The case originated in an application (no. 28601/11) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Saudi Arabian and American binational, Mr G.S.B. (“the applicant”), on 4 May 2011. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr Y. Bonnard and Mr G. Grisel, a lawyer practising in Lausanne. The Swiss Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Frank Schürmann.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the transmission of banking data concerning him in the framework of a mutual assistance agreement between Switzerland and the United State of America had infringed his rights as secured under Articles 8 and 14.
On 18 December 2013 the complaints concerning Articles 8 and 14 were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
On 9 June 2015 the Chamber rejected a request from the applicant for a suspension of the examination of the case.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Miami.
The facts of the case as submitted by the parties can be summarised as follows.
In 2008 the US tax authorities (the Internal Revenue Service [IRS] in Washington) discovered – primarily from a complaint lodged by a former employee of the UBS SA bank in Geneva responsible for asset management for the bank’s private North American customers – that thousands of US taxpayers held UBS bank accounts which had not been declared to their national authorities or else held economic rights in respect of such accounts.
Owing to the role which it had apparently played in that connection, the bank faced a risk of criminal prosecution.
On 18 February 2009 a deferred prosecution agreement (DPA) was concluded between UBS SA and the US Department of Justice (DOJ). In this document the bank acknowledged that it had, in particular, allowed US taxpayers to use off-shore accounts to conceal their assets and income from the US tax authorities and had met with and provided on-the-spot advice, in the United States, to customers who had not declared their accounts to the IRS. It was agreed that proceedings could be dropped in return for a settlement amount of 780 million US dollars (USD).
On 19 February 2009 the IRS brought a civil action (a so-called “John Doe summons” [JDS]) requesting a formal order to UBS SA to reveal the identities of its 52,000 American customers and to communicate data on their bank accounts.
Switzerland was concerned that the dispute between the US authorities and UBS SA might give rise to a conflict between Swiss and US law should the IRS obtain that information, and the civil proceedings were therefore suspended pending extra-judicial reconciliation.
On 19 August 2009, with a view to identifying the taxpayers in question, the Federal Council (Government) of the Swiss Confederation and the United States of America (“the United States”) concluded an “Agreement concerning the request by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States relating to the Swiss company UBS SA” (“Agreement 09”) ...
Under the first Article of Agreement 09 Switzerland undertook to deal with the US request for mutual assistance concerning UBS SA’s American customers in accordance with the criteria laid down in the Appendix to that Agreement and, moreover, in conformity with the Convention of 2 October 1996 between Switzerland and the United States on double taxation (CDI-US 96) ...
Drawing on those criteria, the parties to Agreement 09 considered that the request for mutual assistance concerned “some 4,450 open or closed accounts”.
Switzerland further undertook to set up a “special task force” enabling the Swiss Federal Tax Authority (AFC) to reach its final decisions in the framework of the mutual assistance request within a specific timescale.
In return, the Agreement provided that the United States and UBS SA would submit to the US District Court for the Southern District of Florida a joint request for the discontinuance of the request for enforcement of the “John Doe Summons” (see Article 3 of Agreement 09) ...
On 31 August 2009 the IRS submitted a mutual assistance request to the AFC with a view to obtaining information on US taxpayers who, between 1 January 2001 and 31 December 2008, had had “authority to sign or other access rights to” bank accounts “held, supervised or maintained by a section of UBS SA or by one of its branches or subsidiaries in Switzerland”.
On 1 September 2009 the AFC ordered UBS SA to provide information for the purposes of the 15 June 1998 Order concerning the US-Swiss Convention of 2 October 1996 on double taxation (CDI-US 96) ... The AFC decided to instigate a mutual assistance procedure and requested that UBS SA provide, in particular, complete files on the customers mentioned in the Appendix to Agreement 09.
By judgment of 21 January 2010 (A-7789/2009) the Federal Administrative Court (TAF) accepted an appeal against a decision taken by the AFC which concerned, in the framework of the Appendix to Agreement 09, a challenge falling within the category defined in paragraph 2/A/b. In its reasoning, the TAF held that:
– Agreement 09 was a mutual agreement which should remain within the framework set out by the convention on which it depended, CDI-US 96;
– under the terms of the aforementioned convention, mutual assistance was granted in cases of tax fraud, but not in cases of tax evasion (that is to say the mere failure to declare a bank account to the tax authorities; regarding this distinction under Swiss tax law ...;
– accordingly CDI-US 96 only facilitated exchange of information in cases of “fraud or a similar offence” for the purposes of Swiss law, that is to say tax swindle (tax evasion by dint of “creative accountancy”) or document forgery;
– having regard to the obligations which it imposed on Switzerland, that agreement should have taken the form of an international treaty ratified by the Swiss Federal Parliament and been put to an “optional referendum”;
– accordingly, the form of a mere friendly agreement concluded by the Federal Council on its own had been insufficient.
Consequently, the Federal Administrative Court voided the decisions given by the AFC on the basis of Agreement 09.
The entry into force of that TAF judgment of 21 January 2010 called into question the application of Agreement 09.
Indeed, out of the approximately 4,450 individual cases covered by that agreement some 4,200 concerned situations of long-term tax evasion of enormous proportions. The Swiss Government considered that an inability to provide mutual aid in such cases could create major difficulties for Switzerland in its bilateral relations with the United States. The Federal Council deemed likely that the United States would impose compensatory measures, and that the minimum they could expect was that the US would reactivate the enforcement procedure in respect of the UBS customers through mutual assistance channels. The Federal Council were concerned that an American court might then order UBS SA to provide the IRS with the data in question and force the judgment through by dint of extremely high coercive fines.
On 31 March 2010, in order to prevent such a development, after fresh negotiations with the United States, the Federal Council concluded a “Protocol amending the Agreement between Switzerland and the United States concerning the IRS’s request for information on the Swiss company UBS SA, signed in Washington on 19 August 2009”, referred to as “Protocol 10”.
The provisions of that protocol were incorporated into Agreement 09. They became provisionally applicable on the date of its signature by the parties.
By Federal Decree of 17 June 2010 “approving the Agreement between Switzerland and the United States concerning the request for information regarding UBS SA, as well as the Protocol amending that Agreement”, the Federal Assembly (the Swiss Parliament) approved Agreement 09 and Protocol 10, and gave the Federal Council leave to ratify them.
The consolidated version of Agreement 09 as amended under Protocol 10 is sometimes referred to as “Convention 10” ...
The aforementioned Federal Decree stated that the optional referendum mentioned in Article 141 of the Federal Constitution in respect of certain international treaties concluded by Switzerland ... was not available in the present case.
On 15 July 2010 the Federal Administrative Court delivered judgment in a pilot case (A-4013/2010) concerning the validity of Convention 10. In that judgment the TAF ruled that:
– Convention 10 was fully binding on it within the meaning of Article 190 of the Constitution ...;
– there was no substantive hierarchy in international law (apart from the pre-eminence of jus cogens); accordingly, Convention 10 held the same status as CDI-US 96;
– as CDI-US 96, like the Convention (for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms) and the International Covenant on Civils and Political Rights (“UN Covenant II”), had been adopted prior to Convention 10, its provisions were only applicable insofar as they were compatible with the rules of the latter 96, because Convention 10 took precedence by virtue of its posteriority.
UBS SA transmitted the applicant’s file to the AFC on 19 January 2010.
In its final decision of 7 June 2010, the AFC ruled that all the conditions had been met for granting mutual assistance to the IRS and ordering the communication to it of the documents published by UBS SA.
On 7 July 2010 the applicant appealed to the Federal Administrative Court against that decision.
By judgment of 21 September 2010, without assessing the actual lawfulness of the decision of 7 June 2010, the court set it aside, noting that the applicant’s right to a hearing had been flouted. Consequently, it referred the case back to the AFC, inviting it to allow the applicant to submit his observations and to give a fresh decision on affording the US authorities mutual assistance in his case.
By letter of 28 September 2010 the AFC notified a deadline of 29 October 2010 for the applicant to forward any observations before the issuing of a fresh decision.
On 13 October 2010 the applicant submitted a statement of his position on the matter.
In its final decision of 4 November 2010 the AFC once again held that all the requisite conditions were fulfilled for granting the IRS mutual assistance and ordering UBS SA to communicate the requested documents to the US authorities.
On 8 December 2010 the applicant appealed to the Federal Administrative Court against the decision of 4 November 2010. He complained, in substance, of a lack of any legal basis for the decisions of 1 September 2009 and 4 November 2010, as well as of the violation of the Convention and other international treaties, owing, in particular, to noncompliance with the prohibition of the retroactivity of laws and non-respect for his right to respect for his private life, the presumption of innocence, the principle of equality and non-discrimination, and his right to remain silent.
Determining as the final domestic instance, the Federal Administrative Court delivered judgment on 2 March 2011.
It first of all held, in substance, that Convention 10 was binding on the Swiss authorities, considering that they did not have to verify its conformity with Federal law and previous conventions.
Secondly, with reference to the pilot case A-4013/2010 of 15 July 2010 (see paragraph 18 above), the Federal Administrative Court set out the following reasoning:
...”
On those grounds, the Federal Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
On 24 March 2011 the applicant lodged a public-law appeal with the Federal Court, submitting that the considerations set out in the judgment challenged solely concerned mutual assistance in criminal matters and were not relevant to administrative mutual assistance.
By judgment of 11 April 2011 that court declared the appeal inadmissible, mainly with reference to a judgment of 20 December 2010 (ATF 137 II 128), which had found that appeals against AFC decisions given pursuant to the Convention on Double Taxation and subsequent agreements concluded with the United States fell within the scope of administrative mutual assistance.
On 14 December 2012 the banking data concerning the applicant were transmitted to the US tax authorities.
By letter of 14 June 2013, the Court invited the applicant to inform it of the subsequent developments in the case, and, in particular, to give a brief summary of any consequences or any criminal penalties imposed personally and effectively on him in the United States following the disclosure of his banking data as ordered by the Swiss Federal Tax Authority (AFC).
By letter of 7 August 2013 the applicant stated that he was not currently in a position to respond to the Court’s request.
By letter of 30 June 2014 the applicant pointed out that the US authorities were still conducting their tax inspection and that he had not yet been charged with any criminal offence.
...