The case originated in an application (no. 2967/12) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Yan Zakharchuk (“the applicant”), on 20 December 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms O. Tseytlina, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged that his exclusion from Russia following his criminal conviction violated his right to respect for private and family life under Article 8 of the Convention.
On 28 June 2016 the application was communicated to the Government. On 5 July 2016, under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court, the Polish Government were invited to intervene as third party in the proceedings. On 7 September 2016 they informed the Court that they refrained from exercising their right to intervene.
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in Bialystok, Poland.
The applicant was born in February 1980 in Leningrad, in the former USSR (since 1992 the city has been called St Petersburg or St Peterburg) to a mother who was a Soviet citizen and a father who was Polish. In May 1980 the applicant’s parents officially chose Polish nationality for the applicant.
After his birth, the applicant lived in the former Soviet Union with his mother and then in 1985 moved with her to Poland. In 1988 they returned to the USSR. In 1988 the applicant’s parents divorced.
In August 1991 the applicant obtained a Polish passport, but continued to reside in Russia with his mother. Between December 1994 and June 1995 he spent six months with her in Poland vising his father, and after his return to Russia he continued to reside in St Petersburg. According to the applicant, after that he lost contact with his father. The applicant resided in Russia as a foreign national based on a regularly extended five-year residence permit.
According to the Government, on 16 September 1999 the St Petersburg Military Garrison Court found the applicant guilty of aggravated theft and gave him a suspended sentence of four years’ imprisonment with two years’ probation. From the documents submitted it transpires that this criminal record was subsequently expunged.
In the spring of 2003, the applicant applied for yet another five-year residence permit, which was granted to him and remained valid until May 2008. In June or July 2004 the applicant graduated from university in St Petersburg and in October 2004 started working as a physical education teacher in a college.
According to the applicant’s submission, he does not speak Polish, has no family or social ties with Poland and has not visited the country for a number of years. Referring to records of border crossings, the Government partially contested that submission, stating that the applicant had visited Poland in the years preceding his conviction. They pointed out, in particular, that the applicant had crossed the “Brest” border checkpoint between Belorussia and Poland on 14 July 2004.
On 22 December 2004 the St Petersburg Military Garrison Court found the applicant guilty under Article 111 § 3 of the Russian Criminal Code of causing grievous bodily harm to a military officer in the course of a group attack. The applicant and his two friends, who had all been drunk, had entered a shop, where the shop owner had asked them to leave owing to their behaviour. Then the applicant and his two friends had waited for the owner to come out from the shop and had then attacked him, causing him serious bodily harm – including fracturing the base of his skull, causing second-degree brain concussion, and breaking his upper jaw. The court convicted the three men of the assault and sentenced each of them to a term of imprisonment in a strict-regime correctional colony. The applicant was sentenced to six years’ imprisonment. In the text of the sentence, it was stated that the applicant had no criminal record at the time of the sentencing.
On 4 May 2010 the Tosnenskiy Town Court in the Leningrad Region decided that the applicant should be released on parole as he had served more than two-thirds of his sentence. On 12 May 2010 the applicant was released; about seven and half months before the completion of his prison sentence. He was ordered to find employment and to visit the parole officer at regular intervals for the remainder of his sentence until 21 December 2010.
On 16 March 2011 the applicant obtained a renewed Polish passport from the Polish consulate in St Petersburg which was valid until 16 March 2021.
On 11 April 2011 the applicant lodged a request with the Dzerzhinsky District Court in St Petersburg seeking recognition of his right to Russian nationality by birth and asking to be provided with a Russian passport. On 12 October 2011 the court rejected his claim, finding that he did not have that right as he had never been a Soviet citizen.
On 9 March 2009 the head of correctional colony no. 3 of the Main Department for the Execution of Punishments in St Petersburg and the Leningrad Region concluded that a decision should be taken concerning the undesirability of the applicant’s remaining in Russia.
On 25 March 2009 the Federal Service for the Execution of Punishments asked the Russian Ministry of Justice to issue a decision on the undesirability of the applicant’s residence in Russia.
On 11 August 2010 the Russian Ministry of Justice issued decision no. 6204-p on the undesirability of the applicant’s presence (residence) in Russia and his exclusion from the country until 21 December 2018 following his criminal conviction (hereinafter “the exclusion order”). The decision stated that, given the applicant’s conviction for a particularly serious crime, his presence or residence in Russia represented a threat to public order. The applicant was informed of the decision on 30 November 2010.
On 17 February 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal against the exclusion order with the Kirov District Court in St Petersburg. In it he argued that his exclusion from Russia would violate his right to respect for private and family life. He stated, in particular, that he had lived all his life in Russia, and that he had no relationship with his Polish father and had never resided in Poland. He also stated in general terms that the exclusion would have an adverse effect on his family life with his mother, with whom he had lived all his life and who was his only relative. As for the issue concerning the seriousness of the crime he had committed, the applicant stated as follows;
“3. I am obliged to comply with the conditions of the release on parole that is to remain in the Russian Federation due to the decision of the Tosnenskiy Town Court of 4 May 2010. Taking this decision [on my exclusion] represents a repeated additional punishment for me, which is not envisaged by the law. There are no grounds [to believe] that I represent threat to the public order, rights and lawful interests of Russian citizens.”
On 9 March 2011 the applicant was informed in writing that he must leave Russia within three days, or face deportation.
On 12 April 2011 the Kirov District Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the exclusion order. In its decision, the court stated, inter alia, that the applicant, being a Polish national, had failed to provide any evidence of Russian nationality, despite the fact that as a person who had been born in the USSR he could have applied for it. It further stated that the applicant had lived in Russia since 1980 and on 1 May 2003 he had been provided with a Russian residence permit valid until 1 May 2008. Despite his submission to the contrary, the applicant had indeed visited Poland, as he had crossed the state border with Poland on 14 July 2004. On 22 December 2004 the applicant had been convicted and sentenced to six years’ imprisonment in a strict-regime correctional colony and then on 4 May 2010 he had been released on parole, 7 months and 17 days prior to completion of the full sentence. On 11 August 2010 the Ministry of Justice had issued decision no. 6204-p excluding him from Russia until 21 December 2018. The court stated further that the decision had been taken due to the applicant’s conviction for commission of a premeditated serious offence and the danger he posed for public order, which was demonstrated by the crime he had committed – causing grievous bodily injuries to the victim. The applicant’s reference to his release on parole for good behaviour and the fact of his mother’s residence in Russia were not sufficient to outweigh the threat he represented to public order. The court also stated that even though the applicant had been released on 4 May 2010, he had not tried to apply for Russian nationality until almost a year later, on 11 April 2011. Since his release from prison in May 2010, the applicant had failed to find employment, despite that being one of the conditions of his parole, and although his positive character references had been of significance for his release on parole, they did not amount to convincing evidence that he would pose no threat to public order were he to continue to reside in Russia. The applicant’s need to comply with the requirements of his parole was not a valid reason for remaining in Russia, given that the relevant period had passed. As for the seriousness of the offence committed by the applicant, the court stated as follows:
“... by sentence of the St Petersburg Military Garrison Court of 22 December 2004 Y. Zakharchuk was convicted for crime punishable under Article 111 § 3 of the Russian Criminal Code [causing grievous bodily harm] and sentenced to 6 years of imprisonment in a strict regime correctional colony.
On the basis of decision of the Tosnenskiy Town Court in the Leningrad Region of 4 May 2010 Y. Zakharchuk was absolved from serving the rest of the punishment imposed by the sentence of St Petersburg Military Garrison Court of 22 December 2004 of 7 months and 7 days and granted parole ...
On 11 August 2010 the Ministry of Justice issued decision no. 6204-p on the undesirability of Y. Zakharchuk’s presence (residence) in Russia ...
The decision was taken ... as Y. Zakharchuk had been sentenced by St Petersburg Military Garrison Court to deprivation of liberty for the commission of a premeditated particularly serious crime ... of causing grievous bodily harm.
Therefore, presence of Y. Zakharchuk in the Russian Federation creates a real threat to public order, rights and lawful interests of Russian citizens ...
At present, Y. Zakharchuk’s criminal record for the commission of this particularly serious crime is not expunged.
The positive character reference of Y. Zakharchuk from the place of serving the sentence and the circumstances due to which he had been released on parole represent the basis for the assessment of the convicted person’s behaviour and taking decision concerning the necessity of serving the sentence fully and does not serve as the evidence of the lack of a real threat to public order, rights and lawful interests of Russian citizens while Y. Zakharchuk is in the Russian Federation.
Decision of the Tosnenskiy Town Court in the Leningrad Region of 4 May 2010 according to which Y. Zakharchuk was released on parole does not provide him with the right to be present in the Russian Federation ...”
The applicant appealed against the above decision to the St Petersburg City Court, stressing that the exclusion order was not sufficiently clear, as it did not specify the nature of the threat he posed to public order, that it was not supported by evidence, and that the fact that he had been released on parole for good behaviour had been completely disregarded by the District Court. The applicant further stated that he had lived all his life in Russia with his mother, that he had no other relatives, that he had not ever lived in Poland, had no ties with this country and had no relationship with his Polish father. Finally, the applicant stressed that the first-instance court had failed to examine his arguments concerning his right to Russian citizenship by birth.
On 20 June 2011 the St Petersburg City Court endorsed the findings of the District Court. Its decision stated the following:
“... the first-instance court established that Yan Zakharchuk was a Polish national ... On 11 August 2010 the Russian Ministry of Justice issued decision no. 6204-P concerning the undesirability of his presence (residence) ... and obliging him to leave the Russian Federation ...
... [when] examining the applicant’s submission concerning the absence of grounds for the decision prohibiting his entry into the Russian Federation, the [first-instance] court established that the decision had been taken to ensure safety for the State.
The first-instance court correctly concluded that the decision on the undesirability of the applicant’s presence in the Russian Federation had been taken lawfully and had been confirmed by specific facts. At the same time, Mr Zakharchuk had fully exercised his right to have legal counsel.
The decision by the Ministry of Justice was taken within its sphere of competence.
As for the applicant’s argument concerning his Russian citizenship, the court finds it unsubstantiated [as] ... given that Mr Zakharchuk’s parents had chosen citizenship of the Polish People’s Republic for him, his USSR citizenship has been lost ... The applicant has not renounced his Polish citizenship and he has been provided with a Polish passport. Moreover, while residing in the Russian Federation, Mr Zakharchuk had acted as a foreign citizen, which was demonstrated by the fact that he repeatedly applied for residence permits and not for Russian nationality ...
The court finds that the decision of the first-instance court is lawful and substantiated ...”
On 26 July 2011 the applicant married a Russian national, Ms T.Sh., in St Petersburg.
On 29 July 2011 the applicant was deported to Poland. The term of his expulsion from Russia expired on 21 December 2018.
Section 9 of the Act contains a list of grounds for refusing a residence permit or revoking a previously issued residence permit. In particular, a residence permit will be revoked if a decision is issued pronouncing the foreigner’s presence in Russia undesirable (paragraph 2).
A competent authority may issue a decision stating that a foreign national’s presence on Russian territory is undesirable (an “exclusion order”). Such a decision may be issued if the foreign national is unlawfully residing on Russian territory or if his or her residence is lawful but represents a real threat to public order, in particular. If such a decision has been taken, the foreign national must leave Russia or will otherwise be deported. That decision also forms the legal basis for subsequent refusal of re-entry into Russia (section 25.10).
If a competent authority has issued a decision declaring that a foreigner’s presence on Russian territory is undesirable, that foreigner will be refused entry into Russia (sections 25.10 and 27(7)(7)).
Entry into the Russia is not allowed if a foreign national has a criminal conviction which has not been expunged or cancelled (section 27 (3)).
Article 58 (Choice of penal establishments for persons sentenced to imprisonment):
“1.  [Persons sentenced to imprisonment shall serve their respective sentences, depending on the gravity of the crimes that they have committed, in:
- Strict-regime correctional colonies (исправительная колония строгого режима), for those who have been sentenced to imprisonment for the commission of a particularly grave crime ...;
Article 79 (Release on parole)
“3.  A person serving a sentence may be released conditionally and prior to expiry of the sentence if a court finds that he no longer needs to endure the punishment and if he has already served no less than two thirds of the sentence for the commission of a particularly serious crime ...”
Article 86 (conviction)
“A person convicted for commission of a crime is considered convicted from the day of entering into force of the conviction until the expunging or cancellation of the criminal record ...
Conviction is expunged:
d) in respect of persons convicted for commission of a particularly serious crime- after eight years since the completion of serving the sentence ...”