The case originated in an application (no. 18568/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Ivana Pojatina (“the applicant”), on 9 February 2012.
The applicant was represented by Ms I. Bojić, a lawyer practising in Zagreb and Ms I. Radačić, a senior research associate at the Ivo Pilar Institute of Social Sciences. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant complained, under Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention, that Croatian law had dissuaded health professionals from assisting her when giving birth at home and that she had not had an effective domestic remedy for her Convention complaint at her disposal.
On 16 February 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Zagreb.
She gave birth to her first three children in hospital. In 2011 she became pregnant with her fourth child and had a due date in February 2012.
In November 2011 she sent a letter to the Croatian Chamber of Midwives (Hrvatska Komora Primalja), enquiring about the possibility of having professional assistance with a home birth. She explained that her first three hospital deliveries had gone normally, without the need for much medical intervention, but that she had not felt fulfilled afterwards. She therefore wanted to give birth to her fourth child at home.
On 1 December 2011 she received a reply that according to the relevant domestic legislation health professionals, including midwives, were unable to assist with home births. In particular, although the Act on Midwifery allowed the setting up of private practices by midwives, the Healthcare Act, as the general Act in the sector, still did not expressly provide for such a possibility. Therefore, since the matter was not clearly regulated, no midwife had set up a private practice or officially assisted with home births. The letter also cited a statement from the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (Ministarstvo zdravstva i socijalne skrbi Republike Hrvatske - hereinafter “the Ministry of Health”) issued in August 2011 and published on the Croatian Chamber of Midwives’ website:
“Having regard to the current circumstances, where the requirements for organising a system of professionally conducted home births do not exist (education and training of personnel) and where the other accompanying elements (availability of emergency transport and proper admission [to a medical facility] in the case of complications) which would enable safe delivery at home are lacking, we are of the opinion that in this area of healthcare the lawmaker has ensured, as far as possible, all the conditions for the care of mothers and the right of children to life and health. Considering the above, we are of the opinion that the protection of children, who do not choose the circumstances of their coming into this world, takes precedence over respect for a woman’s right to freely choose to give birth outside a medical facility.”
The Croatian Chamber of Midwives thus declined to assist with the applicant’s planned home birth. It noted that home births nevertheless occurred in Croatia, and for that reason it had urged the Ministry of Health to clearly regulate the matter as soon as possible.
On 15 February 2012 the applicant gave birth to her child at home, assisted by a midwife from abroad.
After the birth a paediatrician and a gynaecologist allegedly declined to examine the applicant and her baby but she eventually managed to find doctors who examined them both.
On 23 February 2012 the applicant registered the birth and obtained a birth certificate.
On 11 May 2011 the Ministry of Health sent a letter in reply to an enquiry from the Ombudswoman for Children (Pravobraniteljica za djecu), which stated that the relevant domestic law provided that babies were to be delivered in medical facilities. The question of home births had not been regulated by law and medical assistance in such procedures was considered as quackery. It further stated that home births were the personal responsibility of the mother and the person assisting with the delivery. In the event of a delivery outside a medical facility and where a woman claiming to be the mother did not have any medical documentation, the doctor carrying out the first examination of the child was obliged to make note of the absence of such documents. The doctor was not allowed to register data which he or she was not able to verify.
On 25 August 2011 the Ministry of Administration (Ministarstvo uprave Republike Hrvatske) sent a letter in reply to an enquiry from the Parents in Action - Roda NGO (Roditelji u Akciji – Roda) stating that the law provided for the possibility to register the civil status of a child born outside a medical facility. It further stated that officials were obliged to verify data reported to them before putting anything down in the State register. Consequently, a person reporting the birth of a child born outside a medical facility was required to submit proof that the woman reported as the child’s mother had indeed given birth to the child. The medical documentation required for proving such circumstances was a matter for the health administration authorities.
On 31 May 2012 the Ministry of Health replied to an enquiry from Parents in Action – Roda NGO by saying that it had never instructed doctors not to examine children born at home. On the contrary, having regard to the increased frequency of situations in which doctors were faced with having to examine children born at home without any medical documentation, it had consistently held that doctors were obliged to examine such children but were not allowed to register any data that they were not able to verify. It added that home birth was still not regulated by law and that therefore there was no mechanism for registering requests for home birth or regulations on the duty to report them.
On 24 January 2012 the Croatian Chamber of Midwives reported on a case in which, according to the media coverage, a woman who had given birth at home had been separated from her child for two days. In particular, the hospital had called the police and social workers in order to establish that she was indeed the child’s mother after she had refused to be examined by a gynaecologist in a hospital. In addition, several midwives suspected of having taken part in the birth had been questioned by the police.
According to information submitted by the Government, no health professional has ever been prosecuted in criminal proceedings or sanctioned for assisting with a home birth.
In the Concluding Observations on the combined fourth and fifth periodic reports on Croatia issued on 24 July 2015, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women expressed concern regarding the lack of oversight procedures and mechanisms for ensuring adequate standards of care, the protection of women’s rights and their autonomy during deliveries and the lack of options for giving birth outside hospitals.
A survey on maternity practices in Croatia undertaken by the Parents in Action - Roda NGO in March 2015 noted situations of women’s wishes being disregarded by medical staff during childbirth, of a lack of consent for procedures conducted during labour, and limits on the presence of an accompanying person during childbirth.
The Gender Equality Ombudsperson (Pravobraniteljica za ravnopravnost spolova) issued a research report in 2013 which noted inconsistencies in hospital practices regarding the presence of an accompanying person during childbirth.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 56/1990 with subsequent amendments) read as follows:
“Rights concerning childbirth, motherhood and childcare shall be regulated by law.”
“Everyone has the right to healthcare in accordance with the law.”
The Healthcare Act (Zakon o zdravstvenoj zaštiti, Official Gazette nos. 150/2008, 155/2009, 71/2010, 139/2010, 22/2011, 84/2011 and 154/2011), as in force at the material time, provided that healthcare measures included, inter alia, ensuring the full healthcare of women, in particular in relation to family planning, pregnancy, childbirth and motherhood (section 17(10)). Healthcare measures were provided in accordance with a plan and programme drawn up by the Ministry of Health (section 18).
Healthcare services were to be provided by healthcare facilities, companies and private health professionals, under the conditions prescribed by law (section 35(1)). Exceptionally, healthcare services were also provided by other legal entities and physical persons in accordance with the law (section 35(2)).
The Act expressly regulated the private practice of health professionals such as doctors, dentists, dental technicians, pharmacists, nurses and physiotherapists (sections 146 and 147). It did not expressly regulate midwives in private practice.
As regards foreign health professionals in private practice, the law regulating the work of foreigners in Croatia was applicable. Foreign health professionals had to meet the same conditions as national health professionals in private practice, save for having Croatian citizenship. They also had to have relevant knowledge of the Croatian language (section145(4) and 147(7)).
Private health professionals who performed in private practice without meeting the conditions provided by that Act and those who worked in private practice in an area which was banned by that Act, could have been punished for a misdemeanour and ordered to pay a fine of between 5,000 and 10,000 Croatian kunas (HRK) (sections 204(2) and 204(9)).
The Act was subsequently amended several times (Official Gazette nos. 12/2012, 35/2012, 70/2012, 144/2012, 82/2013, 159/2013, 22/2014, 154/2014, 70/2016 and 131/2017), but it still did not expressly regulate midwives in private practice.
The Bylaw on the minimum conditions for space, workers and medical equipment for providing healthcare services (Pravilnik o minimalnim uvjetima u pogledu prostora, radnika i medicinsko-tehničke opreme za obavljanje zdravstvene djelatnosti, Official Gazette no. 61/2011– “the Bylaw on minimum conditions”), as in force at the material time, provided that the performing of midwifery services required an examination room measuring at least twelve square metres, a room for an assistant midwife of at least nine square metres, a waiting room measuring at least nine square metres, and toilet facilities for staff and patients. It also regulated which appliances were required for performing midwifery services and which members of staff had to be present during each eighthour shift (section 31).
The Bylaw on the conditions, organisation and functioning of emergency outpatient medical assistance (Pravilnik o uvjetima, organizaciji i načinu rada izvanbolničke hitne medicinske pomoći, Official Gazette no. 146/2003 – “the Bylaw on emergency medical assistance”), as in force at the material time, regulated the measures and procedures to be followed in the event of an emergency at the place of the emergency, during transport in emergency medical assistance vehicles and on the premises of medical facilities (sections 2 and 3). The Bylaw provided that plans and programmes for the basic education of medical nurses and medical technicians working in urgent outpatient medical assistance had to include, inter alia, assisting with births outside a hospital, dealing with newborns and transporting mothers and newborns (annex no. 3).
The Compulsory Health Insurance Act (Zakon o obveznom zdravstvenom osiguranju, Official Gazette nos. 150/2008, 94/2009, 153/2009, 71/2010, 139/2010 and 49/2011), as in force at the material time, provided that guaranteed healthcare was provided through health measures established on the basis of a corresponding plan and programme drawn up by the Ministry of Health (sections 15(2) and 15(3)). Insured persons were entitled to obtain guaranteed healthcare at the expense of the Health Insurance Fund (“the Fund”) in healthcare facilities and from private healthcare professionals who had concluded an agreement with the Fund on providing healthcare services under the conditions prescribed by law (section 15(4)). Obtaining guaranteed healthcare services related to the monitoring of pregnancies and childbirth was paid for in its entirety by the Fund (section 16(2)(3)).
On 1 July 2013 a new Compulsory Health Insurance Act (Zakon o obveznom zdravstvenom osiguranju, Official Gazette nos. 80/2013 and 137/2013) came into force. It still provides that guaranteed healthcare is provided through health measures established on the basis of a corresponding plan and programme drawn up by the Ministry of Health (sections 18(2) and 18(3)).
The Plan and programme of healthcare measures under compulsory health insurance (Plan i program mjera zdravstvene zaštite iz obveznog zdravstvenog osiguranja, Official Gazette nos. 126/2006 and 156/2008 – “the Plan and programme of healthcare measures”) provides that healthcare measures include, inter alia;
- the examination and vaccination of children born at home (section 1(2)(1)(14));
- emergency transportation of endangered pregnant women, women giving birth and newborns in situations of urgent illnesses and conditions (section 1(4)(1)(4));
- professional assistance of a doctor and a midwife in home birth and transportation to a maternity ward (section 1(5)(2)(2)(1));
- the examination of a woman in her home after giving birth there and an examination in a medical facility six weeks later (section 1(5)(2)(3)(1)).
The Act on Midwifery (Zakon o primaljstvu, Official Gazette nos. 120/2008 and 145/2010) provides for the possibility of performing independent midwife work. Approval for performing such work is given by the competent body of the Croatian Chamber of Midwives (section 15).
The Act also provides for the possibility for midwives to set up a private practice if they have completed the relevant education and have obtained approval for performing independent work (section 24(1)). The Act refers to the provisions of the Healthcare Act (section 24(2)) for the procedure for setting up and closing a private practice.
The State Registers Act (Zakon o državnim maticama, Official Gazette, no. 96/1993), as in force at the material time, set down which persons were obliged to report the birth of a child to the registry of births when the child was born outside a medical facility (section 11(2)). It also laid down a general obligation for officials to verify data before entering it in the State Register if there was a reasonable suspicion that the data was incorrect (section 25(3)).
The State Registers Act was amended in 2013 to expressly provide that a person reporting the birth of a child born outside a medical facility must submit medical documents related to the birth or proof of motherhood (section 11(3)).
The relevant provision of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette no. 125/11), as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“A doctor of medicine, a dentist or other health professional who declines to provide immediate medical assistance to a person in need of such assistance owing to the existence of a risk of permanent damage to his or her health or life shall be punished by imprisonment of up to three years.”
“Any person who provides medical treatment or other medical assistance while lacking the necessary professional qualifications shall be punished by imprisonment of up to one year.”
The relevant provisions of the Medical Assistance Act (Zakon o liječništvu, Official Gazette nos. 121/2003 and 117/2008) provide that a doctor is only allowed to refuse to provide medical assistance when a person is making threats or demonstrating physical aggression towards him or her or another health professional, save for in emergency situations (section 18(4)). In the event of an unlawful refusal to provide medical assistance a doctor can be punished for a misdemeanour and ordered to pay a fine of between HRK 5,000 and 10,000 (section 59).
The other relevant international and comparative-law material is set out in paragraphs 62-68 in the case of Dubská and Krejzová v. the Czech Republic ([GC], nos. 28859/11 and 28473/12, 15 November 2016).