The case originated in two applications (nos. 24816/14 and 25140/14) against the Republic of Slovenia lodged with the Court on 26 March 2014 under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by sixteen Slovenian nationals (“the applicants”), whose details are set out in the annex to this judgment.
The applicants were represented by Ms N. Zidar Klemenčič, a lawyer practising in Ljubljana, and the European Human Rights Law Institute, based in Nicosia. The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Morela, State Attorney.
The applicants alleged that the State had failed to provide them with access to basic public utilities, such as drinking water and sanitation, contrary to the requirements of Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention. Relying on Article 14, they further submitted that, as members of the Roma community, they were unable to effectively enjoy the same rights as the majority population owing to the authorities’ discriminatory attitudes towards them.
On 8 April 2015 the Government were given notice of the applications. In addition, leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court) was granted to the European Roma Rights Centre and the Human Rights Centre of the University of Ghent.
Mr Branko Hudorovič (the first applicant) was born in 1959 and lives in the informal Roma settlement of Goriča vas in the Ribnica Municipality. Mr Aleks Kastelic (the second applicant) is the first applicant’s son, born in 2007, who initially applied to the Court under the name Aleks Hudorovič. Following the Government’s objection, lodged on 2 November 2015, his name was corrected to Aleks Kastelic.
On 26 May 2011 the first applicant and the second applicant’s mother, Ms Marija Kastelic, reached a court settlement whereby the second applicant resides in the custody of his mother at a different address from that submitted by the first applicant. According to the information about the first and second applicants’ family situation provided to the Government by the Ribnica Social Work Centre on 22 June 2015, the first applicant maintained contact with the second applicant under the terms agreed upon with the latter’s mother. According to the first applicant, the second applicant lives mostly with him in the Goriča vas settlement.
More than 10% of the population residing in the Ribnica Municipality do not have access to drinking water from the public water-distribution system. The public sewage system for the discharge of urban wastewater was built solely in the town of Ribnica and the Hrastje area, while all other housing facilities must be equipped with their own septic tanks or individual water treatment plants installed at the expense of each facility or investor.
On 31 December 2014 there were forty-three public housing units at a subsidised rent rate provided to people with low incomes in the Ribnica Municipality. Another fourteen public housing units were provided at the market rate.
The land on which the Roma community settled thirty years ago is owned by the Republic of Slovenia. This marshy agricultural land is categorised in the Municipal Spatial Plan of the Ribnica Municipality as the best category of agricultural land, where construction of residential buildings is not allowed. Moreover, the Goriča vas settlement is located outside of settlement areas under high-voltage power lines where construction is not allowed due to electromagnetic radiation.
In the early period of the settlement, the inhabitants lived there in tents, but later some more permanent dwellings were constructed. Today most residents live in wooden huts, some of which have stonework or brick inside. Today some eighty people reside in the settlement. Demolition orders were issued in respect of five such illegally constructed huts, including one built by the first applicant. He received an order to remove the building then under construction in 2000, which came into effect in 2005. None of the demolition orders was, however, executed, one of the reasons being that alternative accommodation would have had to be provided to the Roma children living on the premises.
The buildings in the Goriča vas settlement are not equipped with plumbing, nor is there any sewage piping. As regards electricity, the residents rely on illegal connections to electricity poles. The collection and transport of municipal waste is regularly performed by the public municipal utility service, and it is no longer charged to the residents since they have failed to pay their bills.
The first applicant initially submitted that he lived in a caravan. He subsequently informed the Court that he had moved into a simple wooden hut where he lives with his son. The hut has no access to water, sewage and sanitation. According to the first applicant, they collect water from the cemetery or the nearby polluted stream or else they acquire it from other houses. Moreover, owing to the lack of sanitation services, the applicants use the area around the caravan for defecation.
The applicants, together with other inhabitants of the settlement, have for a number of years been seeking to obtain access to public utilities. They attended a number of meetings with the Mayor of the Ribnica Municipality and the governmental Office for Minorities (Urad za manjšine). However, as the Goriča vas settlement was established in an irregular manner, the residents have no possibility of acquiring building permits and the other documents necessary for obtaining access to the public infrastructure.
In 1996, the Ribnica Municipality drew up a plan to relocate the residents of the Goriča vas settlement to the Lepovče Roma settlement. Several terraced houses were to be constructed and equipped with the necessary infrastructure. The Roma from the Goriča vas settlement initially agreed to the Municipality’s plan and expressed their readiness to contribute their labour to the project. However, in May 1997 the non-Roma residents of Lepovče expressed their opposition to the enlargement of the Roma settlement in their village, fearing that the proximity of the settlement would cause “further complications”. Subsequently, in May 1997, the first applicant, in his capacity as representative of the Roma living in Goriča vas, declared in writing that the group was not willing to move to the proposed location. It follows from the internal communication of the Municipality that the opposition to the proposed plan partly resulted from the fact that two separate Roma groups were to be settled in Lepovče, between whom disagreements existed. The Municipality subsequently abandoned the resettlement plan.
On 14 April 1999 the first applicant met the Mayor of Ribnica and requested that basic utilities, specifically drinking-water supply and an electricity generator, be provided for the Goriča vas Roma settlement. The first applicant and the Mayor concluded that a diesel generator and a water tank of 2,000-3,000 litres were to be purchased and placed in the Roma settlement; a regular water supply was to be provided by the local fire brigade, with the cost of the water deliveries being borne by the residents. According to the minutes of the meeting, the Roma residents would bear the costs of adequate sanitation (chemical toilets) and arrange for the clean-up of the surrounding area.
Subsequently, on 26 July 1999 the Ribnica Municipality and the first applicant, representing the Roma residing in Goriča vas, signed a cofinancing agreement whereby each of the parties undertook to cover 50% of the costs of the purchase of a water tank and a diesel generator. The pro forma value of the two infrastructure items, as set out in the agreement, amounted to 294,546 Slovenian tolars (SIT) (which according to the then applicable exchange rate amounted to 1,504 euros (EUR)). The Municipality committed itself to carrying out the purchase and delivering the water tank and the generator to the Goriča vas settlement. The individual Roma residents who had financially contributed to the purchase assumed ownership of the infrastructure items, and all the Roma residents of the Goriča vas settlement acquired the right to access water and electricity. In addition to the purchases, the Ribnica Municipality provided some landfill material used for the rehabilitation of the environment in the settlement.
It is undisputed between the parties that the water tank was purchased as part of a co-financing agreement. However, they disagreed on the subsequent course of events and the current situation as regards access to drinking water in the settlement.
According to the applicants, after a number of years the water tank became unusable due to mould and other fungi and they had no choice but to replace it. The tank had not been dug into the ground and therefore was not protected from the weather. Also, the applicants did not know whether the quality of water was being monitored at all. The Government, however, relying on the written testimony of a local resident, submitted that both the diesel generator and the water tank had subsequently been sold. The applicants contested that submission, arguing that “most of [the tanks]” could not have been sold as they had become inappropriate for use.
Regarding the water deliveries, in the period from 30 January 2010 until 1 January 2016 there were thirty-one deliveries of water to the Goriča vas settlement; each time the residents so requested 5,000 litres of water were delivered and the cost of an individual delivery amounted to EUR 35. The Roma residents were obliged to pay the costs of water transportation, while the costs of the water itself were borne by Ribnica Municipality. The Government, relying on information provided by the Ribnica fire brigade, submitted that the supplies of water had been poured into a large water tank installed in the settlement; when the tank was full, other containers had also been filled.
According to the applicants, the water delivered by the Ribnica Fire Brigade was used to fill private water tanks and pools where children bathed in the summer.
The Government further submitted that the Roma from the Goriča vas settlement had supplied themselves with water at the nearby Hrovača Cemetery, which was approximately 1 km away from the settlement. The applicants confirmed that they collected water wherever they could, including at cemeteries.
As regards the financial situation of the applicants, in the period from 1 May to 31 October 2015 the first applicant was entitled to monthly social assistance in the amount of EUR 269.20. The second applicant, in his mother’s custody, was financially supported through her monthly social security allowance amounting to EUR 331.12, and a monthly child allowance in the amount of EUR 114.31. In addition, based on a friendly settlement between the parents, the first applicant had a duty to pay monthly child support to the second applicant in the amount of EUR 61.99.
On 13 October 2015 the Human Rights Ombudsman submitted a request to the Government to urgently adopt all necessary measures for the Goriča vas settlement to be connected to the public water supply system. In the meantime, a water tank had to be installed in the settlement. The Government replied that a water tank had already been installed and that spatial planning at the local level was the responsibility of the Ribnica Municipality. In reply, the Human Rights Ombudsman, noting that the Goriča vas residents had not reported the presence of a water tank, critically assessed the situation and took the view that the Ribnica Municipality had not effectively engaged with the Roma community to ensure them water and sanitation. The Ombudsman considered that the Government were violating the Roma residents’ human right to water and sanitation and noted that a violation would persist until a connection to the public water supply and sanitation system was ensured.
The applicants, a family of fourteen, live in the informal Roma settlement at Dobruška vas 41 in the Škocjan Municipality, which is composed of approximately twenty housing units for two hundred and fifty people. Mr Ljubo Novak (the first applicant) was born in the settlement, Ms Dunja Kočevar (the second applicant) has been living there for twenty years and all of their children were born there, too.
The Dobruška vas 41 settlement is located on land belonging mostly to the Škocjan Municipality and the local Krka Agricultural Cooperative. According to the Roma residents and a report of the Human Rights Ombudsman, members of the Roma community were moved to the area by the local authorities of the then Novo mesto Municipality in 1963, and have lived there ever since. Construction of residential houses in the Dobruška vas 41 settlement is possible under certain conditions and subject to approval by two environmental agencies related to the fact that the land is located partially in a flood area and an area of natural value. However, the Škocjan Municipality spatial plan provides for construction of a wastewater treatment plant and the transformation of the entire area in question into a business zone. The municipal authorities have on several occasions expressed expectations that the Roma residents of Dobruška vas 41 settlement should be relocated, while arguing at the same time that there was no appropriate area for an alternative settlement in the Škocjan Municipality.
In the period from 2004 until 2015 several residents of Dobruška vas 41, but not the applicants, were ordered to suspend construction and remove all structures already built in the settlement. Demolition orders were also issued in respect of a few of them; however, they were not executed.
In 2013 the Municipality lodged criminal complaints against a number of Roma residents, including the first applicant, for unlawful occupation of real property under Article 338 of the Criminal Code. In the first-instance criminal proceedings, the defendants were found guilty and given suspended sentences of three months’ imprisonment, with three years’ probation. The first applicant did not provide any information on whether he had appealed and whether that conviction had become final.
At the date of the lodging of the application, the applicants lived in an illegally built wooden hut located on land owned by the Krka Agricultural Cooperative, without access to water, sanitation or electricity. Subsequently the applicants informed the Court that they had moved into a wooden hut they had built approximately 200 m away from the previous dwelling owing to disagreements with their neighbours which had escalated into destruction of their property and physical aggression against them. They continued to live without a proper water supply and sanitation. The Government supplemented this information, adding that the first and the second applicants had bought two plots of land and illegally constructed a building and two animal sheds without a building permit.
In discussions between the Škocjan Municipality and the relevant State authorities it was decided that the Municipality could not ensure individual water connections to illegally built buildings, since such a solution would contravene the domestic legal order. However, in order to comply with the national and international standards of access to water, it was decided that a group water-distribution connection would be built in the settlement, on land belonging to the Municipality. The residents would be able to instal individual water connections at their own expense, as provided by the relevant legislation. As regards water bills, it was agreed to engage a local commission on Roma issues in a process of mediation to find a suitable solution.
The Dobruška vas 41 settlement where the applicants reside has been connected to the public water supply system since 2011. The water supply system consists of one group water-distribution connection (a group wateraccess point) installed on the initiative and at the expense of the Škocjan Municipality. Nine individual connections were installed from the distribution connection to the individual users’ homes. In 2015, water was supplied to seven individual connections.
Initially, nineteen households were interested in obtaining individual connections, including the applicants’. Only nine households subsequently joined the water supply system by committing to pay their respective shares of the total consumption. In 2015, the average monthly cost of water for a household amounted to approximately EUR 9.
The applicants did not apply to join the water supply system. According to them, while living at a previous location, they had been denied access to the group water-distribution connection by their neighbours, who had not allowed them to lay a water pipe under “their” land. This issue had also been raised in a letter sent to the Mayor of the Škocjan Municipality by the Human Rights Ombudsman in December 2012. The Government submitted that the applicants could have avoided the neighbours and placed the pipes along the road. The applicants responded that they had not been informed of this possibility to connect to the water system. Also after the move to the new location, the applicants had not applied for an individual water connection, nor did they clarify whether their new building could be connected to the group water-distribution connection.
The residents of the Škocjan Municipality also have drinking water available from the village fountain. The fountain, where the applicants obtain their drinking water, is approximately 1.8 km away from the applicants’ hut; it is fitted with a tap and the water has a constant temperature of 14˚C. According to the analysis by the National Laboratory for Health, the Environment and Food, the water complies with the applicable standards and is considered safe, that is to say fit to use for drinking, cooking or washing. Some residents of the Škocjan Municipality (Vinji Vrh), whose households are not connected to the public waterdistribution system, supply themselves with water from the fountain, while for sanitary purposes they use rainwater or water supplied by the fire brigade.
As regards the sewerage system, at the material time the Škocjan Municipality had no public discharge or facility for treatment of urban wastewater. Buildings producing urban wastewater were equipped with septic tanks or cesspits, while newer buildings had small wastewater treatment plants. Septic tanks and small wastewater plants were funded by the owners of buildings where urban wastewater was produced. The public municipal utility service carried out the emptying of cesspits and small wastewater treatment plants (taking out mud and sludge). A wastewater treatment plant was under construction.
As regards the financial situation of the applicants, at the material time the first and the second applicants were receiving monthly child benefit in the amount of EUR 1,556.97, social assistance in the amount of EUR 868.80, and a parental benefit in the amount of EUR 252.04. Their two adult daughters, Ms Pamela Novak (the third applicant) and Julija Novak (the fourth applicant), were receiving monthly social assistance in the amount of 269.20 EUR each. The applicants were therefore receiving social benefits in the monthly amount of EUR 2,947.01. In 2016, however, those benefits were increased to EUR 3,299.85 per month. Moreover, the applicants were receiving EUR 120-130 per month as reimbursement for the costs of transporting their four children from their home to a bus station about 10 km away, from where they continued their journey to school by local bus.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution provide as follows:
(*As amended by the Constitutional Act Amending Article 14 of the Constitution of the Republic of Slovenia, 15 June 2004 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia No. 69/04).)
“In Slovenia everyone shall be guaranteed equal human rights and fundamental freedoms irrespective of national origin, race, sex, language, religion, political, or other conviction, material standing, birth, education, social status, disability, or any other personal circumstance.
All are equal before the law.”
(*As newly introduced by the Constitutional Act Amending Chapter III of the Constitution of the Republic of Slovenia, which was adopted on 17 November 2016 and entered into force on 25 November 2016 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia No. 75/16).)
Spatial development and spatial planning at the local level falls within the competence of municipalities, which, in accordance with the Local Self-Government Act, are independent in managing local matters in the public interest. In terms of spatial planning, that involves first and foremost land-use allocation in order to ensure rational and efficient use of land. To that end, municipalities adopt municipal spatial plans and detailed municipal spatial plans based on the Spatial Planning Act.
Under this legal framework, an area must be identified as construction land before any construction project can be submitted for a building permit. The power to determine the types of public utility infrastructure to be built in individual areas is conferred upon municipalities. The latter are also responsible for constructing the public utility infrastructure, which is financed from municipal budgets, the State budget and the community infrastructure levy. This levy is a contribution to the costs of construction of the public utility infrastructure paid by individual investors. By paying the community infrastructure levy, the person liable for payment, usually the owner of the construction land, is guaranteed connection to the already built infrastructure.
The Construction Act provides that any construction of a new structure, a re-built edifice, a replacement building, and so forth, cannot commence until a final building permit has been obtained. Before a building permit can be issued, the relevant administrative body verifies, inter alia, whether the relevant structure will be provided with the minimum level of public utility services; those include drinking-water supply, electricity supply, wastewater discharge and access to public roads. The investor must also show that a request for an assessment of the community infrastructure levy has, or will, be lodged.
The Construction Act explicitly prohibits the installation of public utility connections to illegally built structures.
As regards legalisation of illegally built buildings and structures, they are considered as new constructions requiring a building permit. Therefore, all of the above-mentioned conditions must be met in order to legalise a building, including the provision of the minimum level of public utility services.
There is a comprehensive regulatory framework governing the use of water in Slovenia. Water as a public good and public services related to its use, to water facilities and equipment are regulated by the Water Act. Different types of checks on water with the aim of ensuring its safety and therefore its suitability for domestic use are provided for in the Regulation of Sanitary Suitability of Foodstuffs (Products and Materials Coming into Contact with Foodstuffs) Act. Furthermore, the Rules on drinking water define the requirements to be satisfied with regard to drinking water in order to protect human health from adverse effects, and the Decree on the Methodology for Determining Prices of Municipal Utility Services for Environmental Protection provides the methodology for determining prices of obligatory public municipal utility services, such as the drinking-water supply.
Individual tasks to be performed within the scope of the municipal utility service of water supply are determined in the Decree on Drinking-Water Supply. In principle, the municipal service of water supply is provided throughout the area of a municipality to buildings occupied by people and structures where drinking water is used for watering animals. By way of exception, private supply of drinking water may be ensured in respect of settlements and individual buildings or structures where the municipality does not provide the public utility service. Pursuant to the Decree, settlement areas with fifty or more permanent residents and a population density of more than five residents per hectare are to be equipped with a public water-distribution system. Subject to certain derogations, also settlement areas with less than fifty residents should be equipped with such a system.
The planning and construction of the connection to the public waterdistribution system should be ensured by the owner of the building or other structure that is to be connected. The Decree prohibits the provider of the public utility service from connecting to the public water-distribution system any buildings or structures that do not comply with the applicable rules on the discharge and treatment of urban wastewater. Both the Ribnica and Škocjan municipalities have adopted ordinances on drinking-water supply that are, in all essential provisions, aligned with the Decree and other relevant regulations.
As regards sanitation, the tasks performed within the scope of obligatory municipal utility service are determined in the Decree on the Discharge and Treatment of Urban Wastewater and Run-off Rainwater. The public utility service consists of discharging the wastewater into the public sewerage system, treating the discharged water, collecting urban wastewater and sludge from cesspits and from small urban wastewater plants, treatment of such wastewater and sludge in an urban or combined wastewater plant, and so forth.
Municipalities have a duty to provide the public utility service of sanitation throughout their respective areas; however, certain derogations regarding the scope of the service are allowed. Specifically, owners of buildings outside the designated settlement areas and where there is no public sewerage system must ensure that urban wastewater is discharged and treated in small urban wastewater treatment plants. Specific obligations related to the scope and methods of the public utility service provision are regulated by the municipal acts. Both the Ribnica and Škocjan municipalities have adopted ordinances on the discharge and treatment of urban wastewater that provide in detail the scope of the respective public municipal utility services and the locations where the urban wastewater is treated. For an owner of a property to be connected to the public sewerage system, he or she must be in possession of a final building permit and/or proof of the right to build.
Members of the Roma community in Slovenia are entitled to individual and community rights in the same way as all other citizens of the Republic of Slovenia. Their status is defined as a “special ethnic community” entitled to collective, special rights. In 2007, the Roma Community in the Republic of Slovenia Act was adopted. It acknowledges the special status of the Roma community in Slovenia and its successful integration into Slovene society. The Act further defines the special rights of the Roma community which are accorded to its members in addition to the rights and obligations appertaining to all Slovenian citizens. Pursuant to section 3, the State is to provide for the implementation of the special rights of the Roma community in the areas of education, culture, employment, spatial planning and environmental protection, health and social security, as well as notification and participation in public affairs pertaining to the Roma community. Moreover, the Act determines the competences of national and local authorities for the implementation of those rights and provides for cooperation of the representatives of the Roma community in implementing their rights and obligations as provided by law.
Section 5 of the Act provides that the national and local authorities must include Roma settlement issues and improvement of living conditions of the Roma community members in their spatial plans. Pursuant to this section, the system of spatial planning in respect of Roma settlements is to be realised through appropriate local planning solutions. However, the initiative for planning of those settlements may under certain conditions be transferred to or taken over by the Government. The Government themselves may enact spatial planning regulations concerning Roma settlements in cases where a lack of legal regulation or municipal infrastructure could result in a serious threat to health, a long-standing disturbance of the public order or a permanent threat to the environment. In such cases, the tasks taken on by the State are carried out with State funds.
The interests of the Roma community in relation to the national authorities are represented by the Roma Community Council of the Republic of Slovenia, an umbrella organisation of the Roma community (section 9 of the Act). The Council consists of representatives of the Roma Association of Slovenia and the representatives of the Roma community in municipal councils. Pursuant to the Roma Community Act, the Government have a duty to adopt, in cooperation with the Roma Community Council and the municipalities, a programme of measures providing for obligations and tasks to be carried out at the national and local levels (section 6 of the Act). At the national level, the monitoring and protection of the special rights of the Roma community are primarily ensured by the Office of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia for National Minorities (Urad Vlade Republike Slovenije za narodnosti).
In March 2010 the Slovenian Government adopted a National Programme of Measures for Roma for the Period 2010-15 in which it defined priority areas – housing, education, employment and health care – which required specific short-term and long-term measures to improve the situation. The Government stated that the Roma settlements had not been subject to permanent regulation or controlled development. The absence of comprehensive measures and the lack of investment funds had resulted, inter alia, in poor public utilities. The Government pointed out that under the Spatial Planning Act, the municipalities were required to prepare municipal spatial plans, and encouraged them to include Roma settlements in those strategic plans, so as to provide for the redevelopment of such settlements which were mostly unlawfully occupied and the result of haphazard construction.
In the Fourth report on the situation of the Roma community in Slovenia (2015), in which the Government presented the implementation of the Roma Community Act and the National Programme of Measures for Roma, they noted that some municipalities had not yet adopted municipal spatial plans, which had prevented the Roma settlement in those areas from benefiting from legalisation and spatial development. Neither had some municipalities opened calls for submission of applications for public rental housing which would have allowed the members of the Roma community to apply for it, should they so wish. The Government submitted that the State did not have any means of coercing the municipalities into action. They did note, however, that housing issues were closely related to the enjoyment of human rights such as access to safe drinking water and sanitation. The State had a duty to provide for the enjoyment of those rights at all levels, as provided in a number of international documents, and the municipalities should act in accordance with those instruments.
This Convention recognises the right of the child to clean drinking water in the context of the right to health as follows:
“1. States Parties recognize the right of the child to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health and to facilities for the treatment of illness and rehabilitation of health. States Parties shall strive to ensure that no child is deprived of his or her right of access to such health care services.
States Parties shall pursue full implementation of this right and, in particular, shall take appropriate measures:
...
(c) To combat disease and malnutrition, including within the framework of primary health care, through, inter alia, the application of readily available technology and through the provision of adequate nutritious foods and clean drinking-water, taking into consideration the dangers and risks of environmental pollution;
...”
The Resolution recognises the right to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation as a human right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and all human rights, and calls upon States and international organisations to provide financial resources, capacity building and technology transfer, through international assistance and cooperation, in particular to developing countries, in order to scale up efforts to provide safe, clean, accessible and affordable drinking water and sanitation for all.
The Human Rights Council expressed its concern that approximately 884 million people lacked access to improved water sources and more than 2.6 billion people did not have access to improved sanitation. Affirming the need to focus on local and national perspectives in considering the issue, the Human Rights Council reaffirmed the primary responsibility of States to ensure full realisation of all human rights. It held that they should take steps, nationally and through international assistance and cooperation, especially economic and technical, to the maximum of their available resources, to achieve progressively the full realisation of the right to safe drinking water and sanitation by all appropriate means, including particularly the adoption of legislative measures in the implementation of their human rights obligations.
The Resolution thus calls upon States to, inter alia, continuously monitor and regularly analyse the status of the realisation of the right to safe drinking water and sanitation; assess existing policies, programmes and activities in the sectors of water and sanitation, giving due consideration to waste-water management, including treatment and reuse, and to monitor resources allocated to increase adequate access, as well as to identify actors and their capacity; assess whether the existing legislative and policy framework is in line with the right to safe drinking water and sanitation, and to repeal, amend or adapt it in order to meet human rights standards and principles; ensure free, effective, meaningful and non-discriminatory participation of all people and communities concerned, particularly people living in disadvantaged, marginalised and vulnerable situations.
In its twenty-ninth session from 11 to 29 November 2002, the CESCR adopted General Comment no. 15 (2002) on the right to water (Articles 11 and 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights) which, in so far as relevant, provides:
“II. NORMATIVE CONTENT OF THE RIGHT TO WATER
...
While the adequacy of water required for the right to water may vary according to different conditions, the following factors apply in all circumstances:
(a) Availability. The water supply for each person must be sufficient and continuous for personal and domestic uses. These uses ordinarily include drinking, personal sanitation, washing of clothes, food preparation, personal and household hygiene. The quantity of water available for each person should correspond to World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines. Some individuals and groups may also require additional water due to health, climate, and work conditions;
(b) Quality. The water required for each personal or domestic use must be safe, therefore free from micro-organisms, chemical substances and radiological hazards that constitute a threat to a person’s health. Furthermore, water should be of an acceptable colour, odour and taste for each personal or domestic use.
(c) Accessibility. Water and water facilities and services have to be accessible to everyone without discrimination, within the jurisdiction of the State party. Accessibility has four overlapping dimensions:
	(i) Physical accessibility: water, and adequate water facilities and services, must be within safe physical reach for all sections of the population. Sufficient, safe and acceptable water must be accessible within, or in the immediate vicinity, of each household, educational institution and workplace. All water facilities and services must be of sufficient quality, culturally appropriate and sensitive to gender, life-cycle and privacy requirements. Physical security should not be threatened during access to water facilities and services;
	(ii) Economic accessibility: Water, and water facilities and services, must be affordable for all. The direct and indirect costs and charges associated with securing water must be affordable, and must not compromise or threaten the realization of other Covenant rights;
	(iii) Non-discrimination: Water and water facilities and services must be accessible to all, including the most vulnerable or marginalized sections of the population, in law and in fact, without discrimination on any of the prohibited grounds; and
	(iv) Information accessibility: accessibility includes the right to seek, receive and impart information concerning water issues.
...
Non-discrimination and equality
...
States parties should take steps to remove de facto discrimination on prohibited grounds, where individuals and groups are deprived of the means or entitlements necessary for achieving the right to water. States parties should ensure that the allocation of water resources, and investments in water, facilitate access to water for all members of society. Inappropriate resource allocation can lead to discrimination that may not be overt. ...
With respect to the right to water, States parties have a special obligation to provide those who do not have sufficient means with the necessary water and water facilities and to prevent any discrimination on internationally prohibited grounds in the provision of water and water services.
...
STATES PARTIES’ OBLIGATIONS
General legal obligations
While the Covenant provides for progressive realization and acknowledges the constraints due to the limits of available resources, it also imposes on States parties various obligations which are of immediate effect. States parties have immediate obligations in relation to the right to water, such as the guarantee that the right will be exercised without discrimination of any kind (art. 2, para. 2) and the obligation to take steps (art. 2, para.1) towards the full realization of articles 11, paragraph 1, and 12. Such steps must be deliberate, concrete and targeted towards the full realization of the right to water.
...
Specific legal obligations
The right to water, like any human right, imposes three types of obligations on States parties: obligations to respect, obligations to protect and obligations to fulfil.
...
(c) Obligations to fulfil
The obligation to fulfil can be disaggregated into the obligations to facilitate, promote and provide. The obligation to facilitate requires the State to take positive measures to assist individuals and communities to enjoy the right. The obligation to promote obliges the State party to take steps to ensure that there is appropriate education concerning the hygienic use of water, protection of water sources and methods to minimize water wastage. States parties are also obliged to fulfil (provide) the right when individuals or a group are unable, for reasons beyond their control, to realize that right themselves by the means at their disposal.
The obligation to fulfil requires States parties to adopt the necessary measures directed towards the full realization of the right to water. The obligation includes, inter alia, according sufficient recognition of this right within the national political and legal systems, preferably by way of legislative implementation; adopting a national water strategy and plan of action to realize this right; ensuring that water is affordable for everyone; and facilitating improved and sustainable access to water, particularly in rural and deprived urban areas.”
The then special rapporteur, Catarina de Albuquerque, noted in her Report that at the time of her visit, nearly 100% of the population in Slovenia had access to safe water and 86% of the population were connected to the public water supply system. A comprehensive system of water-quality testing was implemented at the national and municipal levels and tap water in Slovenia met European Union and WHO standards. Slovenia had established strict water-protection zones to prevent the contamination of water sources by agriculture, industry and other activities. Regular tests were conducted by 300 monitoring stations throughout the country to assess water quality. Overall, the special rapporteur concluded that Slovenia had a good framework and system in place for ensuring the provision of safe water to the general population.
Concerning sanitation, over half of the population were connected to a wastewater treatment facility, and the Government was making significant efforts to increase this number further. Where people were not connected to sewerage, they generally had cesspools.
As regards the situation of the Roma and their access to safe water, the special rapporteur noted at the outset that while official statistics reported over 3,000 Roma people were living in Slovenia, some estimates were as high as 10,000, not taking into account those Roma people who were not settled. According to the findings of an analysis on the theme “Territorial issues of Roma settlements in Slovenia” prepared by an expert group tasked to deal with the spatial problems of Roma settlements, about twenty-one of ninety-five settlements in Prekmurje and Dolenjska had no access to water, either from public water works or from a local water source. Many of them also had no access to sanitation.
In order to be connected to the water and sanitation networks in Slovenia, one had to apply to the municipality and present evidence of ownership and a building permit, among other documentation. Although Roma communities had been present in Slovenia for centuries, their settlements had frequently been established in an irregular manner. According to the Report, the authorities had used the “illegality” of the settlements as a principal justification for not connecting these communities to water and sanitation services.
The special rapporteur noted with appreciation that some municipalities had found positive solutions to addressing the sometimes difficult and complex problems associated with the Roma community in Slovenia. For example, some municipalities had waived the requirements outlined above in order to facilitate access to water and sanitation.
With regard to water, the special rapporteur pointed out that while household connections were the ideal solution, in the meantime efforts should be made to find interim solutions. Such solutions could include extending the network to a public water point that would be available to all people living in the settlement, or delivering safe water in tankers. Additionally, urgent measures were necessary to improve the current status of sanitation in many Roma settlements. As with water, interim measures were critical. The special rapporteur pointed out that there were an increasing number of sanitation technologies to choose from that did not require connection to the network.
Paragraph 5 of the European Charter on Water Resources recognises the right to water in the following terms:
“Everyone has the right to a sufficient quantity of water for his or her basic needs.
International human rights instruments recognise the fundamental right of all human beings to be free from hunger and to an adequate standard of living for themselves and their families. It is quite clear that these two requirements include the right to a minimum quantity of water of satisfactory quality from the point of view of health and hygiene.
Social measures should be put in place to prevent the supply of water to destitute persons from being cut off.”
The Parliamentary Assembly, stressing that access to water should be recognised as a fundamental human right because it is essential to life on earth and is a resource that must be shared by humankind, and acknowledging that primarily drinking-water resources will become increasingly rare, at a time when needs are increasing, recommended member and non-member States to, inter alia, (a) take the measures needed to ensure that everyone has access to water and sanitation; (b) decentralise water management systems to make them the responsibility of local and regional authorities, and give the latter the necessary legal powers and financial resources; and (c) take steps to make water sanitation techniques more generally available.
The Parliamentary Assembly pointed out that access to safe drinking water and sanitation was recognised as a human right by the United Nations, and noted that fresh water is a limited, fragile resource, but one which is vital for humankind. Regretting that one in six of the world’s inhabitants still did not have access to water and that almost one person in two had to live without a waste-water drainage system, the Parliamentary Assembly recommended that member and non-member States, inter alia, recognise that access to water is a fundamental human right, in line with the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 64/292 of 28 July 2010 and United Nations Human Rights Council Resolution 15/9 of 30 September 2010.
In its Report on Slovenia (fourth monitoring cycle) adopted on 17 June 2014, the ECRI noted with concern the lack of access to a safe water supply in or near some settlements. Referring to a study according to which 17% of Roma obtained water from springs or neighbours, 2% from cisterns and 2% had no access to running water at all, the ECRI emphasised that the lack of access to safe drinking water had a direct negative impact on the health of the Roma communities concerned, as well as indirect repercussions on their everyday life in other areas, such as education and employment.
Observing that provision of water was the competence of municipalities, the ECRI established that most of them had waived the obligatory requirement of prior legalisation and had provided access to piped water for informal settlements. However, the Roma settlement of Goriča vas in Ribnica, home to approximately seventy people, around twenty-two of them children of school age, had no water supply, no electricity and no sewerage system.
The ECRI urged the national authorities to take immediate action to ensure that all Roma obtained practical access to a safe water supply in or in the immediate vicinity of their settlements.
In its Conclusions on the Implementation of the Recommendations in Respect of Slovenia Subject to Interim Follow-up adopted on 23 June 2017, the ECRI noted that the Slovenian authorities had opened a public tender for projects relating to utility infrastructure, including water collector wells and pipelines connecting Roma settlements to the distribution system. The amount of EUR 2 million in total was budgeted for the years 2016 and 2017.
The authorities also informed the ECRI that in September 2016 they had provided exceptional funding of EUR 30,000 to ensure access to safe drinking water for the Goriča vas settlement in Ribnica, as well as for two premises in Dobruška vas in Škocjan. However, according to NGOs, only one settlement received water cisterns; as they were not insulated, the water froze in winter. No water was supplied to other informal settlements.
Despite some efforts made by the Slovenian authorities, the ECRI found that the lack of practical access to a safe water supply continued to be a problem for many Roma. It concluded that its recommendation on the provision of safe water supply had not been implemented.
The then Commissioner for Human Rights, Nils Muižnieks, noted in his Report that while the authorities had installed water cisterns in Dobruška vas at the end of 2016 as a short-term solution to ensure access to drinking water, the inhabitants complained that the cisterns were not filled regularly and the water did not stay in them. Most people therefore obtained their water from a stream polluted with sewage and waste from a meatprocessing plant nearby. Drinking from or bathing in contaminated streams caused illnesses, such as diarrhoea and skin rashes, to which the children were particularly prone. The lack of water prevented the inhabitants from maintaining basic hygiene. As a result, children were mocked and avoided in school, and adults found it difficult to obtain or keep employment.
In discussions with the Commissioner, various interlocutors agreed that there was a lack of political will on the part of certain local municipalities in the Dolenjska region to resolve the legal status of Roma settlements and to improve the inhabitants’ living conditions. They further noted that the State was not putting adequate pressure on the municipalities regarding the matter.
The Commissioner for Human Rights made a general recommendation to the national authorities with regard to poverty reduction and social inclusion. He encouraged the Government to define more clearly the targets of their social policies, so as to enable an assessment of the results, and not simply the level of their implementation. Social policies should be grounded on the relevant national and international human rights framework ensuring that all persons are protected in an equal and nondiscriminatory manner.
Access to improved drinking water sources is increasing, rising from 76% of the global population in 1990 to 91% in 2015. Nevertheless, according to the available Eurostat data in 2015, the percentage of European resident population which had access to drinking water through a connection to a public water supply system varied substantially from one country to another, ranging from less than 64% to 100%.
Also connection to the urban wastewater treatment has improved throughout Europe over recent decades. According to the European Environment Agency, in central European countries, connection rates are now at 97%, with about 75% receiving tertiary treatment, the final stage of treating wastewater before it is discharged to the environment. The rates of connection to the urban wastewater systems are generally lower in Southern, South-East and Eastern Europe, with levels at about 71%.