The case concerns a demolition order against the applicant’s home on the grounds that it had been built unlawfully on forest land.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Kulautuva, in the Kaunas region. He was represented by Mr A. Palijanskas, a lawyer practising in Kaunas.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms K. Bubnytė-Širmenė.
In January 2005 the authorities restored the property rights of the applicant’s mother by giving her a plot of land in Kulautuva. At that time, the land in question was included in the Register of Forests (Miškų kadastras) as forest land (see paragraph 25 below). In June 2006 the applicant’s mother gifted the applicant 0.8 hectares of forest land.
As submitted by the applicant and not disputed by the Government, sometime between 2005 and 2006 the applicant built a house and a storehouse on the aforementioned plot. From that time until the date of the latest information provided to the Court (13 February 2020), the applicant and his wife lived in the house.
In June 2012 the State Inspectorate of Territorial Planning and Construction under the Ministry of the Environment (hereinafter “the Inspectorate”) inspected the applicant’s land and found that the construction had been unlawful. He was ordered to demolish the buildings within six months. That time-limit was extended by three months at the applicant’s request. Subsequently he sought a further extension, but the courts found that there were no lawful grounds for granting it.
In September 2013 the Inspectorate instituted proceedings against the applicant before the Kaunas District Court for failure to comply with the demolition order.
In his reply to the Inspectorate’s claim, the applicant did not dispute the unlawfulness of the construction, but submitted that he was taking steps to change the status of his land. He argued that there were no trees on the part of the plot on which he had built the house and that it was therefore not justified to classify it as forest land. He contended that if the status of the land was changed, he would be able to obtain a construction permit and legalise the buildings ex post facto (see paragraph 28 below). The applicant also submitted that the house was his only home, he was retired and did not have sufficient funds to acquire a new place of residence.
On several occasions in 2013 and 2014 the applicant addressed the public authorities in charge of the supervision and management of forests, asking them to re-assess the boundaries of the forest on his land and to exclude from the forest land category the part on which the house had been built. The authorities refused his requests and stated that the plot had been included in the Register of Forests in 2004 because it had fulfilled the criteria of forest land (see paragraph 25 below), as demonstrated by photographic evidence dating from that time. They also noted that unlawful construction on the land did not constitute grounds to find that it was no longer forest land.
In November 2014 the Kaunas District Court adjourned the proceedings instituted by the Inspectorate (see paragraph 7 above), on the grounds that the applicant had lodged complaints about the authorities’ refusal to re-assess the boundaries of the forest on his land (see paragraph 9 above). The court observed that the latter proceedings were part of the applicant’s efforts to legalise the unlawful construction ex post facto and thus relevant to determining whether the demolition order should be upheld.
In March 2015 the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint about the authorities’ refusal to re-assess the boundaries of the forest (see paragraph 9 above). It held that the status of forest land could be changed only in a limited number of circumstances provided for by law (see paragraph 26 below), which were not present in the applicant’s case. It also observed that the applicant’s advanced age and low income did not exempt him from the obligation to comply with the law. In March 2016 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld that decision.
In March 2016 the Kaunas District Court resumed the adjourned proceedings (see paragraph 10 above), but in September 2016 it adjourned them again, on the grounds that the applicant had instituted proceedings seeking to establish a fact of legal significance, namely that his grandfather had owned a homestead on the plot. The court observed that if such a fact was established, it would enable the applicant to legalise the unlawful construction (see paragraph 26 below).
In December 2016 the Kaunas District Court dismissed the applicant’s request to establish a fact of legal significance (see paragraph 12 above). After examining the documents submitted by the applicant and hearing witnesses, the court found that there was insufficient evidence that his grandfather had owned a homestead, or that such a homestead had been located on his plot. In July 2017 the Kaunas Regional Court upheld that decision, and in October 2017 the Supreme Court declined to examine an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant.
In July 2017 the Kaunas District Court resumed the adjourned proceedings (see paragraph 12 above).
On 18 October 2017 the Kaunas District Court allowed the Inspectorate’s claim and ordered the applicant to demolish the buildings. It observed that the applicant had built them on forest land, without having changed the status of the land and without having obtained a construction permit (see paragraph 27 below). Furthermore, his subsequent attempts to legalise the unlawful construction ex post facto had been unsuccessful (see paragraphs 11 and 13 above). In accordance with the Constitutional Court’s case-law, the prohibition to build on forest land was justified by the importance of forests to the environment, and could not be considered disproportionate (see paragraph 30 below). Moreover, an order to demolish a building built in an area where construction was prohibited was necessary in order to protect the environment and to ensure a fair balance between the public interest and individual rights, and thus it could not be considered disproportionate either (see paragraph 31 below). The court ordered the applicant to demolish the buildings within six months, in view of the difficulties which he might face during the autumn and winter. If he failed to do so, the Inspectorate had the right to demolish them at the applicant’s expense.
The applicant lodged an appeal against that decision. He submitted that he was retired and in poor health, his wife had cancer, and they had nowhere else to live. He stated that he had built the house on his own land and its presence did not interfere with anybody’s interests, as demonstrated by letters from the local authorities and local residents, expressing their support for him. He argued that the first-instance court had failed to strike a fair balance between his rights and the public interest.
On 9 February 2018 the Kaunas Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It observed that, in accordance with the domestic case-law, it had to take into account the individual circumstances of the applicant’s situation, such as the circumstances in which the unlawful construction had been carried out; the seriousness of such construction; the reasons for the unlawfulness; its nature and degree; whether the applicant had been aware that his conduct was unlawful and whether he could have any legitimate expectations; the nature and importance of the rights defended by the demolition order; the proportionality of the proposed measure; and whether the applicant would suffer an individual and excessive burden as a result. The court emphasised that the applicant had knowingly built the house without a construction permit (see paragraph 27 below), and the fact that he had hoped to be able to legalise it ex post facto could not exempt him from responsibility. The court considered that the obligation to demolish the buildings was proportionate and struck a fair balance between individual rights and the public interest – in particular, the protection of the environment and rational use of protected areas. In the court’s view, the applicant’s arguments concerning his age and state of health were unrelated to the obligation, provided for by law, to eliminate the consequences of unlawful construction.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, in which he raised essentially the same arguments (see paragraph 16 above), but on 27 April 2018 the Supreme Court refused to accept it for examination, on the basis that it raised no important legal issues.
On 25 September 2019 the Kaunas District Court, at the bailiff’s request, fined the applicant 80 euros (EUR) for failure to comply with the courts’ decisions (see paragraphs 15-18 above). In determining the amount of the fine, the court took into account the applicant’s age, state of health, low monthly income and the fact that it was his first offence of such kind. It emphasised that the payment of the fine did not relieve him from the obligation to comply with courts’ decisions.
On 26 November 2019 the Kaunas Regional Court upheld the fine. It observed that the applicant had been aware that his buildings had been constructed unlawfully since June 2012 (see paragraph 6 above), and that he had failed to comply with the courts’ decisions for more than a year. During that time he had taken no actions to comply with them and had not indicated any objective circumstances which might have precluded him from doing so. The court also observed that the applicant’s age, state of health and income were relevant only when determining the amount of the fine, but they could not constitute grounds to relieve him from the obligation to comply with courts’ decisions.
At the time the latest information was made available to the Court (13 February 2020), the house had not yet been demolished.
Articles 22, 23 and 24 of the Constitution state, respectively, that an individual’s private life, property and home are inviolable. Article 22 also states that the law and courts must protect everyone from arbitrary or unlawful interference with his or her private and family life.
Article 54 of the Constitution enshrines the duty of the State to take care of the natural environment, wildlife and plants, individual objects of nature, and particularly valuable areas, and to supervise the sustainable use of natural resources, as well as their restoration and development. It further states that any destruction of land and the subsurface, pollution of water and air, radioactive impact on the environment, as well as depletion of wildlife and plants, are prohibited by law.
In accordance with Article 7 of the Constitution, ignorance of the law does not exempt anyone from liability.
In accordance with Article 2 § 3 of the Law on Forests, valid at the material time, forest land was land covered by trees, as well as land consisting of cleared spaces, fallen trees, forest fields, arboretums, seed-plots, forest seed plantations, bushes and plantations. Forest roads, areas, technological and fire-resistant borders, timber storehouses and other equipment related to forestry, leisure areas, animal-feeding areas and land designated for the planting of trees were also classified as forest land.
Article 11 § 1 provides an exhaustive list of cases where the status of forest land may be changed to land of a different purpose. In so far as relevant to the present case, Article 11 § 1 (7) provides that the status of privately-owned forest land may be changed in order to rebuild a homestead which previously existed there. The existence of a homestead has to be demonstrated on the basis of archival documents, and if no such documents are available, a court may establish a fact of legal significance.
At the material time, the requirement to obtain a construction permit in order to build a new building was provided for in Article 3 § 2, Article 12 § 1 (4) and Article 23 § 1 of the Law on Construction.
At the material time, Article 28 provided that in the event of unlawful construction, an individual could be allowed to obtain the necessary documents in order to legalise the construction ex post facto, but only where such construction was permissible in general. Otherwise, the unlawfully built buildings had to be demolished within an established time-limit.
For the case-law of the Constitutional Court concerning the importance of forests to the public interest, see Beinarovič and Others v. Lithuania (nos. 70520/10 and 2 others, §§ 99-100, 12 June 2018).
In its ruling of 13 March 2006 the Constitutional Court held:
“The Constitutional Court [has previously held that] ... the State, when regulating economic activity, may establish special conditions, procedures and means of control, as well as certain restrictions or prohibitions on the economic activity related to the use of natural resources. [When doing so], the State ... is bound by ... the principles of justice, reasonableness and proportionality enshrined in the Constitution ...
The aforementioned restrictions and prohibitions may be applied, inter alia, to economic activity and construction in these areas, as well as to other activity on account of which the landscape or individual objects located in these areas may be changed.
It must be underlined that these restrictions and prohibitions, whose aim is to ensure the protection of particularly valuable areas – that is to say, the public interest – may and must be established not only in respect of the State and municipalities ... but also in respect of other owners and users – natural and legal persons ...
It is particularly important that the aforementioned restrictions and prohibitions do ... not restrict the rights of the owners and other persons more than is necessary to achieve their objectives.
...
There are not enough legal arguments to find that restrictions [on construction on forest land] ... especially taking account of the character of forests as special objects of ownership, of their special ecological, social and economic significance to the environment, are disproportionate to their objective ... [or] that the owners’ property rights are restricted more than permitted by the Constitution.”
In its ruling of 31 January 2011 the Constitutional Court held:
“[U]nder the Constitution, the legislator, when seeking to protect the public interest, inter alia, the protection of the natural environment ... may establish various measures in order to eliminate the consequences of construction which violates the requirements of the law. Such measures may include an obligation to demolish the [unlawfully built] structure ... When establishing such measures, it is important to respect the principle of proportionality, which requires that the measures provided for by law be proportionate to the objectives sought to be realised ... [T]he measures must [also] be necessary for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others, the values enshrined in the Constitution, and/or constitutionally important objectives.
Therefore, the legal regulation ... whereby a court, examining a case on the legal consequences of [unlawful] construction, [has] to adopt a decision ordering the builder to demolish the structure ... in situations where construction is not permitted in the area in question [and] the established violation may thus be eliminated only by demolishing ... the structure, is proportionate to the committed violation and is in line with the legitimate and generally important objectives sought in order to protect the violated rights of others, to strike a fair balance between the interests of society and those of an individual, to ensure the protection of the environment ... [and] to guarantee the rational use of territories ...”