The application concerns the compatibility with Article 8 of the Convention of an administrative fine imposed on the applicant, a lawyer. Relying on legal professional privilege, the applicant had refused to testify as a witness in criminal proceedings against the former managing directors of four companies to which he had provided legal advice prior to their insolvency. The applicant had been released from his duty of confidentiality only by the current managing director of these companies, but not by several of the former managing directors on trial.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Rhede. He is a practising lawyer and represents himself.
The Government were represented by one of their Agents, Mrs N. Wenzel, of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Between 1996 and 2014 the applicant’s law firm was engaged to advise four companies: H. stock corporation and L., W. and G. limited liability companies, which all became insolvent in 2014. It was essentially the applicant who provided legal advice on different transactions to the companies.
In 2017 the Münster Regional Court opened criminal proceedings against the former managing directors of the companies, inter alia, for fraud. The managing directors were represented by different lawyers in these proceedings. The court summoned the applicant as a witness. He was to testify on specific sales transactions carried out by these companies. The court informed the applicant that the current managing director of the four companies, D., had issued a declaration releasing him from professional secrecy as a lawyer. The insolvency administrator had also agreed to the applicant testifying in court. Moreover, the former managing director of L. company had agreed to release the applicant from professional secrecy.
At the hearing before the Regional Court on 18 May 2017 the applicant, relying on Article 53 § 1 no. 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 26 below), refused to testify. He considered himself to be bound by professional secrecy. He argued that for him to be allowed to testify, it would be necessary for all the persons who had been managing directors at the time when he was the companies’ lawyer, and who were now defendants in the present criminal proceedings, also to release him from professional secrecy.
The Regional Court informed the applicant that in its view, release from professional secrecy by the current managing director of the four companies was sufficient. As the applicant nevertheless refused to testify, the court, relying on Article 70 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 27 below), ordered the applicant to pay an administrative fine (Ordnungsgeld) of 150 euros (EUR), to be converted into one day’s administrative detention (Ordnungshaft) per EUR 50 if payment of the fine could not be enforced.
On 17 August 2017 the Hamm Court of Appeal quashed the Regional Court’s order. It agreed with the Regional Court that where a lawyer had only been mandated by a company, release from professional secrecy by the current managing director of the company was sufficient; additional release from professional secrecy by the former managing director(s) was not necessary. However, the Court of Appeal quashed the Regional Court’s decision on a different ground. It considered that release from professional secrecy by the former managing director(s) was exceptionally required if a lawyer had been mandated both by the company and by its former managing director(s) in person and thus had a contractual relationship with both. However, the Regional Court had failed to establish in the present case whether the applicant had been instructed, in addition, by the companies’ former managing directors in person.
At the hearing before the Münster Regional Court on 9 November 2017 the applicant, who had been summoned as a witness to testify on the legal advice he had given on a number of specified transactions to the four companies, again refused to testify as he considered himself bound by professional secrecy.
The Regional Court, referring to Article 70 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, having informed the applicant of its view regarding his duty to testify and having heard him, thereupon ordered the applicant to pay an administrative fine amounting to EUR 600, to be converted into one day’s administrative detention per EUR 50 if payment of the fine could not be enforced. The applicant was further ordered to pay the costs incurred by his refusal to testify.
The Regional Court found that the applicant did not have a right to refuse to testify under Article 53 § 1 no. 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. It confirmed its view that release from professional secrecy by the current managing director of the four companies, that is, the director at the time when the release declaration was made, was sufficient. Moreover, the applicant had not substantiated that the legal consultancy contracts he had concluded with two of the former managing directors in person had covered subjects on which the court intended to question the applicant as a witness and that a right not to testify could have arisen from that contractual relationship.
On 20 November 2017 the applicant lodged an appeal against the Regional Court’s order. He argued that he had had the right under Article 53 § 1 no. 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure not to testify in the proceedings.
The applicant argued that in order to be authorised to testify, he would have needed to be released from professional secrecy also by the managing directors of the companies at the time when the business transactions in respect of which he had been summoned to testify had taken place. Article 53 of the Code of Criminal Procedure protected relationships of trust, which a lawyer could only build up with individuals, not with a legal entity. A lawyer could only give comprehensive legal advice to a company if the managing director(s) acting for it provided him with a full account of the relevant facts. In particular, if the managing director(s) did not also provide information potentially relevant in future criminal proceedings against them, a lawyer was unable to advise the company on risks that certain acts might make its representatives liable to criminal prosecution. It was therefore essential for the functioning of the lawyerclient relationship with a company that the managing director(s) kept the right to decide whether or not to release the lawyer with whom they had worked from professional secrecy.
Furthermore, courts of appeal in Germany took diverging views on the question of who had to release a lawyer from professional secrecy in circumstances such as those at issue in the present case. There was no decision of the last-instance Federal Court of Justice or the Federal Constitutional Court on the subject-matter. In these circumstances, lawyers were de facto forced to rely on professional secrecy in order not to run the risk of being found guilty of disclosure of private secrets under Article 203  § 1 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 28 below).
On 27 February 2018 the Hamm Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal as ill-founded. It found that the requirements under Article 70 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for imposing on the applicant the administrative fine and the costs caused by his refusal to testify were met. The applicant could not rely on a right not to testify under Article 53 § 1 no. 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The Court of Appeal confirmed that it had been sufficient that the current managing director of the four companies had released the applicant from professional secrecy. It was not necessary for the former managing directors of these companies, in particular the defendants in the criminal proceedings at issue, also to release the applicant from professional secrecy.
The Court of Appeal stated that the right to release lawyers from their duty of confidentiality lay with the person to whose benefit that duty had been laid down in law. However, there was disagreement between the courts and among legal writers about who was entitled to release a lawyer from professional secrecy in the case of a change of managing director or where an insolvency administrator had been appointed.
A number of courts of appeal (including the Zweibrücken, Düsseldorf, Schleswig, Koblenz and Celle Courts of Appeal, see also paragraph 31 below) had decided that a company’s lawyer could only be released from professional secrecy by both the current and the former managing directors. A relationship of trust protected by Article 53 of the Code of Criminal Procedure could only exist between individuals. Moreover, it usually could not be ruled out that in his lawyer-client exchanges, the lawyer had obtained knowledge of personal secrets of the former managing director acting for the company in addition to secrets of the company.
In contrast, other courts of appeal (including the Cologne, Nuremberg and Oldenburg Courts of Appeal, see also paragraph 30 below) took the view that it was sufficient that the current managing director of a company or the insolvency administrator released a lawyer having worked for the company from professional secrecy. There was a lawyer-client relationship and a relationship of trust protected by Article 53 of the Code of Criminal Procedure only between the lawyer and the company as a legal entity. Therefore, the legal representative of the company at the moment of the statement releasing the lawyer from his duty of confidentiality alone was entitled to decide whether such a release from confidentiality was in the company’s interest.
The Court of Appeal stated that it endorsed the latter view, which had been taken by a number of courts of appeal for a considerable time (see paragraph 30 below). Where the contractual lawyer-client relationship existed only between the company and the lawyer, the duty of confidentiality served the company’s interests. It would often run counter to the company’s interests if a former managing director could decide whether or not to release the company’s lawyer from his duty of confidentiality. Furthermore, this would lead to undue restrictions on the investigation of the truth in criminal proceedings. A company’s interest could be or become different from that of its managing director(s). The fact that a managing director might withhold information, in particular relating to his own potential criminal liability, from the company’s lawyer as the latter was not under a duty of confidentiality towards the director was an acceptable consequence of the contractual relationship only between the company and the lawyer.
Furthermore, the applicant had not substantiated that he or his law firm had concluded legal consultancy contracts not only with the companies, but also with their former managing directors themselves concerning subject-matters on which he was to be questioned by the court.
On 15 March 2018 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Federal Constitutional Court. He argued that the decisions of the Münster Regional Court of 9 November 2017 and of the Hamm Court of Appeal of 27 February 2018, which had imposed a fine on him for failure to testify in criminal proceedings, had breached his constitutional right to exercise freely his profession. He stressed that the courts of appeal in Germany had taken diverging views on the question of who had to release a lawyer who had worked for a company from professional secrecy and that the Hamm Court of Appeal had endorsed the view taken by some of the courts of appeal which was less protective of the lawyer-client privilege. He submitted that the domestic courts’ decisions had disproportionately interfered with the secrecy of exchanges between lawyer and client, which covered both the company instructing a lawyer and persons acting on the company’s behalf.
On 26 March 2018 the Federal Constitutional Court, without giving reasons, declined to consider the applicant’s constitutional complaint (file no. 2 BvR 460/18).
On 15 May 2018 the applicant testified as a witness before the Münster Regional Court in the criminal proceedings against the former managing directors of the four companies on transactions covered by the legal consultancy contracts between his law firm and these companies. The court had announced that it would order the applicant’s detention under Article 70 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 27 below) to enforce his duty to testify if necessary. The applicant further paid the fine of EUR 600 previously imposed on him by that court.
Article 53 of the Code of Criminal Procedure lays down rules on the right to refuse to testify on professional grounds. The provision, in so far as relevant, provides:
“(1)  The following persons may ... refuse to testify:
...
lawyers ... concerning information which was entrusted to them or became known to them in this capacity;
...
(2)  The persons designated in paragraph (1), first sentence, numbers 2 to 3b, may not refuse to testify if they have been released from their duty of confidentiality. ...”
Article 70 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, on the consequences of an unjustified refusal to testify, in so far as relevant, provides:
“(1)  A witness who without having a legal ground therefor refuses to testify ... shall be charged with the costs caused by this refusal. At the same time an administrative fine shall be imposed on him and, if the fine cannot be collected, administrative detention shall be ordered.
(2) Detention may also be ordered to force a witness to testify; such detention shall not, however, extend beyond the termination of the proceedings before the court in question, nor beyond a period of six months.
...
(4) Where these measures have been exhausted, they may not be repeated in the same proceedings or in other proceedings if the same offence is the subject of the proceedings.”
Article 203 of the Criminal Code, which penalises the disclosure of private secrets, in so far as relevant, provides:
“(1)  Whoever unlawfully discloses the secret of another, in particular a secret relating to personal privacy or a business or trade secret, which was revealed or otherwise made known to him in his capacity as a
...
(3)  lawyer, ...
...
shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine.
...”
The courts of appeal in Germany have adopted different stances on the question of who had to release from professional secrecy a lawyer who had given legal advice to a company in the case of a change in the company’s management.
One group of courts of appeal takes the view that release from professional secrecy by the representative of a company at the time of the declaration of release, that is, the current managing director (or the insolvency administrator) was sufficient; additional release by former managing directors was not necessary. These courts argue, in essence, that there was a contractual relationship only between the lawyer and the company, which alone was protected by the lawyer’s duty of confidentiality and could decide alone whether or not it was in its interest to release the lawyer from that duty (see, in particular, Cologne Court of Appeal, file nos. III-2 Ws 544/15 and 2 Ws 544/15, order of 1 September 2015; Nuremberg Court of Appeal, file no. 1 Ws 289/09, order of 18 June 2009; and Oldenburg Court of Appeal, file no. 1 Ws 242/04, order of 28 May 2004).
Another group of courts of appeal, in contrast, considers that both the current representatives of a company and the former representatives had to release the company’s lawyer from his duty of professional secrecy. These courts generally stress that a relationship of trust protected by the duty of confidentiality could only exist between individual persons, not with a company as a legal entity. Moreover, in his exchanges with company representatives, a lawyer usually obtained knowledge also of the representatives’ personal secrets (see, in particular, Zweibrücken Court of Appeal, file no. 1 Ws 334/16, order of 8 December 2016; Düsseldorf Court of Appeal, file no. 1 Ws 1155/92, order of 14 December 1992; Celle Court of Appeal, file no. 1 Ws 194/85, order of 2 August 1985; Koblenz Court of Appeal, file no. 2 VAs 21/84, order of 22 February 1985; and Schleswig Court of Appeal, file nos. 1 Ws 160/80 and 1 Ws 161/80, order of 27 May 1980).