The case originated in an application (no. 50446/09) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Ramūnas Jankauskas (“the applicant”), on 9 September 2009.
The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their then Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicant complained about the Lithuanian authorities’ decision to strike his name off the list of trainee advocates.
On 25 November 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Pakruojis.
In 1996 the applicant graduated from the Lithuanian Police Academy with a degree in law. He worked as an investigator at Šiauliai city police headquarters.
On 3 October 2000 the Šiauliai Regional Court established that from 1995 to 1996, when he had been working as an investigator, the applicant had several times solicited and sometimes succeeded in getting bribes for discontinuing criminal proceedings. The victims of the applicant’s crimes, who were suspects in criminal proceedings or their relatives, had been threatened and sometimes harassed sexually by the applicant. He would tell them that “the case would end badly (blogai baigsis)” if they did not meet his demands. The Šiauliai Regional Court found that such actions amounted to the intentional crimes of abuse of office (Article 285 of the Criminal Code) and bribery (Article 282 of the Criminal Code). The court also noted that the applicant had not acknowledged his guilt, but had instead tried to justify his criminal acts and avoid taking responsibility for them in any way possible. The trial court sentenced him to eight years’ deprivation of liberty in a correctional labour colony under a strict regime, ordered the confiscation of all his property, and prohibited him from working in law enforcement or the justice system for five years.
The applicant’s conviction was upheld by the Court of Appeal on 29 June 2001 and by the Supreme Court on 18 December 2001.
In 2003, upon entry into force of the new Criminal Code, the Šiauliai Regional Court requalified the applicant’s sentence to four years and seven months’ deprivation of liberty. The applicant was released from prison on 8 September 2003 after serving his sentence.
By a ruling of 17 June 2005 the Šiauliai Regional Court expunged the applicant’s conviction from his criminal record. The court noted that the applicant had served his sentence. He had been convicted of crimes of medium severity. The court also took account of the fact that the applicant had not committed any violations of administrative law, had been bringing up a child alone, had been described in positive terms by people at his place of residence and at his workplace, had drawn the right conclusions from the crimes he had committed, and had promised not to commit any crimes in the future. The ruling was not appealed against and became enforceable.
According to the applicant’s curriculum vitae, which he later submitted to the Bar Association, from May 2004 he worked as in-house lawyer and loan administrator in various private companies.
On 12 January 2007 the applicant wrote to the Lithuanian Bar Association, which regulates advocates (lawyers admitted to the Bar, advokatas), requesting to be admitted as a trainee advocate. He asked that an advocate V.S.B. be appointed as his supervisor in his work practice. The applicant also confirmed in writing that “none of the grounds listed in the Law on the Bar prevented him from being put on the list of trainee advocates”. The applicant also submitted a written application (advokato įskaitos lapas) where he listed his former places of employment, stating that from 22 July 1991 until 15 March 1999 he had worked in the police and from 19 March 2004 in the private sector. There was no explanation about the period between 1999 and 2004.
The Bar Association placed the applicant’s name on the list of trainee advocates on 25 January 2007 and advocate V.S.B. was appointed as his supervisor.
On 13 June 2007 the Bar Association received a letter from a private person, L.G., informing it that the applicant had withheld information from the Bar Association that he had been previously convicted.
On 20 June 2007 the Bar Association held that by failing to inform it of the conviction, the applicant had withheld information relevant to assessing his reputation, and that therefore he had shown that his attitude towards the standing of the Lithuanian Bar and towards becoming a trainee advocate was not honest and respectful. The Bar Association considered that the applicant had breached points 1.3, 12.1 and 13.2 of the Lithuanian Code of Professional Ethics for Advocates (see paragraph 37 below – hereinafter, “the Code of Ethics”), and disciplinary proceedings against him were therefore justified. The Bar Association also considered that the applicant’s supervisor, V.S.B., had likewise breached the Code of Ethics but that he would not face disciplinary proceedings owing to his long and positive professional record.
On 10 July 2007 the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Association held that the applicant had committed a disciplinary violation by withholding information about his conviction by Šiauliai Regional Court on 3 October 2000 (see paragraph 7 above). The committee emphasised the fact that the applicant had not mentioned the conviction or his “long prison sentence” in his application to be admitted as a trainee advocate, his curriculum vitae or in the other documents submitted in support. Information about the conviction had been relevant for assessing his reputation. By withholding such information the applicant had acted dishonestly and disrespectfully, and had not protected the prestige of the Lithuanian Bar. The applicant had thus breached points 1.3, 12.1 and 13.2 of the Code of Ethics, which set out the necessary requirements for candidates to become trainee advocates (see paragraph 37 below). The case therefore had to be decided by the Court of Honour of Advocates (hereinafter – “the Court of Honour”).
In a letter of 4 September 2007 to the Bar Association the chief prosecutor of Šiauliai Region wrote that the applicant lived in the city of Šiauliai and that in the course of his work as a trainee advocate he had interaction with the same investigators, prosecutors and judges with whom he had worked before committing his crimes and with those who had later investigated his crimes or examined his case in court. Even though the applicant had served his sentence, communication with those investigators, prosecutors and judges caused some strains at work in Šiauliai. The chief prosecutor stated that it would be better if the applicant could be prevented from practising law in the city or region of Šiauliai, even though the Law on the Bar did not provide for the possibility to restrict an advocate’s activity within or outside a certain area.
By a letter of 4 September 2007 the Court of Honour informed the applicant about the forthcoming hearing in his case, and invited him to participate in person or have an advocate represent his interests in those disciplinary proceedings. The applicant was present at the hearing, and explained that he had not hidden his conviction. The only reason he had not informed the Bar Association about it was because in his view there had been no requirement to do so. He also asked for the removal of the president of the Court of Honour, J.K., stating that the manner in which the latter had put certain questions to him showed he was biased. The request was refused as unfounded.
The Court of Honour, composed of the presiding advocate, J.K., and two other advocates, A.P. and G.P., met on 25 September and 25 October 2007. They postponed the hearing to a later date on each occasion.
On 23 November 2007 the Court of Honour rejected a request by the applicant to remove J.K. as unsubstantiated, while A.P. was replaced by another advocate, J.M.
The Court of Honour also held on the same day that the applicant had breached the Code of Ethics and imposed the disciplinary measure of ordering his removal from the list of trainee advocates, on the basis of Articles 13 § 1 and 54 § 2 of the Law on the Bar (see paragraph 34 below). In setting out its reasons the Court of Honour had regard to the crimes committed by the applicant and noted that during the criminal court proceedings he had expressed no remorse (see paragraph 7 above). For the Court of Honour, even though the law did not directly require that a person disclose a prior conviction when submitting a request to become a trainee advocate, such an obligation stemmed from Article 8 (4) of the Law of the Bar, which required candidates to be of high moral character (nepriekaištinga reputacija). Similarly, point 13.2 of the Code of Ethics set out that an advocate had to act honestly and ethically, even if certain acts or behaviour that did not meet the requirements of the Law on the Bar or the Code of Ethics were not described specifically in that Code (see paragraph 37 below). The Court of Honour considered that the crimes which the applicant had committed whilst working in law enforcement had been cynical and had shown great disrespect towards society. Moreover, he had committed those crimes while working in the legal field. In the light of such considerations, the Court of Honour was convinced that the applicant, who had a university degree and had previously had a law-related job, had deliberately withheld information about his prior conviction, because he had been aware that, if information not only about his crimes but also about the manner in which he had committed them had come to light, then the Bar Association would have rejected his application to become a trainee advocate. Lastly, the Court of Honour noted that the profession of advocate was defined not only by legal acts, but also by certain ethical rules, historic practices and society’s legitimate expectations as to the assistance an advocate was to provide as part of his or her role. An advocate should therefore always adhere to the moral and legal standards and obligations, protect the professional honour and dignity of advocates and do nothing that would discredit the good name of the profession, the advocate’s oath, or the notion of justice.
The applicant challenged the above decision before the Vilnius Regional Court. He argued, inter alia, that there had been procedural beaches and that the Court of Honour had not been impartial. He also maintained that the concept of high moral character applied to advocates was too strict when compared with the requirements for bailiffs or civil servants.
On 24 October 2008 the Vilnius Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal as unfounded. It dealt with the applicant’s allegations about procedural violations by the Court of Honour by noting that that court had merely postponed the case on 25 September and 25 October 2007, without examining it on the merits (see paragraph 19 above). The applicant’s suggestion that the Court of Honour had issued a ruling on either of those dates that the applicant had not committed a disciplinary violation was therefore unfounded. Furthermore, J.K., the advocate who had been the president of the Court of Honour, had been questioned as a witness by the Vilnius Regional Court and had testified that he had not been biased against the applicant; he had only had an opinion about the particular actions performed by the applicant. Moreover, the applicant’s allegation about a lack of impartiality on the part of J.K. had also been dismissed as unfounded by the Court of Honour. Lastly, the change in the composition of that court when the case had been decided on 23 November 2007, removing A.P., a member said by the applicant to have been favourable to him (see paragraph 20 above), had not been a decisive factor because the court had been unanimous in its finding against the applicant. The Vilnius Regional Court thus dismissed the applicant’s request to summon for questioning advocate A.P., who, according to the applicant, had participated in the hearing when his case had gone before the Court of Honour. On the basis of the written evidence, the first-instance court established that A.P. had not taken part in the disciplinary proceedings against the applicant.
As to the question of the applicant’s reputation, the Vilnius Regional Court had particular regard to the crimes of which he had been convicted (see paragraph 7 above). While observing that the conviction had expired, the court noted that the crimes had been committed when the applicant had been working in law enforcement. The manner in which those crimes had been committed and their scale did not allow for the assertion that the applicant had automatically regained the status of being of high moral character immediately after the conviction had been expunged. Were it otherwise, society’s expectations as to the morals and ethics of representatives of the advocate’s profession would not be met. Only people of high moral character could be trusted to work in the process of the implementation of justice. In other words, the applicant’s actions had to be looked at to see not only if they had been in accordance with applicable laws, but also whether they had adhered to the requirements of professional ethics. That stemmed, inter alia, from Article 8 (4) and other provisions of the Law on the Bar, which provided that an advocate was liable to disciplinary sanctions, including disbarment, for breaches of professional ethics (see paragraph 34 below), and was something that had also been confirmed by the Supreme Court (see paragraph 43 below).
The Vilnius Regional Court concurred with the Court of Honour that the applicant had had a moral obligation to disclose important information such as a prior conviction to the Bar Association when submitting an application to become a trainee advocate, even though that requirement had not been explicitly stated on the application form (see paragraph 12 above, advokato įskaitos lapas). The fact that, according to the applicant, his supervising advocate, several other advocates in Šiauliai and some members of the Bar Association Council had known about his prior conviction, did not absolve him from the obligation to provide information that was as comprehensive as possible when applying to the Bar, so that it would be possible to assess his reputation objectively and comprehensively. The Court of Honour had also been correct in holding that the applicant had consciously withheld that information because he had understood that the nature of his criminal acts would not have permitted him to be considered as a person of high moral character. In any case, if the applicant had had any doubts about whether the information about his prior conviction was relevant, he could have asked the Bar Association. Consequently, it had been legitimate for the Court of Honour to impose a disciplinary measure on the applicant by removing him from the list of trainee advocates.
The applicant appealed, arguing, inter alia, that the rules of the Code of Ethics had not applied to him at the time when he had requested to become a trainee advocate, given that they applied only to people who were already advocates and trainee advocates. According to the applicant, the president of the Court of Honour had clearly acknowledged to the Vilnius Regional Court that anyone who had disclosed a prior conviction had been admitted to the Bar and that the applicant would also have been admitted if he had done the same. The applicant also relied on Article 5 § 1 (2) of the Law on Bailiffs and Article 9 § 3 (1) of the Law on Civil Service (see paragraphs 41 and 42 below), implying that the definition of high moral character had been interpreted too broadly by the Court of Honour.
The Bar Association asked that the applicant’s appeal be dismissed.
By a ruling of 7 April 2009 the Court of Appeal upheld the Vilnius Regional Court’s arguments and dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It found that no violations had been committed under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 of the Convention as regards the fairness of the disciplinary proceedings. The rules regulating disciplinary proceedings did not prohibit postponing examination of a case. Moreover, the applicant had not challenged J.M.’s participation in the disciplinary proceedings. It would also have been irrelevant to summon A.P. as she had not sat in the Court of Honour when it had decided on the applicant’s case on 23 November 2007.
As to the merits of the complaint, the Vilnius Regional Court had been correct in its interpretation of the Law on the Bar and of established court practice in looking at the applicant’s crimes, their manner and scale not only in the light of the Law on the Bar, but also taking into account the rules for advocates’ professional ethics. There had been no arguments in the applicant’s appeal to refute the first-instance court’s view of his crimes and behaviour in the light of those ethical requirements. Contrary to the applicant’s submission, the first-instance court had relied on Article 8 (4) of the Law on the Bar and on the Code of Ethics, not on Article 8 (1) of the Law on the Bar. The applicant’s argument that the first-instance court had applied Article 8 (1) of the amended Law on the Bar (see paragraph 35 below) retroactively was therefore unfounded.
Lastly, the Court of Appeal rejected the applicant’s argument that he had had no obligation to inform the Bar Association about his prior conviction. The Court of Honour had been correct in finding that such an obligation stemmed from the Law on the Bar and the Code of Ethics, which also applied to the applicant. The Court of Honour’s conclusion had been supported by point 12.1 of the Code of Ethics, which set out that the relationship between an advocate and the Bar was based on mutual respect and good-will assistance, and by point 13.2, which stated that an advocate must also adhere to the traditions and customs which corresponded to the common principles of ethics and decency (see paragraph 37 below). As a result, the Court of Honour had had grounds to impose a disciplinary penalty on the applicant and to strike his name off the list of trainee advocates on the basis of Articles 7 § 1 (4), 8 (4), 13 § 1 (1) and 35 of the Law on the Bar.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law. He submitted, inter alia, that the prohibition on him practising law was in breach of his rights under Articles 8 and 14 of the Convention. He also argued that an expired conviction should not be an obstacle for him to become an advocate. He mentioned that the stricter requirements on reputation under the amendments to Article 8 (1) of the Law on the Bar of 15 April 2008 (see paragraph 35 below), should not have been applied to him retroactively. For the applicant, it was also wrong to apply the Code of Ethics to actions he had committed before becoming a trainee advocate. Lastly, he was also dissatisfied by how his case had been handled by the Court of Honour, relying on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. He argued that all such considerations meant his case merited review by the Supreme Court because the uniform interpretation of the law was at stake.
On 13 May 2009 the Supreme Court rejected the appeal. It restated its settled case-law (see paragraphs 43 to 47 below) that advocates and trainee advocates were part of the justice system, and were therefore not only bound by laws, but also had to protect the spirit of the law and the ideals of justice and lawfulness. Ignorance of requirements of laws discredited the advocate’s profession and undermined its prestige. An advocate or trainee advocate who had breached imperative legal norms could not excuse that failing by alleging that he or she did not know the law or that the law was not sufficiently precise, because that person was bound to know the law and ethical requirements as part of his or her job. The activity of advocate was not only regulated by standards applicable to the general public, but also by special requirements set out in the laws regulating the advocate’s profession and by professional ethics. The requirements for the applicant’s behaviour, which were set out in the rules for professional ethics, were objectively necessary: only a person whose professional behaviour was beyond reproach could be entrusted to take part in the process of the implementation of justice. The notion of the implementation of justice would be discredited if any and every person was allowed to take part in that process, irrespective of his or her behaviour. The applicant’s case therefore did not give grounds for cassation appeal because it followed established case-law and was not relevant for developing it.
On 25 June 2009 the applicant attempted to submit another appeal on points of law. He drew the Supreme Court’s attention to the Šiauliai Regional Court’s ruling of 17 June 2005 to expunge his conviction (see paragraph 10 above).
On 10 July 2009 the Supreme Court found the appeal to be essentially identical to the earlier one and refused to admit it for examination.
The Law on the Bar (Advokatūros įstatymas), as valid at the time of the applicant’s admission to the list of trainee advocates on 25 January 2007 and as applied by the Court of Honour and the civil courts in his case, read:
“1.  A person may be admitted to the Bar if he or she:
...
4)  is of high moral character;
... ”
“A person shall not be held to be of high moral character and may not be admitted to the Bar if he or she:
1)  has been convicted of a serious or very serious crime (sunkus ar labai sunkus nusikaltimas), irrespective of whether or not the conviction has expired, or convicted of any other criminal act and the conviction has not yet expired;
2)  has been dismissed from the post of judge, prosecutor, advocate, trainee advocate, notary ... [or] court bailiff ... for professional misconduct or misconduct in office, or dismissed from the civil service as a result of a disciplinary sanction or dismissed for gross professional misconduct and less than three years have passed from the date of dismissal;
3)  abuses psychotropic, narcotic or toxic substances, or alcohol;
4)  does not meet the requirements laid down for advocates in the Code of Professional Ethics for Advocates which would be applicable to the candidate upon his or her admission to the Bar.”
“1.  A decision to recognise a person as an advocate must be declared void if:
1)  new facts come to light after the person has been recognised as an advocate which would have been an obstacle for that person becoming an advocate;
...
3)  if one of the conditions listed in Article 8 of this law arises after the decision to recognise a person as an advocate.”
“1.  A person is put on the list of trainee advocates by a decision of the Bar Association. The person may be put on the list if he or she:
...
3)  is of high moral character, in accordance with Article 8 of this Law ...”
“An advocate must:
1)  discharge his or her duties honestly. An advocate must comply with the requirements of the Code of Professional Ethics for Advocates and behave in an honest and civic-minded manner;
2)  observe the oath taken by him or her and follow the law in his or her professional practice;
...”
“1.  Disciplinary proceedings may be started against an advocate who breaches the requirements of this Law or the Lithuanian Code of Professional Ethics for Advocates.
A decision to start disciplinary proceedings is taken by the Lithuanian Bar or by the Minister of Justice.
Disciplinary cases are examined by the Court of Honour of Advocates...”
“If an advocate commits a breach listed in Article 52 § 1 of this Law, the Court of Honour may impose the following disciplinary sanctions:
1)  warning (pastaba);
2)  reprimand (papeikimas);
3)  public reprimand (viešai paskelbiamas papeikimas);
4)  annulment of advocate status.”
“1.  The provisions of this chapter [on disciplinary liability] also apply to trainee advocates, except for Article 53 (4).
In addition to the disciplinary sanctions listed in Article 53 (1)-(3), the disciplinary sanction of striking a trainee advocate’s name off the list of Lithuanian trainee advocates may be imposed.”
“Appeals against decisions by the Court of Honour of Advocates may be lodged with the Vilnius Regional Court...”
Article 8 of the Law on the Bar, after it was amended on 15 April 2008, and until 2 July 2013, stated that a person may not be considered to be of high moral character and cannot be admitted to the Bar, if he or she has been convicted of any intentional crime, and irrespective whether the conviction had expired.
Article 8 of the Law on the Bar, after it was amended on 2 July 2013, currently reads as follows:
“A candidate is not considered to be of high moral character and cannot be admitted to the Bar, if he or she:
1)  has been convicted of a serious or very serious crime and until the conviction has expired ..., and less than four years have passed since serving the sentence or being released from serving the sentence;
2)  has been convicted of any other intentional crime and the conviction has not expired ..., and less than three years have passed since serving the sentence, a suspension of the sentence, or release from serving the sentence;
3)  has been dismissed from his or her position or duties ... because he or she does not meet the requirement of high moral character, or has been dismissed from the post of judge, prosecutor, advocate, trainee advocate, notary, trainee notary [or] bailiff ... for professional misconduct or dismissed from the civil service ... for gross professional misconduct ... and less than two years have passed since dismissal from that post...;
4)  abuses psychotropic, narcotic or toxic substances, or alcohol.”
The Code of Professional Ethics for Advocates (Advokatų etikos kodeksas), approved by the Lithuanian Bar Association Conference on 8 April 2005 and valid at the time of the applicant’s admission as a trainee advocate, stated the following:
“1.1.  Lithuanian advocates shall participate in the process of implementation of justice, represent and defend legitimate interests of their clients in court, State or municipal institutions or other organisations.
2.  An advocate’s practice requires observation of legal and moral obligations visà-vis:
2.1.  clients;
2.2.  the courts and other institutions where the advocate defend clients’ interests or represent clients, or acts on clients’ behalf;
2.3.  the advocate’s profession;
2.4.  society.
3.  An advocate must always protect the honour and dignity of the profession, and must not discredit the advocate’s name, the oath he or she has sworn or the ideal of justice.
4.  The aim of this Code is to guarantee proper execution of the essential functions of advocates. An advocate who does not adhere to these rules may face disciplinary sanctions.
5.  When defending a client’s interests which are protected by law, or when representing a client and while acting in the interests of justice, an advocate must strive to not breach human rights and fundamental freedoms, which are recognised by international and domestic law.”
“...
1.  When carrying out his or her professional practice an advocate has the rights enumerated in the Constitution, the Law on the Bar, other laws or legal acts, in international legal instruments and in this Code.
2.  When exercising his or her profession, an advocate has the duties enumerated in the Constitution, the Law on the Bar, other laws or legal acts, in international legal instruments and in this Code.”...
“12.1.  An advocate’s relationship with the Bar is based on mutual respect and goodwill assistance.”
“13.1.  The Code of Professional Ethics for Advocates also applies to trainee advocates.
2.  When the actions or behaviour of an advocate are not compatible with the Law on the Bar, the by-laws of the Bar, this Code or other legal acts regulating the professional activity of advocates and where such actions or behaviour are not described in this Code, the advocate must follow the traditions and customs which are in line with the common principles of ethics and decency.”
The Code of Professional Ethics for Advocates (Lietuvos advokatų etikos kodeksas), approved by the Lithuanian Bar Association on 15 April 2016, and currently in force, reads:
“1.  An advocate’s professional honour and honesty are traditional values which must be adhered to as part of the professional duties of an advocate and as a necessary condition for belonging to the body of advocates.
An advocate must always:
1)  maintain his or her professional honour and dignity, abstain from discrediting the name of an advocate, the oath given and the notion (idėja) of justice;
2)  be of high moral character and keep it;
3)  behave honestly, politely and fairly;
...
An advocate must not act in abuse of his or her professional name.
...
An advocate is prohibited from engaging in any acts or conduct which are incompatible with honesty, other generally accepted norms of ethics and morality or which undermine society’s confidence in advocates, harm the reputation of the Lithuanian Bar Association or undermine advocate’s professional name.”
“1.  Lawfulness of an advocate’s professional practice is one of the most important principles that determine the role of advocate in the legal system of the State and guarantees for an advocate’s professional activities, therefore an advocate must aspire to the ideals (idealai) of justice and lawfulness and defend his or her client’s rights and lawful interests only in lawful ways and by lawful means, while not violating the prohibitions imposed by legal acts, without exceeding the powers granted to him or her and respecting others’ rights.
An advocate must always respect the law and act so as not to violate principles of justice.
...
An advocate must ensure that his or her place of work and the conditions for professional practice meet the requirements of the Law on the Bar and the Lithuanian Bar Association...”
“1.  The relationship of an advocate with the Lithuanian Bar is based on mutual respect and good-will assistance.
...”
The Law on Courts (Teismų įstatymas), at the time of the applicant’s admission to the list of trainee advocates read, and also currently reads:
“A person may not be held to be of high moral character and may not be appointed as a judge, if he or she:
1)  has been convicted of a crime by a court judgment which has taken effect...
2)  has been dismissed from the post of judge, advocate, notary ... or the civil service for professional misconduct and less than five years have passed since dismissal;
...
4)  does not meet other requirements of the Code of Ethics for Judges.”
The Law on Prosecutor’s Office (Prokuratūros įstatymas) at the time of the applicant’s admission to the list of trainee advocates read, and also currently reads:
“1.  A person may be admitted to the prosecutor’s service if he or she is of high moral character ...
...
A person shall be regarded as being of high moral character, if ... he or she has not been convicted of a criminal act by a court judgment which has taken effect, or has not been dismissed from service or a post for gross misconduct, or if less than five years have passed after his or her dismissal, and provided that his or her behaviour conforms with the provisions set out in the Code of Ethics for Prosecutors.”
The Law on Bailiffs (Antstolių įstatymas), from 22 November 2005 to 30 March 2009, which thus applicable at the time of the applicant’s admission to the list of trainee advocates, read as follows:
“1.  A person may not be held to be of high moral character if:
1)  he or she has been convicted of a serious or very serious crime, irrespective of whether the conviction has expired;
2)  he or she has been convicted of ... a minor or medium severity serious negligent or intentional crime if the conviction has not expired;
...
4)  his or her behaviour is incompatible with the requirements of the Code of Professional Ethics for Bailiffs;
5)  he or she has been dismissed from a post of judge, prosecutor, advocate, trainee advocate, notary, trainee notary, bailiff ... or dismissed from the civil service ... for professional misconduct ... and less than three years have passed ...”
The Law on the Civil Service (Valstybės tarnybos įstatymas), as in force at the time of the applicant’s admission to the list of trainee advocates and relied on by him during the civil court proceedings, read as follows:
“...
A person may not be admitted to the civil service if he or she:
1)  has been convicted of a serious or very serious crime, a crime against the civil service or the public interest or of a crime of a corrupt nature and the conviction has not yet expired or has not been expunged ...”
In civil case no. 3K-3-584/1999, decided on 4 November 1999, the Supreme Court held:
“... Assessing from the legal point of view, the actions of an advocate or trainee advocate, the specific function of the Bar and its role within the legal system of the State should be taken into consideration. The role of an advocate is to defend the rights and legitimate interests of the client by lawful ways and means and to seek the implementation of justice. The profession of an advocate is one of the professions whose representatives must comply with higher and stricter standards of conduct. Not only the common standards of conduct but also special requirements established both by the laws regulating the activity of the Bar and the rules of professional ethics are applicable in respect of an advocate’s practice. The necessity for requirements established by the rules of professional ethics is an objective one: only a person of high moral character can be trusted to participate in the process of administration of justice. Permitting anyone to participate in this process, without regard to his or her conduct, would discredit the idea of administration of justice.
... Point 3 of the Code of Professional Ethics for Advocates requires that an advocate or a trainee advocate must obey the law precisely and without circumventing it, and must be of high moral character and of irreproachable behaviour. Therefore, it is not enough to assess an advocate’s actions only by having regard to the law; they must also be assessed in the context of the rules regulating professional ethics. Finding that actions of an advocate or trainee advocate do not amount to a crime and therefore may not be reproached from the point of view of criminal law does not automatically mean that the requirements of professional ethics have not been violated.
... An advocate or trainee advocate who has violated imperative legal norms cannot plead either ignorance of law or ignorance of rules of professional ethics, or that a law is not sufficiently detailed. An advocate or trainee advocate must know the law and the rules of professional ethics as part of their job.”
In civil case no. 3K-3133/2000, decided on 7 February 2000, the Supreme Court held:
“... when admitting the former judges to the Bar, not only should their behaviour but also their professional activity be evaluated. ... Serious breaches of law by a judge do not comply with the requirement of high moral character of a person wishing to be admitted to the Bar. Respect for the law and its perfect execution are very important characteristics in a person wishing to become an advocate ...”
In civil case no. 2A-220/2000, decided on 5 September 2000 the Court of Appeal held:
“...commission of a crime has significant importance when evaluating a person’s character...”
In civil case no. 3K-7-168/2001, decided on 9 January 2001 and concerning readmittance to the Bar, the enlarged chamber of the Supreme Court noted that there was no breach of the law which could permanently impede a person from being readmitted to the Bar. Even so, a lawyer who wished to be readmitted to the Bar and who was trying to prove having regained high moral character, should provide clear and persuasive evidence, that he or she had followed all the rules of ethics and discipline and did not lose skills. The court, which heard such a case, then had to verify: 1) what was the nature of the breaches of law, which led to the advocate’s disbarment; 2) what personal, family or other circumstances were influential in the breach of law being committed; 3) how the person behaved during the time when he or she was disbarred; 4) whether the person had been rehabilitated; 5) whether his or her competence was sufficient.
In civil case no. 3K-3-80/2009 of 23 February 2009 the Supreme Court upheld the appellate court conclusion that a person had the right to apply to a court for a ruling of having regained high moral character in order to be admitted to the Bar. The Supreme Court held that the Court of Appeal in that case had not concluded that the claimant could not practice as an advocate at all, but that she had only failed to prove that she had regained the status of being of high moral character.
The Supreme Court may take a case up if the lower courts have departed from the Supreme Court’s practice as to how a certain legal rule should be interpreted and applied, or if the Supreme Court’s practice as to a certain legal question has not been uniform (Articles 346 and 350 of the Code of Civil Procedure). The Code of Civil Procedure currently reads that a civil case may be reopened if the European Court of Human Rights finds that a domestic court decision has breached an applicant’s rights under the Convention or one of its Protocols (Article 366 § 1).
Recommendation R (2000) 21 of the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers to member States on the freedom of exercise of the profession of lawyer (adopted on 25 October 2000) states as follows:
“The Committee of Ministers ...
...
... Underlining the fundamental role that lawyers and professional associations of lawyers also play in ensuring the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
Desiring to promote the freedom of exercise of the profession of lawyer in order to strengthen the Rule of Law, in which lawyers take part, in particular in the role of defending individual freedoms;
...
Recommends the governments of member States to take or reinforce, as the case may be, all measures they consider necessary with a view to the implementation of the principles contained in this Recommendation.
...
Principle I – General Principles on the freedom of exercise of the profession of lawyer
...
Decisions concerning the authorisation to practice as a lawyer or to accede to this profession should be taken by an independent body. Such decisions, whether or not they are taken by an independent body, should be subject to a review by an independent and impartial judicial authority.
...
Principle II – Legal education, training and entry into the legal profession
...
All necessary measures should be taken in order to ensure a high standard of legal training and morality as a prerequisite for entry into the profession and to provide for the continuing education of lawyers...”
The Council of Bars and Law Societies of Europe (CCBE) has adopted two foundation texts: the Code of Conduct for European Lawyers, which dates back to 28 October 1988 and has undergone a number of amendments, and the Charter of Core Principles of the European Legal Profession, which was adopted on 24 November 2006. The Charter contains a list of ten core principles common to the national and international rules regulating the legal profession, amongst which the following principles are enumerated:
“...
(d)  the dignity and honour of the legal profession, and the integrity and good repute of the individual lawyer;
...
(h)  respect towards professional colleagues;
(i)  respect for the rule of law and the fair administration of justice; and
(j)  the self-regulation of the legal profession.”