The case originated in an application (no. 48494/06) against the Republic of Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Krisztián Barnabás Tóth (“the applicant”), on 24 November 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Hegedűs, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicant complained under Article 8 of the Convention about the impossibility of having his biological paternity established.
On 7 December 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Budapest.
From January 2004 the applicant lived in a common-law marriage with Ms H.K. On 5 April 2004 it was confirmed that she was pregnant. On 1 September 2004 their cohabitation ended.
On 26 November 2004 a Mr P. made a declaration of paternity in respect of the child to be born. The mother consented to this.
On 4 January 2005 Ms H.K. gave birth to a girl.
On 13 January 2005 Mr P.’s wife adopted the girl. This was endorsed by the Gyomaendrőd Custody Board. The mother consented to the adoption.
When the applicant found out about this, on 20 January 2005 he requested the Pest County Administrative Office to appoint an ad hoc guardian for the baby so that he could file an action with a view to establishing his own paternity. The case was transferred to the Gyomaendrőd Custody Board. The Board refused to appoint a guardian, observing that the girl’s family situation was settled and it was not in her interest to have the issue of paternity tried in court. The applicant’s administrative appeal was to no avail.
The applicant challenged these decisions in court.
On 15 September 2005 the  held a hearing at which the applicant was heard as to his personal circumstances and his vision about raising the child.
On the same day, the court dismissed his action. It upheld the finding that it was not in the child’s interest to institute proceedings for challenging the fiction of paternity. The court pointed out that the applicant had also had the opportunity to make a declaration of paternity with the consent of the mother after the conception of the child. However, the paternity had meanwhile been acknowledged by Mr P. and the child had been adopted by Mrs P. Therefore, the child’s legal status was settled and, according to the evidence obtained by the custody authorities, including a home visit and interviews, she was being raised in a loving family atmosphere and it was not in her interest to be removed from that environment for the sole purpose of establishing the biological paternity by medical tests. The court added that if the fiction of paternity were successfully challenged, the ‘status of father’ would necessarily fall vacant, but the applicant’s declaration of paternity would not take full effect in the absence of the mother’s consent. Under those circumstances, the child would lose her settled family status.
The court added that had the custody board granted the applicant’s request, it would have committed a grave breach of the law, since this might have resulted in the child being deprived of her settled family status and her removal from the loving family atmosphere in which she was raised, whereas her best interest was to preserve her existing family relationships which in the long run could secure harmonious physical, mental and moral development.
On 17 May 2006 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s petition for review.
The Supreme Court endorsed the administrative authorities’ position that it was not in the interest of the child to call into question the paternity. While acknowledging the applicant’s argument about the significance for the child of getting to know her biological father, the Supreme Court insisted that the child’s interest was of paramount importance, observed that she was being brought up in a loving family with appropriate means and held that a lawsuit challenging the paternity was at that time not in her best interest. The Supreme Court noted that should the child herself wish at one point to bringing a case with a view to establishing biological paternity, she could do so once she reached fourteen years of age.
The Constitution, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
Article 67
“(1) In the Republic of Hungary all children shall have the right to such protection and care by their family, the state and society as necessary for their satisfactory physical, mental and moral development.”
Act no. IV of 1952 on Marriage, Family and Guardianship (“the Csjt.”) provides as follows:
Section 1
“(2) In the application of this Act the minor child’s interests shall always be taken into account and his or her rights shall be safeguarded.”
Section 37
“(2) The man from whom the child originated may, from the date of the conception, acknowledge the child as his own by a declaration of full legal effect, if
a) no other man is to be regarded to be the father under the law and
b) the child is at least sixteen years younger than the person making the declaration who must have attained sixteen years of age.”
Section 44
“(1) The judicial declaration of paternity, maternity and the effect of subsequent marriage can be requested in an action; and the presumption of paternity can be challenged by an action. The action shall be brought in person by the entitled person. ...
(4) Before the institution of an action challenging the presumption of paternity, the child custody board shall, in case of a minor lacking capacity, hear the mother and the presumed father, except where an impediment beyond its control occurs. The child custody board shall not give its approval to the initiation of a lawsuit, unless the establishment of the [child’s] origin and the settling of his/her family status are in the interest of the minor. If there is a dispute between the mother and the presumed father about the custody of the child, the child custody board’s approval shall only be given in exceptionally justified cases.”
Government Decree no. 149/1997. (IX. 10.) on Child Custody Boards, Child Protection Procedure and Child Custody Board Procedure provides as follows:
Section 64
“(1) In order to initiate an action for settling the family status of a child, the child custody board shall appoint an ad hoc guardian for the child’s statutory representation. The appointment of an ad hoc guardian may be requested by the parent, the guardian and the child having attained the age of 14, but the child custody board may also decide on the appointment ex officio. ...
 (4) In determining whether or not to give approval for the initiation of an action for the establishment of the child’s family status, the child custody authority shall examine whether the establishment of the origin and the settling of the family status is in the interest of the child or the person placed under guardianship.”
Decision no. 57/1991. (XI. 8.) AB of the Constitutional Court contains the following passages:
“3.  The Constitutional Court holds that Article 67 (1) of the Constitution cannot be interpreted in such a way as to include the child’s right to family status and right to belong to a family based on biological kinship. From the constitutional rule relied upon, only the entitlement to actual family care can be inferred. This does not mean only belonging to a family based on blood relations but also belonging to a so-called social family, and includes care and protection within that family.
The Constitutional Court, however, points out that the right to ascertain one’s parentage and to challenge and call into question the legal presumption relating to it is a most personal right which falls within the scope of the “general right of personality” found in Article 54 (1) of the Constitution. ...
The Constitutional Court holds that the right to identity and self-determination form part of the “general right of personality”. The right to identity and self-determination includes, as a most personal right, the right to ascertain one’s parentage and to challenge and find out one’s biological status ... The forfeiture of this right by an earlier lawsuit conducted by other persons ... violates the child’s right to identity ... Therefore, the Constitutional Court has held that the irrevocable forfeiture of a child’s right to ascertain his or her parentage by conferring upon the statutory representative an unqualified right to sue is unconstitutional.”
Decision no. 982/B/1998. AB of the Constitutional Court contains the following passages:
“... According to the well-established jurisprudence of the Constitutional Court, Article 67(1) of the Constitution cannot be vested with the meaning that a child’s upbringing within a family, or his/her claim for family care, shall [and can] only be realised in a family based on blood relations. ...
Therefore, the family protection element of the constitutional protection afforded to the child can be realised within a family based or not based on blood kinship, that is, also within a family taken “merely” in a sociological and legal sense, consequently – in this latter case – also within a family where the parental status is based on a presumption of paternity under the Csjt., that is, where it does not correspond to an objective biological truth. Such a broad interpretation of the notion of family for the purposes of child protection is justified because, among other reasons, often the upsetting and the public questioning of the existing family background, conceived in a sociological and legal sense, might disadvantageously affect the child’s proper physical, mental and moral development...
[...T]he right to ascertain one’s blood lineage is granted constitutional protection, irrespective of the above considerations...”
For elements of comparative law within the Member States of the Council of Europe concerning certain rights of putative fathers, see Kautzor v. , no. 23338/09, §§ 37 to 39, 22 March 2012.