The case originated in an application (no. 50001/12) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two German nationals, Mr Patrick Breyer and Mr Jonas Breyer (“the applicants”), on 27 July 2012.
The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr H.-J. Behrens and Ms K. Behr of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection.
The applicants complained under Articles 8 and 10 that, as users of pre-paid mobile phone SIM cards, certain personal data had been stored by their respective service providers owing to the legal obligation provided by section 111 of the Telecommunications Act.
On 21 March 2016 the Government was given notice of the application.
Written submissions were received from Privacy International and ARTICLE 19, which had been granted leave by the VicePresident to intervene as third parties (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were born in 1977 and 1982 respectively and live in Wald-Michelbach. Both applicants were involved in a civil-liberties union, which campaigned against the general retention of telecommunications data. In that context both applicants organised public protests and published articles criticising State surveillance. The first applicant was also a member of the Parliament of Schleswig-Holstein.
In June 2004 a legal obligation for telecommunication providers to store personal details of all their customers, in particular even of customers where such details are not necessary for billing purposes or other contractual reasons (pre-paid (“pay-as-you-go”) mobile-telephone SIM cards), was introduced via amendments to the Telecommunications Act (Telekommunikationsgesetz). Until the said amendments entered into force, telecommunication service providers had been entitled solely to collect and store the data necessary for their contractual relationship. Where pre-paid mobile-telephone SIM cards were concerned, no such data had been considered necessary. These amendments were made in the framework of a fundamental revision of the Telecommunications Act which was felt necessary after the adoption of five EU Directives on 7 March and 12 July 2002 which had to be transposed into German Law until July and October 2003.
Both applicants use pre-paid mobile-phone SIM cards and had to register under section 111 of the Telecommunications Act (see paragraph 27 below) certain personal details with their respective service provider when activating those SIM cards.
On 13 July 2005 the applicants lodged a constitutional complaint against, amongst other provisions, sections 111, 112 and 113 of the Telecommunications Act. Section 111 of this Act introduced the obligation to collect and store the telephone numbers, the name, address and date of birth of an allocation holder and the effective date of the contract (see paragraphs 27 and 28 below). Sections 112 and 113 of the Telecommunications Act contained an automated and manual procedure to access the data stored under section 111 (see paragraphs 29 and 31 below). The applicants argued that the said sections violated their right to privacy of correspondence, post and telecommunications as well as their right to informational self-determination (Recht auf informationelle Selbstbestimmung) (see paragraph 25 below).
Section 111 of the Telecommunications Act was amended by an Act of 21 December 2007 by which other identifiers of an allocation were included under the obligation to store subscriber data and the data to be stored was expanded by the respective device number, in cases in which a mobile-communication end device was made available together with the mobile-communication allocation.
The applicants extended their pending constitutional complaint to include the amended version of the Telecommunications Act. Consequently, the Federal Constitutional Court considered in its judgment the Telecommunications Act as in force on 1 January 2008.
On 24 January 2012 the Federal Constitutional Court decided, in so far as relevant for the present case, that sections 111 and 112 of the Telecommunications Act were compatible with the Basic Law (Grundgesetz), that section 113(1) sentence 1 was compatible with the Basic Law when interpreted in conformity with it, and that sections 112 and 113 required independent enabling legislation for the retrieval of data by the authorities listed or referred to therein (see paragraphs 29 and 31 below). Concerning the parts of the applicants’ constitutional complaint that are not at issue in the present proceedings, the Federal Constitutional Court held that the manual information procedure of section 113(1) may not be used for the attribution of dynamic IP addresses and that the security authorities may only require information on access codes under section 113(1) if the statutory requirements for their use are satisfied.
It also noted that according to the Federal Government, the automated retrieval procedure under section 112 of the Telecommunications Act was of primary importance. Experience had shown that the number of manual retrievals under section 113 of the Telecommunications Act was between 3% and 5% of the number of automated requests under section 112 of the Telecommunications Act.
As regards the relevant parts of the applicants’ constitutional complaint the Federal Constitutional Court first held that the challenged provisions interfered with the right to informational self-determination. It further stated (as translated into English on the Federal Constitutional Court’s website; references to the court’s jurisprudence have been omitted in the quotes below):
“122. a) The right to informational self-determination takes account of endangerments and violations of personality which arise in the conditions of modern data processing from information-related measures. The free development of personality presupposes the protection of the individual against unrestricted collection, storage, use and transmission of the individual’s personal data. This protection is therefore covered by the fundamental right of Article 2(1) in conjunction with Article 1(1) of the Basic Law. In this respect, the fundamental right guarantees the authority of the individual in principle himself or herself to decide on the disclosure and use of his or her personal data. The guarantee of the fundamental right takes effect in particular when the development of personality is endangered by government authorities using and combining personal information in a manner which persons affected can neither fully appreciate nor control. The extent of protection of the right to informational self-determination is not restricted to information which by its very nature is sensitive and for this reason alone is constitutionally protected. In view of the possibilities of processing and combining, there is no item of personal data which is in itself, that is, regardless of the context of its use, insignificant. In particular, the protection of informational self-determination also includes personal information on the procedure by which telecommunications services are provided.
Provisions which give authority for government authorities to deal with personal data as a rule create a number of encroachments which build on each other. In this respect, a distinction must in particular be made between the collection, storage and use of data. In legislating for data exchange for the purpose of the performance of government duties, however, a distinction must also be made between data transfer by the party supplying the information and data retrieval by the agency seeking the information. A data exchange takes place through the encroachments of retrieval and transfer, which correspond to each other and each of which requires an independent legal basis. Figuratively speaking, the legislature must open not only the door for the transmission of data, but also the door for their retrieval. It is only both legal bases together, which must operate together like a double door, which give authority to exchange personal data. This does not exclude – subject to the system of competencies and the requirements of clear drafting – the possibility of both legal bases being contained in one provision.
b) The challenged provisions encroach upon the complainants’ fundamental right to informational self-determination. Firstly, there are encroachments upon the duty of collection and storage of [section 111 of the Telecommunications Act]. There are independent further encroachments upon fundamental rights by the duty of service providers laid down in [section 112(1) of the Telecommunications Act] to make the data available as customer databases which can be accessed in an automated procedure and by the authority of the Federal Network Agency to retrieve these data and to transmit them to particular authorities (see [section 112(4) of the Telecommunications Act]). Accordingly, [section 113(1) sentences 1 and 2 of the Telecommunications Act] create independent encroachments upon fundamental rights by imposing on the telecommunications service providers a duty to provide information on demand with regard to the data stored by themselves.
Finally, [sections 112 and 113 of the Telecommunications Act] are subject to prior retrieval of the data by the authorities entitled to retrieve, in the form of a request ([sections 112(1), 112(2), 112(4) of the Telecommunications Act]) or a demand ([section 113(1) of the Telecommunications Act]); this constitutes an independent encroachment which must be distinguished from the foregoing. But under the legislature’s legislative concept, this also requires a further legal basis, which must be contained in federal or Land legislation, depending on the area involved. The provisions of [sections 112 and 113 of the Telecommunications Act] – corresponding to the distinction between collection and transmission in the legislative typology of the data protection Acts – are to be understood solely as the legal basis for the transmission. They presuppose that the authorities entitled to receive information have independent powers of collection (...) .”
In connection with section 111 of the Telecommunications Act the Federal Constitutional Court held that the obligation to maintain a database for subscriber information pursued the legitimate aim of, in particular, criminal prosecution. Even though the database constituted a precautionary collection and storage of a great range of data and criminal offenders would still be able to circumvent the provision by using telecommunications services anonymously, under false names or with mobile-telephone cards acquired from third parties, the interference with the right to informational self-determination was ultimately justified owing to the relatively restricted nature of the information stored.
Concerning proportionality the Federal Constitutional Court stated, inter alia:
“136. [Section 111 of the Telecommunications Act] does not violate the requirements of proportionality in the narrow sense. Even if the provision orders a precautionary collection and storage, without occasion, of a great range of telecommunications data, in view of the relatively restricted information content of the collected data this is an encroachment of limited weight.
However, the encroachment is non-trivial. It has weight insofar as [section 111 of the Telecommunications Act] makes it possible to attribute telecommunications numbers and subscribers almost completely for all telecommunications services and for this purpose individualizing data such as address, date of birth and date when the contract commences are recorded and kept available by the government. The data form a general basis for information and fulfil the function of a telecommunications number register. As a rule, they make it possible to obtain all the telecommunication numbers of any person; conversely, virtually every telecommunications event for which a telecommunications number is determined may also be attributed to a connection and thus to a subscriber. As data which relate to the fundamental elements of telecommunications events they are therefore associated with particularly protected information relationships whose confidentiality is essential for a free order. In addition, the corresponding data are collected and stored without cause by way of precaution in order to make them available for the performance of government duties.
Nevertheless, the encroachment constituted by this is not of very great weight. In particular, the fact that the data are collected by way of precaution does not give the procedure a very great weight. For even if [section 111 of the Telecommunications Act] has a great range, the encroachment is restricted in substance to narrowly restricted data which in themselves give no evidence as to the specific activities of individuals and whose use the legislature has restricted to purposes defined in more detail. In such cases, even a precautionary storage is not automatically a particularly serious encroachment for the mere reason that it is carried out without occasion. Admittedly, the precautionary storage of data must always remain an exception to the rule and needs to be justified. But it is not excluded from the outset that precautionary data collections may be justified as the basis of the performance of a variety of government duties, such as are currently familiar in the form of the register of residents or, in the field of motor vehicles, in the form of the Central Vehicle Register ... and the Central Register of Driving Licences ...
The data covered by [section 111 of the Telecommunications Act] have limited probative value. They merely make it possible for telecommunications numbers to be individually attributed to the respective subscribers and thus to those numbers’ potential (and typical) users. These data contain no more detailed private information. In a fundamentally different way than in the case of precautionary storage of all telecommunications traffic data, neither do these data as such contain highly personal information, nor is it possible to use them to create personality profiles or track users’ movements. ...
Nor does a particular weight of the encroachment result from the fact that the data of [section 111 of the Telecommunications Act], taken in context, permit individual telecommunications events known to the authorities to be attributed and thus in certain circumstances make it possible to obtain individualised knowledge of their circumstances or their content. For in this way all that is made possible from the outset is the investigation of individual events where required by a specific case. In these cases, the authority already knows the circumstances or the content of the telecommunications event which is to be individualized with the data of [section 111 of the Telecommunications Act], whether because the authority has found them by investigation within its own competence – for example on the basis of § 100g of the Code of Criminal Procedure ... – involving encroachment upon the secrecy of telecommunications, whether because it has learnt of them through its own observations or from third-party information without such an encroachment. In the same way, conversely, no particular weight of the encroachment results from the fact that a retrieval of telecommunications numbers may be followed by further measures which in certain circumstances may entail serious encroachments, including encroachments upon the secrecy of telecommunications. For such further encroachments are only permissible under independent legal bases, which must take account of the weight of the encroachment in question.
The possibility of attribution of the data collected in [section 111 of the Telecommunications Act] serves the effective performance of the duties of the authorities defined in more detail in the provisions on use. It is constitutionally justified by the fact that the state may have a legitimate interest in successfully investigating particular telecommunications events if occasion arises, and this interest in the performance of particular tasks may have considerable weight, in individual cases even pre-eminent weight. It may not be cited in opposition to this that direct communication without means of telecommunications has no comparable encroachments. For the situation in that case is different. Because direct communication does not resort to technical means of communication which make it possible, without public observation, to interact over any distance in real time, it has no comparable basis, nor is there a comparable necessity for such a register. The traditional powers of investigation, for example the examination of witnesses or the seizure of documents, are more useful for clarification here than they are with regard to communication by means of electronic services. However, it is correct that even the possibilities of the modern means of telecommunications provide no justification for registering, if possible, all activities of citizens by way of precaution and making them basically reconstructible in this way. But there is no question of this when a register of telecommunications numbers is established, even when account is taken of the interaction with other available data.”
With regards to section 112 of the Telecommunications Act the Federal Constitutional Court clarified that this provision:
“144.  ... governs the use of the data stored under [section 111 of the Telecommunications Act] in the form of an automated information procedure in which the Federal Network Agency [Bundesnetzagentur] is to transmit the data on request to particular authorities named in [section 112(2) of the Telecommunications Act]. The provision is the legal basis only for the duty to make the data available as customer databases, for access to and transmission of these data, but not also for the retrieval in the form of a request from the authorities entitled to receive information.”
However, according to the court, a general entitlement to collect data may be sufficient for a request by the entitled authorities. In this connection the court used the image of a double door (see § 123 of the extract reproduced in paragraph 14 above), stating that, while section 112 of the Telecommunications Act opens the door of transmission, it does not open the door of data collection by the specialised authorities.
Nonetheless, the Federal Constitutional Court held that – for several reasons – the interference provided for by section 112 of the Telecommunications Act was considerably weighty:
“156. However, the provision acquires a considerable weight of encroachment from the fact that [section 111 of the Telecommunications Act] very much simplifies data retrievals. The procedure, which is centrally organised and automated, permits an access which largely removes practical difficulties of data collection and makes the data of the persons affected available without delay or attrition in the form of requirements of review. In addition, the information is given without telecommunications enterprises or other third parties becoming aware of this. Admittedly, the fact that the issuing of information is not noticed by the telecommunications enterprise ensures discretion for the persons whose data are involved; but at the same time, this means that the encroachments lack the effects of restraint and control which are entailed by observation by third parties. In addition, a legal review by the Federal Network Agency, which transmits the data, is only made if there is a particular occasion for this (see [section 112(4) sentence 2 of the Telecommunications Act]). Since the retrieving authority does not have to give reasons for its request, however, such an occasion will scarcely ever arise.
Weight also attaches to the fact that the legislature has drafted the purposes of the data very broadly. The data may generally be transmitted to the authorities named in [section 112(2) of the Telecommunications Act] for the performance of their statutory duties. This is restricted only for the law enforcement authorities under [section 112(2) no. 2 of the Telecommunications Act], and under [112(2) nos. 3 and 7 of that Act] for the customs authorities named there. But it is important in this connection that data may be issued to the former, under [section 112 of the Telecommunications Act], only for purposes of warding off danger, which excludes mere risk precaution. In connection with the respective duties of the authorities entitled to retrieve, the information duties of the Federal Network Agency are also not very restricted. In particular, there are no strict encroachment thresholds in the statute; instead, the duty of information is opened in full to the respective competence of the authorities. However, the fact that information may only be given insofar as it is necessary for the performance of the duty does create an objectively limiting factor. This ensures that retrievals are not casually permitted for mere guidance in advance but only when information actually needed for the performance of duties cannot be obtained more easily but equally effectively in another way.
...
However, [section 112 of the Telecommunications Act] does not in fact restrict information to retrievals which are legitimized by specific legal bases relating to the automated information procedure, but also accepts requests which are based on simple powers of data collection. As a result, there is no requirement on the nonconstitutional level for the entitled authorities to be expressly specified over and above [section 112(2) of the Telecommunications Act] and for further conditions for data retrieval which are to be observed. ...”
The Federal Constitutional Court, nevertheless, concluded that section 112 of the Telecommunications Act was proportionate:
“155.  [Section 112 of the Telecommunications Act] satisfies the requirements of the principle of proportionality. The provision serves to increase the effectiveness of the performance of their duties by the authorities named in [section 112(2) of the Telecommunications Act] and it is suitable and necessary for this. It is also proportionate in the narrow sense.
...
Despite the fact that the weight of the encroachment is considerable, the provision is proportionate. The authorities entitled to retrieve are at least limited in number. The purposes for which they are given information under [section 112(2) of the Telecommunications Act] are central duties relating to the guarantee of security. In view of the increasing importance of electronic means of communication and the concomitant changes of human communication behaviour in all areas of life, the authorities here depend to a great extent on a possibility which is as uncomplicated as possible of being able to attribute telecommunications numbers individually. In this respect, it is a decision of the legislature which is constitutionally unobjectionable if it permits the transmission of these data in order to investigate criminal offences and dangers, to observe developments which endanger the constitution in order for the government and the public to be informed or to give assistance in emergencies. Because such investigations must often be carried out rapidly and without the knowledge of those affected, an automated information procedure is of particular importance for them. Increasing the effectiveness of the work of the courts is also a concern whose weight is supported by such a provision.
The limited probative value of the data is of central importance for the weighing of interests: They provide information solely on the attribution of individual telecommunications numbers to their subscriber. Even if, in specific collection contexts, sensitive information may result from them, the information content of this information as such remains limited and in addition depends on further investigations whose lawfulness is to be evaluated under different provisions.
...
... Since the subject here is the transmission of data by an authority and the substantive conditions for this, including those with regard to the persons whose data are involved, are laid down definitively and with sufficient clarity by [section 112 of the Telecommunications Act], then, taking account of the limited weight of encroachment of the provision, this is compatible with the principle of proportionality and corresponds to the structure of the provisions on the automated retrieval of vehicle and vehicle owner data from the vehicle register ... and the provision on data transmission in the law relating to the registration of residents ... . Admittedly, this does not change the responsibility of the legislature – and in this connection, where applicable, of the Länder – for the constitutional formulation of the data collection provisions, which are not themselves the subject of the present proceedings. ...”
In addition, the court emphasised the responsibility of the public authorities to apply these provisions in such a way that specific account was taken of the requirements of section 112(1) and (2) of the Telecommunications Act and in particular of the requirement that collection must be necessary even in an individual case, and of the further requirements of the principle of proportionality.
In respect of section 113 of the Telecommunications Act the Constitutional Court held that the provision could only be understood as a release provision and that an additional legal basis for the retrieval of data by the authorities was required. The court also noted that there was no limitation regarding the requesting authority – the exception being the authorities’ duties – and that the purposes for data retrieval were stated in broad terms. It concluded, nonetheless, that, in view of the information from the data in question, which in itself was limited, and their great importance for an effective performance of duties, the reach of this provision was constitutionally unobjectionable.
The Federal Constitutional Court stated, inter alia:
“176. However, [section 113(1) sentence 1 of the Telecommunications Act] opens the manual information procedure very wide. It permits information for the purpose of warding off dangers, prosecuting criminal offences or regulatory offences and performing intelligence duties. In this connection, the provision is also given no specific thresholds of encroachment which define its scope in more detail. Instead, it always permits information in the individual case if this is necessary to perform the above duties.
However, in view of the information content of the data in question, which in itself is limited, and their great importance for an effective performance of duties, the reach of this provision is constitutionally unobjectionable. In this connection, account must be taken of the fact that it by no means permits information to be given indiscriminately. On the contrary, there is a restrictive effect in the fact that information under [section 113(1) sentence 1 of the Telecommunications Act] are called for in the individual case and must be necessary. In relation to warding off danger, which the legislature has expressly not defined as including risk precaution, a prudent interpretation reveals that a ‘concrete danger’ within the meaning of the ‘general clauses’ (Generalklauseln) of police law is a requirement for such information. Admittedly, this threshold is low and also admits the suspicion of dangers. Equally, it does not in advance restrict information to persons endangering public security within the meaning of general police and regulatory law. However, this does not relieve it from restriction to such an extent as to be disproportionate in view of its limited weight of encroachment. In particular it does not enable information as a general means for lawful administrative enforcement, but in the individual case it requires the duty in question to have a security-law character. It is true that in regard to the intelligence services, which in general act in advance, irrespective of concrete dangers, there is no comparable threshold of encroachment. But this is justified by the restricted duties of the intelligence services, which are not directly aimed at police measures, but only at a duty to provide reports to the politically responsible state bodies or to the public. Apart from this, it follows here too from the requirement of necessity in the individual case that information under [section 113(1) sentence 1 of the Telecommunications Act] must be required in order to successfully investigate a particular action or group which requires observation by the security authorities. In so far as information relates to the prosecution of criminal offences and regulatory offences, the requirement of necessity in an individual case means that there must at least be an initial suspicion.
Taken together, these thresholds are not high, but they are constitutionally acceptable. In this connection, it must be taken into account in comparison to [section 112 of the Telecommunications Act] that a manual information procedure entails certain procedural efforts on the part of the retrieving authority, which is likely to encourage the authority to obtain the information only where it is sufficiently needed.”
Regarding legal remedies against information requests under sections 112 and 113 of the Telecommunications Act the Federal Constitutional Court held:
“186.  ... Nor are there objections to the fact that in view of the slightness of the encroachment no specific proceedings of legal redress are intended against information under [sections 112 and 113 of the Telecommunications Act]. Legal redress in this connection may be sought under general rules – in particular together with legal redress proceedings against the final decisions of the authorities.
The requirements of the principle of proportionality do not give rise to a blanket requirement for the persons affected by the information to be notified of the information under [section 112 and 113 of the Telecommunications Act], ...”
In its decision the Federal Constitutional Court established that 26.6 million data sets – either subscriber identity or telephone number – had been queried in 2008 under section 112 of the Telecommunications Act. That figure did not differentiate between data sets relating to pay-as-you-go mobile telephone users and other customers.
The provisions of the Basic Law, in so far as relevant for the present case, read:
Article 1
“(1) Human dignity shall be inviolable. To respect and protect it shall be the duty of all State authority. ...”
Article 2
“(1) Every person shall have the right to free development of his personality in so far as he does not violate the rights of others or offend against the constitutional order or the moral law. ...”
Article 10
“(1) The privacy of correspondence, post and telecommunications shall be inviolable.
(2) Restrictions may be ordered only pursuant to a law. If the restriction serves to protect the free democratic basic order or the existence or security of the Federation or of a Land, the law may provide that the person affected shall not be informed of the restriction and that recourse to the courts shall be replaced by a review of the case by agencies and auxiliary agencies appointed by the legislature.”
In its judgment of 15 December 1983 (nos. 1 BvR 209, 269, 362, 420, 440, 484/83) the Federal Constitutional Court established the right to informational self-determination and held:
“In the context of modern data processing, the protection of the individual against unlimited collection, storage, use and disclosure of his or her personal data is encompassed by the right to protection of personality rights under Article 2 § 1 in conjunction with Article 1 of the Basic Law. This basic right warrants in this respect the capacity of the individual to determine in principle the disclosure and use of his or her personal data.”
In its judgment of 2 March 2010 (nos. 1 BvR 256, 586, 263/08) the Federal Constitutional Court decided upon the constitutionality of provisions transposing EU Directive 2006/24/EC (see paragraphs 49 and 50 below) into German law (sections 113a, 113b of the Telecommunications Act, Article 100g of the Code of Criminal Procedure), obliging service providers to store for a limited time (6 months) all traffic data of telephone services and allowing the use of such data for criminal prosecution. The court declared section 113a of the Telecommunications Act (obligation to store) unconstitutional and void, owing to a violation of the right to protection of the secrecy of telecommunications. It held that a duty of storage to the extent provided was not automatically unconstitutional at the outset. However, it was not structured in a manner adapted to the principle of proportionality. The challenged provisions guaranteed neither adequate data security nor an adequate restriction of the purposes of use of the data. Nor did they in every respect satisfy the constitutional requirements of transparency and legal protection.
Section 111 of the Telecommunications Act obliges service providers to collect and store certain personal data of their customers. It thereby creates the basis for information requests under sections 112 and 113 of the Telecommunications Act. It read, at the relevant time and in so far as relevant, as follows:
“(1) Any person commercially providing or assisting in providing telecommunications services and in so doing allocating telephone numbers or providing telecommunications connections for telephone numbers allocated by other parties or other identifiers of the respective allocation, is, for the information procedures under sections 112 and 113, to collect, prior to activation, and store without undue delay:
The telephone numbers and other identifiers of the respective allocation;
The name and address of the allocation holder;
The date of birth in the case of natural persons;
In the case of fixed lines, additionally the address for the line;
In cases in which a mobile-communication end device is made available together with the mobile-communication allocation, also the device number of the said device, as well as;
The effective date of the contract.
Even if such data are not necessary for operational purposes; where known, the date of termination of the contract is likewise to be stored. Sentence 1 also applies where the data are not included in directories of subscribers. ... A person with obligations under sentence 1 or sentence 3 receiving notice of any changes is to correct the data without undue delay; in this connection the person with obligations under sentence 1 is subsequently to collect and store data not yet recorded if collecting the data is possible with no special effort. The manner in which data for the information-retrieval procedure provided for under section 113 are stored is optional.
(2) Where the service provider in accordance with subsection (1) sentence 1 or sentence 3 operates in conjunction with a sales partner, such a partner shall collect data according to subsection (1) sentence 1 and 3 under the pre-requisites set out therein and shall transmit to the service provider, without undue delay, these and other data collected under section 95; subsection (1) sentence 2 applies accordingly. Sentence 1 also applies to data relating to changes, inasmuch as the sales partner receives notice of them in the course of normal business transactions.
(3) Data within the meaning of subsection (1) sentence 1 or sentence 3 need not be collected subsequently for contractual relationships existing on the date of entry into force of this provision, save in the cases referred to in subsection (1) sentence 4.
(4) The data are to be erased upon expiry of the calendar year following the year in which the contractual relationship ended.
...”
In July 2016 section 111 of the Telecommunications Act was amended and an obligation for service providers to verify prior to collection the personal data of the mobile-telephone user was included. Presentation of an identity card, a passport or other official identity document is required when the data is being registered initially. The amendment had been considered necessary to further restrict the possibilities available for circumventing the obligations stipulated by section 111 of the Telecommunications Act. According to the travaux préparatoires of the amendment (Publication of the Federal Parliament (Bundestagsdrucksache) no. 18/8702, p. 22) a considerable number of false data in the telecommunication providers’ data bases had been established which had the character of a mass phenomenon. Requests of the relevant authorities pursuant to sections 112 and 113 of the Telecommunications Act had therefore in many procedures not resulted in useful information. A constitutional complaint challenging the compatibility of this amendment with the Basic Law is currently pending before the Federal Constitutional Court (no. 1 BvR 1713/17).
Section 112 of the Telecommunications Act establishes an automated procedure for the data stored under section 111 of the Telecommunications Act. In accordance with this procedure providers of telecommunications services must supply the data in such a way that they can be retrieved by the Federal Network Agency without the knowledge of the providers. Moreover, the possibility of data retrieval using incomplete search data or a search with a similarity function must be provided. The relevant parts of section 112 of the Telecommunications Act read at the relevant time:
“(1) Any person providing publicly available telecommunications services shall store, without undue delay, data collected under section 111(1) sentences 1, 3, and 4, and subsection (2) in customer data files .... The obligated person shall ensure that:
the Federal Network Agency is enabled, at all times, to retrieve data from customer data files by way of automation within Germany;
data can be retrieved using incomplete search data or searches made by means of a similarity function.
The obligated person and his agent are to ensure by technical and organisational measures that no retrievals can come to their notice. The Federal Network Agency may retrieve data from customer databases only to the extent that knowledge of the data is necessary:
in order to prosecute administrative offences under the present Act or under the Unfair Competition Act [Gesetz gegen den unlauteren Wettbewerb];
in order to process requests for information lodged by the bodies set out in subsection (2).
The requesting body shall verify without undue delay to what extent it needs the data transmitted in response to its request and shall erase any data it does not need without undue delay; this shall also apply to the Federal Network Agency regarding the retrieval of data in accordance with sentence 7 no. 1.
(2) Information from the customer data files according to subsection (1) shall be provided to:
the courts and criminal prosecution authorities;
Federal and Land law-enforcement authorities for purposes of averting danger;
the Customs Criminal Investigations Office [Zollkriminalamt] and customs investigation offices [Zollfahndungsämter] for criminal proceedings and the Customs Criminal Investigations Office for the preparation and execution of measures under section 23a of the Customs Investigation Service Act [Zollfahndungsdienstgesetz];
Federal and Land offices for the protection of the Constitution, the Federal Armed Forces Counter-Intelligence Office, and the Federal Intelligence Service;
the emergency service centres under section 108 and the service centre for the maritime mobile emergency number “124 124”;
the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority; and
the authorities of the customs administration for the purposes listed in section 2(1) of the Undeclared Work Act [Schwarzarbeitsbekämpfungsgesetz] via central enquiries offices.
as stipulated in subsection (4), at all times, as far as such information is needed to discharge their legal functions and the requests are submitted to the Federal Network Agency by means of automated procedures.
...
(4) At the request of the authorities referred to in subsection (2), the Federal Network Agency is to retrieve and transmit to the requesting authority the relevant data sets from the customer data files in accordance with subsection (1). It shall examine the admissibility of the transmission only where there is special reason to do so. Responsibility for such admissibility lies with:
the Federal Network Agency, in the cases governed by subsection (1) sentence 7 no. 1; and
the bodies set out in subsection (2), in the cases of subsection (1) sentence 7 no. 2.
For purposes of data-protection supervision by the competent body, the Federal Network Agency shall record, for each retrieval, the time, the data used in the process of retrieval, the data retrieved, information clearly identifying the person retrieving the data, as well as the requesting authority, its reference number, and information clearly identifying the person requesting the data. Use for any other purposes of data recorded is not permitted. Data recorded are to be erased after a period of one year.
...”
In June 2017 a regulation was issued concerning the automatic retrieval procedure under Section 112 of the Telecommunications Act. This subscriber data information regulation (Kundendatenauskunftsverordnung) describes in more detail the possibilities to request information based on the address, name or telephone number of subscribers and outlines the required information to be provided for the requested search. In addition it regulates searches based on incomplete data and searches made by means of a similarity function. The regulation was accompanied by a technical directive, setting the technical standards for the searches and for the communication between the Federal Network Agency, the requesting authorities and the telecommunication providers.
Section 113 of the Telecommunications Act provides for a manual procedure for requesting data stored pursuant to section 111 of the Telecommunications Act. In contrast to the automated information procedure, this provides for a duty of the service providers themselves to supply information to the entitled authorities. In the same way as in the automated information procedure, confidentiality regarding information requests in respect of the persons to whom the data relate must be preserved. Section 113 does not contain an exhaustive list of the authorities entitled to receive information thereunder. Information requests are permissible in so far as they are necessary to prosecute criminal and regulatory offences, to avert danger (Gefahrenabwehr) and to perform intelligence tasks. Section 113 of the Telecommunications Act read, in so far as relevant, at the relevant time:
“(1) Any person commercially providing or assisting in providing telecommunications services may use, subject to the stipulations of subsection (2), the data collected under sections 95 and 111 in accordance with this provision of the Law in order to fulfil its obligations to provide information to the bodies listed in paragraph 3. ...
(2) The information may be provided only inasmuch as one of the bodies set out in paragraph 3 has requested that this be done, in text form, in an individual case in order to prosecute criminal or administrative offences, in order to avert danger to public safety or order, and in order to discharge the legal functions of the bodies set out in subsection (3) no. 3, citing a provision of the law that allows it to so collect the data referenced in subsection (1); no data pursuant to subsection (1) may be transmitted to any other public or non-public bodies. In the case of imminent danger, the information may be provided also if the request is made in a form other than text form. In such an event, the request is to be confirmed subsequently in text form; this shall be done without undue delay. Responsibility for the admissibility of the request for information lies with the bodies set out in subsection (3).
(3) The following are “bodies” in the sense of subsection (1):
The authorities responsible for prosecuting criminal or administrative offences;
The authorities responsible for preventing threats to public security or to public order;
Federal and Land offices for the protection of the Constitution, the Federal Armed Forces Counter-Intelligence Office, and the Federal Intelligence Service.
(4) A person commercially providing or assisting in providing telecommunications services is to transmit the data to be provided pursuant to a request completely and without undue delay. The parties obligated to provide information are to keep confidential requests for information and the provision of information both vis-à-vis the party/parties affected and vis-à-vis third parties.
...”
Information requests in the context of criminal investigations by the public prosecutor’s office and the police under the automated procedure under section 112 of the Telecommunications Act are regulated in the Code of Criminal Procedure (Strafprozessordnung). The applicable articles read, at the relevant time and in so far as relevant, as follows:
Article 160
“(1) As soon as the public prosecutor’s office obtains knowledge of a suspected criminal offence either through a criminal complaint or by other means it shall investigate the facts to decide whether public charges are to be brought.
(2) The public prosecutor’s office shall ascertain not only incriminating but also exonerating circumstances, and shall ensure that evidence, the loss of which is to be feared, is taken.
(3) The investigations of the public prosecutor’s office shall extend also to the circumstances which are important for the determination of the legal consequences of the act. For this purpose it may avail itself of the service of the court assistance agency.”
Article 161
“(1) For the purpose indicated in Article 160 § 1 to § 3 [of the CCP], the public prosecutor’s office shall be entitled to request information from all authorities and to initiate investigations of any kind, either itself or through the authorities and officials in the police force provided there are no other statutory provisions specifically regulating their powers. The authorities and officials in the police force shall be obliged to comply with such a request or order of the public prosecutor’s office and shall be entitled, in such cases, to request information from all authorities.”
Article 163
“(1) The authorities and officials in the police force shall investigate criminal offences and shall take all measures that may not be deferred, in order to prevent concealment of facts. To this end they shall be entitled to request, and in exigent circumstances to demand, information from all authorities, as well as to conduct investigations of any kind in so far as there are no other statutory provisions specifically regulating their powers.
...”
For the prevention of crime the Federal Office for Criminal Investigation (Bundeskriminalamt) and the Federal Police (Bundespolizei) may request information under the automated procedure under section 112 of the Telecommunications Act in accordance with the provisions of the following acts which read at the relevant time:
Section 2 of the Federal Office for Criminal Investigation Act [Bundeskriminalamtgesetz]
“(1) As the central office for the information and intelligence system of the police, the Federal Office of Criminal Investigation supports police forces at Land and federal level in the prevention and investigation of crimes of cross-Land, international or considerable importance
(2) The Federal Office for Criminal Investigation shall for the performance of this task:
	1. collect and analyse all, for this purpose, necessary, data;
...”
Section 7 of the Federal Office for Criminal Investigation Act
“(1) The Federal Office for Criminal Investigation may store, change or use personal data, in so far as required by its respective task as central office.
(2) The Federal Office for Criminal Investigation may, in so far as required for the performance of its task as central office under section 2(2) no. 1, collect data via requests for information or enquiries at public and non-public entities for the supplementation of existing information or other analytic purposes. ...”
Section 21 of the Federal Police Act [Bundespolizeigesetz]
“(1) The Federal Police may, unless this chapter states otherwise, collect personal data in so far as required for the performance of its tasks.
(2) For the prevention of criminal acts the collection of personal data is permitted, in so far as facts justify the presumption that:
an individual will commit a serious criminal act in the meaning of section 12(1) and that the information is required for the prevention of said criminal act; or
an individual is or will be in contact with an individual as described in no. 1 in a way that it can be expected that the measure will lead to the prevention of a criminal act as described in no. 1 and that the prevention in another way would be impossible or severely hampered.”
Provisions similar to section 21 of the Federal Police Act exist for the police forces of the Länder. In addition these police forces are also permitted to collect personal information in so far as necessary for averting danger and the protection of the rights of others.
Under section 7 and 27 of the German Customs Investigation Service Act the Customs Criminal Investigations Office and the Customs Investigation Offices are authorised to collect personal information in so far as required for the performance of their tasks. In addition the customs authorities may collect information under Article 163 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 32 above) when investigating undeclared work.
The Federal and Land offices for the protection of the Constitution, may request the information stored pursuant to section 111 of the Telecommunications Act in so far as necessary for the performance of their tasks and not prohibited by the Federal Data Protection Act.
The Military Counter-Intelligence Office may, under section 4 of the Military Counter-Intelligence Office Act, collect the information required for its tasks, except for the assessment of the security situation of the offices and facilities under the administration of the Ministry of Defence, of allied forces or of international military headquarters.
Under section 2(1) of the Federal Intelligence Service Act, the Federal Intelligence Service may request information stored pursuant to section 111 of the Telecommunications Act, in so far as necessary and not prohibited by the Federal Data Protection Act:
- for the protection of its personnel, facilities and sources against security-endangering activities and secret-service activities;
- for vetting future or current personnel;
- for the verification of incoming information, necessary for the performance of its tasks.
Owing to criticism by the Federal Constitutional Court of section 113(1) of the Telecommunications Act (see paragraphs 12 and 20-21 above) several new provisions regulating retrieval of data by authorities under the manual procedure under section 113 were introduced in June 2013, after this application had been lodged.
Information requests by the public prosecutor’s office and the police were subsequently regulated in Article 100j of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which in so far as relevant, reads:
“(1) In so far as necessary to establish the facts or to determine the whereabouts of an accused person, information on data collected pursuant to sections 95 and 111 of the Telecommunications Act may be requested from any person providing or collaborating in the provision of telecommunications services on a commercial basis (section 113(1) sentence 1 of the Telecommunications Act).
...
(5) On the basis of a request for information under subsection (1) or (2), any person providing or collaborating in the provision of telecommunications services on a commercial basis shall transmit without delay the data required for the provision of the information. ...”
Similar provisions were created for the Federal Police, the Federal Office of Criminal Investigation and the Customs Investigation Service.
The Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution is permitted to request the data collected pursuant to section 111 of the Telecommunications Act from service providers under section 8d of the Federal Act on the Protection of the Constitution (Bundesverfassungsschutzgesetz), which reads in so far as relevant:
“In so far as necessary for the performance of its tasks the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution may request from any person providing or collaborating in the provision of telecommunications services on a commercial basis information on data collected pursuant to sections 95 and 111 of the Telecommunications Act (section 113(1) sentence 1 of the Telecommunications Act). ...”
Similar provisions were introduced for the offices for the protection of the Constitution of the Länder. Moreover, the legal basis for manual information requests by the Military Counter-Intelligence Office and the Federal Intelligence Service refer to section 8d of the Federal Act on the Protection of the Constitution.
Under Article 98 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a person affected by the seizure of an object in the absence of court involvement may apply for a court decision at any time.
In accordance with the well-established case-law of the Federal Court of Justice (see, for example, case no. 5 ARs (VS) 1/97, 5 August 1998), an analogous application of Article 98 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure offers the possibility of judicial review of all completed investigative measures by a public prosecutor if a measure constituted a serious interference with the person’s fundamental rights.
The relevant parts of the Federal Data Protection Act (Bundesdatenschutzgesetz), as in force until 24 May 2018, read as follows:
“Section 1 Purpose and scope
(1) The purpose of this Act is to protect individuals against infringement of their right to privacy as the result of the handling of their personal data.
(2) This Act shall apply to the collection, processing and use of personal data by
public bodies of the Federation,
public bodies of the Länder, where data protection is not covered by Land legislation and where the Länder
a) execute federal law, or
b) act as judiciary bodies and administrative matters are not involved,
...
(3) Where other federal laws apply to personal data and their publication, they shall take precedence over the provisions of this Act. The obligation to abide by legal obligations of secrecy or professional or special official secrecy not based on law shall remain unaffected.
Section 2 Public and private bodies
(1) ‘Public bodies of the Federation’ shall mean the authorities, judiciary bodies and other public-law institutions of the Federation, of the direct federal corporations, institutions and foundations under public law as well as their associations irrespective of their legal forms. ...
Section 3a Data reduction and data economy
Personal data shall be collected, processed and used, and data processing systems shall be chosen and organized in accordance with the aim of collecting, processing and using as little personal data as possible. In particular, personal data shall be rendered anonymous or aliased as allowed by the purpose for which they are collected and/or further processed, and as far as the effort required is not disproportionate to the desired purpose of protection.
Section 4 Lawfulness of data collection, processing and use
(1) The collection, processing and use of personal data shall be lawful only if permitted or ordered by this Act or other law, or if the data subject has provided consent.
(2) Personal data shall be collected from the data subject. They may be collected without the data subject’s participation only if
allowed or required by law, or
a) the data must be collected from other persons or bodies due to the nature of the administrative task to be performed or the commercial purpose, or
b) collecting the data from the data subject would require disproportionate effort and there are no indications that overriding legitimate interests of the data subject would be adversely affected.
Section 13 Data collection
(1) Collecting personal data shall be lawful when the knowledge of such data is necessary for the controller to perform its tasks.
(1 a) If personal data are collected from a private body rather than from the data subject, this body shall be informed of the legal provision requiring the supply of information or that such supply is voluntary.
Section 19 Access to data
(1) Upon request, data subjects shall be given information on
recorded data relating to them, including information relating to the source of the data,
the recipients or categories of recipients to which the data are transferred, and
the purpose of recording the data.
The request should specify the type of personal data on which information is to be given. If the personal data are recorded neither in automated form nor in nonautomated filing systems, this information shall be provided only if the data subject provides information enabling the data to be located and if the effort required is not disproportionate to the data subject’s interest in the information. The controller shall exercise due discretion in determining the procedure for providing such information and in particular the form in which it is provided.
(2) Subsection 1 shall not apply to personal data recorded only because they may not be erased due to legal, statutory or contractual provisions on retention, or only for purposes of monitoring data protection or safeguarding data, and providing information would require a disproportionate effort.
(3) If the provision of information relates to the transfer of personal data to authorities for the protection of the constitution, to the Federal Intelligence Service, the Military Counterintelligence Service and, as far as the security of the Federation is concerned, other agencies of the Federal Ministry of Defence, such provision shall be lawful only with the consent of these bodies.
(4) Information shall not be provided if
the information would endanger the orderly performance of tasks for which the controller is responsible,
the information would threaten the public security or order or otherwise be detrimental to the Federation or a Land, or
the data or the fact of their recording, in particular due to the overriding legitimate interests of a third party, must be kept secret by law or due to the nature of the data, and therefore the data subject’s interest in obtaining information shall not take precedence.
(5) No reasons must be given for refusing to provide information if stating the actual and legal grounds for refusal would threaten the purpose of refusing to provide information. In this case, data subjects shall be informed of the possibility to contact the Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information.
(6) If no information is provided to the data subject, at the data subject’s request this information shall be supplied to the Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information unless the relevant supreme federal authority finds in the individual case that doing so would endanger the security of the Federation or a Land. The information provided by the Federal Commissioner to the data subject may not provide any indication of the knowledge available to the controller without its consent.
(7) Information shall be provided free of charge.
Section 19a Notification
(1) If data are collected without the data subject’s knowledge, he or she shall be notified of such recording, the identity of the controller and the purposes of collection, processing or use. The data subject shall also be notified of recipients or categories of recipients except where he or she must expect transfer to such recipients. If a transfer is planned, notification shall be provided no later than the first transfer.
(2) Notification shall not be required if
the data subject already has this information,
notifying the data subject would involve a disproportionate effort, or
recording or transfer of personal data is expressly laid down by law.
The controller shall stipulate in writing the conditions under which notification shall not be provided in accordance with no. 2 or 3.
(3) Section 19 (2) through (4) shall apply accordingly.
Section 21 Appeals to the Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information
Anyone who believes his or her rights have been infringed through the collection, processing or use of his or her personal data by public bodies of the Federation may appeal to the Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information. This shall apply to the collection, processing or use of personal data by federal courts only where they are active in administrative matters.
Section 24 Monitoring by the Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information
(1) The Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information shall monitor compliance by the public bodies of the Federation with the provisions of this Act and other data protection provisions.
(2) Monitoring by the Federal Commissioner shall also extend to
personal data obtained by public bodies of the Federation concerning the contents of and specific circumstances relating to postal communications and telecommunications, and
personal data subject to professional or special official secrecy, especially tax secrecy under Section 30 of the German Fiscal Code. ...”
Similar provisions existed in Länder. In addition the Länder have their own data protection commissioner monitoring the compliance of Länder authorities with the respective data protection acts.
Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter provide as follows:
Article 7 – Respect for private and family life
“Everyone has the right to respect for his or her private and family life, home and communications.”
Article 8 – Protection of personal data
“1. Everyone has the right to the protection of personal data concerning him or her.
Such data must be processed fairly for specified purposes and on the basis of the consent of the person concerned or some other legitimate basis laid down by law. Everyone has the right of access to data which have been collected concerning him or her, and the right to have them rectified.
Compliance with these rules shall be subject to control by an independent authority.”
The Privacy and Electronic Communications Directive (Directive 2002/58/EC concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector), adopted on 12 July 2002, states, in recitals 2 and 11:
“(2) This Directive seeks to respect the fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised in particular by the Charter of fundamental rights of the European Union. In particular, this Directive seeks to ensure full respect for the rights set out in Articles 7 and 8 of that Charter.
(11) Like Directive 95/46/EC, this Directive does not address issues of protection of fundamental rights and freedoms related to activities which are not governed by Community law. Therefore it does not alter the existing balance between the individual’s right to privacy and the possibility for Member States to take the measures referred to in Article 15(1) of this Directive, necessary for the protection of public security, defence, State security (including the economic well-being of the State when the activities relate to State security matters) and the enforcement of criminal law. Consequently, this Directive does not affect the ability of Member States to carry out lawful interception of electronic communications, or take other measures, if necessary for any of these purposes and in accordance with the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, as interpreted by the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights. Such measures must be appropriate, strictly proportionate to the intended purpose and necessary within a democratic society and should be subject to adequate safeguards in accordance with the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.”
The Directive further provides, insofar as relevant:
Article 1 – Scope and aim
“1. This Directive harmonises the provisions of the Member States required to ensure an equivalent level of protection of fundamental rights and freedoms, and in particular the right to privacy, with respect to the processing of personal data in the electronic communication sector and to ensure the free movement of such data and of electronic communication equipment and services in the Community.
The provisions of this Directive particularise and complement Directive 95/46/EC for the purposes mentioned in paragraph 1. Moreover, they provide for protection of the legitimate interests of subscribers who are legal persons.
This Directive shall not apply to activities which fall outside the scope of the Treaty establishing the European Community, such as those covered by Titles V and VI of the Treaty on European Union, and in any case to activities concerning public security, defence, State security (including the economic well-being of the State when the activities relate to State security matters) and the activities of the State in areas of criminal law.”
Article 15 – Application of certain provisions of Directive 95/46/EC
“1. Member States may adopt legislative measures to restrict the scope of the rights and obligations provided for in Article 5, Article 6, Article 8(1), (2), (3) and (4), and Article 9 of this Directive when such restriction constitutes a necessary, appropriate and proportionate measure within a democratic society to safeguard national security (i.e. State security), defence, public security, and the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences or of unauthorised use of the electronic communication system, as referred to in Article 13(1) of Directive 95/46/EC. To this end, Member States may, inter alia, adopt legislative measures providing for the retention of data for a limited period justified on the grounds laid down in this paragraph. All the measures referred to in this paragraph shall be in accordance with the general principles of Community law, including those referred to in Article 6(1) and (2) of the Treaty on European Union.”
On 15 March 2006 the Data Retention Directive (Directive 2006/24/EC on the retention of data generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic communications services or of public communications networks and amending Directive 2002/58/EC) was adopted. It provided, insofar as relevant:
Article 1 - Subject matter and scope
“1. This Directive aims to harmonise Member States’ provisions concerning the obligations of the providers of publicly available electronic communications services or of public communications networks with respect to the retention of certain data which are generated or processed by them, in order to ensure that the data are available for the purpose of the investigation, detection and prosecution of serious crime, as defined by each Member State in its national law.
This Directive shall apply to traffic and location data on both legal entities and natural persons and to the related data necessary to identify the subscriber or registered user. It shall not apply to the content of electronic communications, including information consulted using an electronic communications network.”
Article 3 – Obligation to retain data
“1. By way of derogation from Articles 5, 6 and 9 of Directive 2002/58/EC, Member States shall adopt measures to ensure that the data specified in Article 5 of this Directive are retained in accordance with the provisions thereof, to the extent that those data are generated or processed by providers of publicly available electronic communications services or of a public communications network within their jurisdiction in the process of supplying the communications services concerned.”
In essence the directive established an obligation for providers of publicly available electronic communication services or of public communications networks to retain all traffic and location data for periods of from six months to two years. It aimed at ensuring that the data were available for the purpose of the investigation, detection and prosecution of serious crime, as defined by each member State in its national law. The retention obligation entailed, inter alia, data necessary to trace and identify the source and destination of a communication, meaning the telephone number and the name and address of the subscriber or registered user (Article 5 § 1 (a) & (b)).
In a judgment adopted by the Court of Justice of the European Union (“the CJEU”) on 8 April 2014 in Digital Rights Ireland and Seitlinger and Others (joined cases C-293/12 and C-594/12, EU:C:2014:238) it declared invalid the Data Retention Directive (see paragraphs 49 and 50 above).
The CJEU further developed its Digital Rights case-law in Tele2 Sverige and Tom Watson and Others (joined cases C-203/15 and C-698/15, EU:C:2016:970), judgment adopted on 21 December 2016). The court stated, inter alia, (§§ 103111, references to further CJEU judgments have been omitted in the quote below):
“103.  ... while the effectiveness of the fight against serious crime, in particular organised crime and terrorism, may depend to a great extent on the use of modern investigation techniques, such an objective of general interest, however fundamental it may be, cannot in itself justify that national legislation providing for the general and indiscriminate retention of all traffic and location data should be considered to be necessary for the purposes of that fight.
In that regard, it must be observed, first, that the effect of such legislation, in the light of its characteristic features as described in paragraph 97 of the present judgment, is that the retention of traffic and location data is the rule, whereas the system put in place by Directive 2002/58 requires the retention of data to be the exception.
Second, national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which covers, in a generalised manner, all subscribers and registered users and all means of electronic communication as well as all traffic data, provides for no differentiation, limitation or exception according to the objective pursued. It is comprehensive in that it affects all persons using electronic communication services, even though those persons are not, even indirectly, in a situation that is liable to give rise to criminal proceedings. It therefore applies even to persons for whom there is no evidence capable of suggesting that their conduct might have a link, even an indirect or remote one, with serious criminal offences. Further, it does not provide for any exception, and consequently it applies even to persons whose communications are subject, according to rules of national law, to the obligation of professional secrecy.
Such legislation does not require there to be any relationship between the data which must be retained and a threat to public security. In particular, it is not restricted to retention in relation to (i) data pertaining to a particular time period and/or geographical area and/or a group of persons likely to be involved, in one way or another, in a serious crime, or (ii) persons who could, for other reasons, contribute, through their data being retained, to fighting crime.
National legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings therefore exceeds the limits of what is strictly necessary and cannot be considered to be justified, within a democratic society, as required by Article 15(1) of Directive 2002/58, read in the light of Articles 7, 8 and 11 and Article 52(1) of the Charter.
However, Article 15(1) of Directive 2002/58, read in the light of Articles 7, 8 and 11 and Article 52(1) of the Charter, does not prevent a Member State from adopting legislation permitting, as a preventive measure, the targeted retention of traffic and location data, for the purpose of fighting serious crime, provided that the retention of data is limited, with respect to the categories of data to be retained, the means of communication affected, the persons concerned and the retention period adopted, to what is strictly necessary.
In order to satisfy the requirements set out in the preceding paragraph of the present judgment, that national legislation must, first, lay down clear and precise rules governing the scope and application of such a data retention measure and imposing minimum safeguards, so that the persons whose data has been retained have sufficient guarantees of the effective protection of their personal data against the risk of misuse. That legislation must, in particular, indicate in what circumstances and under which conditions a data retention measure may, as a preventive measure, be adopted, thereby ensuring that such a measure is limited to what is strictly necessary.
Second, as regards the substantive conditions which must be satisfied by national legislation that authorises, in the context of fighting crime, the retention, as a preventive measure, of traffic and location data, if it is to be ensured that data retention is limited to what is strictly necessary, it must be observed that, while those conditions may vary according to the nature of the measures taken for the purposes of prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of serious crime, the retention of data must continue nonetheless to meet objective criteria, that establish a connection between the data to be retained and the objective pursued. In particular, such conditions must be shown to be such as actually to circumscribe, in practice, the extent of that measure and, thus, the public affected.
As regard the setting of limits on such a measure with respect to the public and the situations that may potentially be affected, the national legislation must be based on objective evidence which makes it possible to identify a public whose data is likely to reveal a link, at least an indirect one, with serious criminal offences, and to contribute in one way or another to fighting serious crime or to preventing a serious risk to public security.”
Following the latter judgment, national courts in several EU Member States have sought preliminary rulings from the CJEU seeking to clarify the scope and effects of the Tele2 Sverige judgment. Two of those cases are still pending (see Privacy International, C-623/17 and Ordre des barreaux francophones et germanophone, Académie Fiscale ASBL, UA, Liga voor Mensenrechten ASBL, Ligue des Droits de l’Homme ASBL, VZ, WY, XX, C520/18).
In a third case, Ministerio Fiscal (C-207/16, EU:C:2018:788), the CJEU was asked whether Article 15(1) of Directive 2002/58, read in the light of Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter, must be interpreted as meaning that public authorities’ access to data for the purpose of identifying the owners of SIM cards activated with a stolen mobile telephone, such as the surnames, forenames and, if need be, addresses of the owners of the SIM cards, entails interference with their fundamental rights, enshrined in those articles of the Charter, which is sufficiently serious to entail that access being limited, in the area of prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences, to the objective of fighting serious crime and, if so, by reference to which criteria the seriousness of the offence at issue must be assessed.
In its judgment of 2 October 2018, the CJEU held, at §§ 51 et seq. (references to further CJEU judgments have been omitted in the quote below):
“51. As to the existence of an interference with those fundamental rights, it should be borne in mind, ... that the access of public authorities to such data constitutes an interference with the fundamental right to respect for private life, enshrined in Article 7 of the Charter, even in the absence of circumstances which would allow that interference to be defined as ‘serious’, without it being relevant that the information in question relating to private life is sensitive or whether the persons concerned have been inconvenienced in any way. Such access also constitutes interference with the fundamental right to the protection of personal data guaranteed in Article 8 of the Charter, as it constitutes processing of personal data.
(...)
In accordance with the principle of proportionality, serious interference can be justified, in areas of prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences, only by the objective of fighting crime which must also be defined as ‘serious’.
By contrast, when the interference that such access entails is not serious, that access is capable of being justified by the objective of preventing, investigating, detecting and prosecuting ‘criminal offences’ generally.
It should therefore, first of all, be determined whether, in the present case, in the light of the facts of the case, the interference with fundamental rights enshrined in Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter that police access to the data in question in the main proceedings would entail must be regarded as ‘serious’.
In that regard, the sole purpose of the request at issue in the main proceedings, by which the police seeks, for the purposes of a criminal investigation, a court authorisation to access personal data retained by providers of electronic communications services, is to identify the owners of SIM cards activated over a period of 12 days with the IMEI code of the stolen mobile telephone. (...) that request seeks access to only the telephone numbers corresponding to those SIM cards and to the data relating to the identity of the owners of those cards, such as their surnames, forenames and, if need be, addresses. By contrast, those data do not concern (...) the communications carried out with the stolen mobile telephone or its location.
It is therefore apparent that the data concerned by the request for access at issue in the main proceedings only enables the SIM card or cards activated with the stolen mobile telephone to be linked, during a specific period, with the identity of the owners of those SIM cards. Without those data being cross-referenced with the data pertaining to the communications with those SIM cards and the location data, those data do not make it possible to ascertain the date, time, duration and recipients of the communications made with the SIM card or cards in question, nor the locations where those communications took place or the frequency of those communications with specific people during a given period. Those data do not therefore allow precise conclusions to be drawn concerning the private lives of the persons whose data is concerned.
In those circumstances, access to only the data referred to in the request at issue in the main proceedings cannot be defined as ‘serious’ interference with the fundamental rights of the persons whose data is concerned.”
The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, David Kaye, recommended in his Report to the Human Rights Council on the use of encryption and anonymity to exercise the rights to freedom of opinion and expression in the digital age (A/HRC/29/32, 22 May 2015, § 60):
“States should not restrict encryption and anonymity, which facilitate and often enable the rights to freedom of opinion and expression. Blanket prohibitions fail to be necessary and proportionate. ... States should refrain from making the identification of users a condition for access to digital communications and online services and requiring SIM card registration for mobile-telephone users.”
The Council of Europe Convention of 1981 for the protection of individuals with regard to automatic processing of personal data (“the Data Protection Convention”), which was ratified by all Council of Europe member States and entered into force for Germany on 1 October 1985, formulates a number of core principles for the collection and processing of personal data. The purpose of the Convention is, according to Article 1, to secure respect for every individual’s rights and fundamental freedoms, and in particular his or her right to privacy, with regard to the automatic processing of personal data relating to him or her. The Convention includes the following basic principles:
Article 2 – Definitions
“For the purposes of this Convention:
a ‘personal data’ means any information relating to an identified or identifiable individual (‘data subject’);
b ‘automated data file’ means any set of data undergoing automatic processing;
c ‘automatic processing’ includes the following operations if carried out in whole or in part by automated means: storage of data, carrying out of logical and/or arithmetical operations on those data, their alteration, erasure, retrieval or dissemination;”
Article 5 – Quality of data
“Personal data undergoing automatic processing shall be:
a) obtained and processed fairly and lawfully;
b) stored for specified and legitimate purposes and not used in a way incompatible with those purposes;
c) adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are stored;
d) accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date;
e) preserved in a form which permits identification of the data subjects for no longer than is required for the purpose for which those data are stored.”
Article 7 – Data security
“Appropriate security measures shall be taken for the protection of personal data stored in automated data files against accidental or unauthorised destruction or accidental loss as well as against unauthorised access, alteration or dissemination.”
Article 8 – Additional safeguards for the data subject
“Any person shall be enabled:
a) to establish the existence of an automated personal data file, its main purposes, as well as the identity and habitual residence or principal place of business of the controller of the file;
b) to obtain at reasonable intervals and without excessive delay or expense confirmation of whether personal data relating to him are stored in the automated data file as well as communication to him of such data in an intelligible form;
c) to obtain, as the case may be, rectification or erasure of such data if these have been processed contrary to the provisions of domestic law giving effect to the basic principles set out in Articles 5 and 6 of this Convention;
d) to have a remedy if a request for confirmation or, as the case may be, communication, rectification or erasure as referred to in paragraphs b and c of this Article is not complied with.”
Article 9 – Exceptions and restrictions
“No exception to the provisions of Articles 5, 6 and 8 of this Convention shall be allowed except within the limits defined in this Article.
Derogation from the provisions of Articles 5, 6 and 8 of this Convention shall be allowed when such derogation is provided for by the law of the Party and constitutes a necessary measure in a democratic society in the interests of:
a) protecting State security, public safety, the monetary interests of the State or the suppression of criminal offences;
b) protecting the data subject or the rights and freedoms of others.
Restrictions on the exercise of the rights specified in Article 8, paragraphs b, c and d, may be provided by law with respect to automated personal data files used for statistics or for scientific research purposes when there is obviously no risk of an infringement of the privacy of the data subjects.”
The Data Protection Convention is currently being updated to, inter alia, better address challenges resulting from the use of new information and communication technologies. A Protocol amending the Data Protection Convention opened to signature by the Contracting States to that Convention on 10 October 2018 and was signed by Germany on the same day.
From a comparative-law report on thirty-four Council of Europe member States’ practices as to the retention of subscriber information of pre-paid SIM-card customers, it appears that fifteen States require telecommunications providers to store such data and that none of the States surveyed currently permits its authorities to maintain their own database of personal data of telecommunications subscribers. Moreover, there is variation as regards the length of time such data may be stored, the purposes for which it may be used, and the procedural requirements that must be met in order to access it. In particular, a majority of the States prescribe in law a list of specific authorities who are permitted to access subscriber information and limit the acceptable purposes to the investigation of crimes or for the prevention of threats to public order. Furthermore, in most States, procedural requirements for accessing stored subscriber information include an order by a court or a public prosecutor, typically if the subscriber data is used mainly for criminal investigative purposes. Lastly, only a minority of States require that customers be notified where their personal data has been accessed.