The case concerns deprivation of the applicant’s parental authority.
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in Arkhangelsk. He was represented by Mr S. Drobotov, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by Mr M. Galperin, his successor in that office.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In April 2000 the applicant married Ms A.K., who gave birth to their son, V., on 3 January 2001. The couple divorced on 15 April 2003 upon mutual consent.
In 2004 Ms A.K. entered into a relationship with Mr M.K. They married in 2005. Ms A.K. and Mr M.K. have a common son, Ye.
On 23 March 2011 Ms A.K. instituted civil proceedings against the applicant, seeking to have him divested of his parental authority over V. In her court claim, Ms A.K. argued that since V.’s birth the applicant had neither participated in his upbringing, nor supported him financially; in fact, he had lived separately from her and the child. She went on to state that after the divorce, neither she nor V. had seen the applicant even once. According to Ms A.K., the applicant had never expressed any interest in V.’s life, or any wish or intention to see his son; nor had he offered any assistance or financial support for V., with the result that V. could hardly remember him. She further pointed out that since 2004 she and V. had been living as a family with Mr M.K., whom V. regarded as his father, even though he knew that it was the applicant who was his biological father. V. was very attached to Mr M.K. and his half-brother, Ye. He regarded himself as a member of that family and was distressed by the fact that his family name and patronymic were different from those of Ye. Ms A.K. also pointed out in her claim that Mr M.K. intended to adopt V.
On 8 April 2011 the applicant lodged a counter-claim. He objected to Ms A.K.’s claim, stating that he loved his son and wished to participate in his upbringing. The applicant stated that he had accepted the fact that after his divorce from Ms A.K., the boy would remain with her, as he had been persuaded that such arrangement had been in V.’s best interests. He further alleged that after Ms A.K. had remarried, he had orally agreed with her that he “would not intervene in V.’s upbringing and would not disturb [Ms A.K.] with his presence” in order not to traumatise V. and to give him time to adapt to his new family. The applicant further alleged that his relations with Ms A.K. were complicated and it had been impossible for him to resolve the question of his access to V. He therefore requested that the court grant him access to his son and establish his right to see him once a fortnight, on Saturday or Sunday from 11 a.m. until 7 p. m., and to spend his annual leave with him.
In an interlocutory decision of 19 April 2011 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Arkhangelsk (“the District Court”) ordered an expert assessment of the child-parent relationship. In the light of the degree of V.’s attachment to each of his parents, with due regard to his age, and the nature of his relationship with each of his parents, the experts were to establish whether, in view of his personal characteristics and those of each of his parents, the applicant could be granted access to V., and, in particular, allowed to spend his annual leave with him, without any damage to the latter’s psychological well-being. The court ordered that the applicant, Ms A.K. and V. appear before a competent body of child psychologists for the assessment.
On 3 May 2011 the applicant requested that the assessment be postponed “until further notice” because he was ill. His request appears to have been refused, and the assessment was carried out in his absence.
In an interview with the psychologists, V. stated that he lived with his “mum” (Ms A.K.), his “dad” (Mr M.K.), and his “brother Ye.” He also stated that he knew of the existence of his “other dad”, the applicant, but he did not remember him and did not want to have contact with him. V. also explained that he had met the applicant once, in April 2011, and that he had had a negative impression of that meeting, as he had feared that the applicant might kidnap him.
On 6 May 2011, at a hearing, the District Court heard the parties, who stated that they wished to pursue their claims. It also examined a number of witnesses, including on behalf of the applicant.
One witness, Ms B., who had been V.’s kindergarten teacher, stated that it had always been Ms A.K. and Mr M.K., who had brought V. to the kindergarten. The boy had been attached to Mr M.K., whom he had considered as his father. Ms B. stated that she did not know the applicant, as she had never seen him at the kindergarten.
Another witness, Ms P., who was the school teacher in charge of V.’s class, stated that she had never seen the applicant at school. He had never come there or expressed any interest in V.’s school life, whereas Ms A.K. and Mr M.K. actively participated in V.’s life and development, followed his progress in school, and took him to various after-school activities. She also stated that, if asked about his family, V. talked about his mother, brother and Mr M.K. as his father, and that he wanted to change his surname to K. (Mr M.K.’s surname).
Another witness, Ms D., who was a paediatrician at a hospital in the vicinity of V.’s home, stated that the applicant had never brought V. to the hospital for check-ups, and had not expressed any interest in V.’s health. She also stated that on several occasions she had visited V. at home and had seen the applicant there only once.
Ms Sh., an acquaintance of the applicant, stated that in April 2011 she and the applicant had gone to a supermarket, where they had seen V. The applicant had told her that that was his son. Ms Sh. had gone up to V. and started talking to him. V. had communicated openly and eagerly. The applicant had then gone up and told V. that he was his father; the boy had stopped smiling and said that he needed to go home. Ms Sh. stated that V. had not recognised his father before the applicant had told him who he was.
On the same date, the District Court gave its judgment. It noted that by virtue of Article 69 of the Russian Family Code and paragraph 11 of Ruling no. 10 of the Supreme Court of Russia of 27 May 1998, parents could be deprived of their parental authority if they deliberately avoided their parental obligations. The court added that deprivation of parents’ parental authority was a measure of last resort applicable only in a situation where it was impossible to protect a child’s rights and interests in another way.
The District Court further observed that the applicant had not been living together with his son V. since April 2003, when he had divorced. It noted that, as could be established from the evidence in the case, after the divorce the applicant had transferred to Ms A.K. for V.’s support 1,000 roubles (RUB) (approximately 25 euros (EUR)) in 2005, and RUB 1,500 (approximately EUR 37) in 2011. He had once sent gifts to V. through a delivery service and had once wished him a happy birthday. Also, in 2011 the applicant had opened a bank account in V.’s name, where he had transferred RUB 1,000 (approximately EUR 25).
The court rejected the applicant’s arguments that he had financially supported V. by informally giving money to Ms A.K. on many occasions. The court noted that the applicant had provided no evidence to corroborate his allegations. It also noted that the photographs adduced by the applicant only confirmed the fact that he had seen his son before 2004. The court also observed that Ms A.K. had not, in fact, prevented V. from seeing his father; she had never hidden V. from the applicant, and he could thus have agreed with her on the question of his access to the child.
Moreover, in so far as the applicant alleged that Ms A.K. had obstructed his contact with V., the court observed that he had never raised that argument before she had brought the proceedings for removal of his parental authority; nor had he ever sought assistance from the competent authorities on that matter. The court thus rejected the applicant’s argument that Ms A.K. had prevented V. from having contact with his father.
The District Court therefore found it established that, in the absence of any objective obstacles, the applicant had not participated in his son’s upbringing since 2004, that he had never expressed any interest in V.’s life, and that he had only occasionally provided the boy with financial support. The court held that, in fact, the applicant had waived his right to participate in V.’s upbringing.
The District Court referred to the report on the assessment of the child-parent relationship and stated that the family ties between the applicant and V. had been lost, and that the boy perceived a third person, Mr M.K., as his father. Those facts, in the District Court’s view, showed that the applicant had wilfully neglected his parental duties with respect to his son. It thus considered that in such circumstances, it was in V.’s best interests to deprive the applicant of his parental authority over his son and leave the boy under the full custody of his mother, Ms A.K. Such a measure, according to the court, was necessary for the protection of V.’s interests, restoration of his right to protection of his health and personality, as well as his right to education and proper physical and mental development. It thus granted Ms A.K.’s claim against the applicant in full, and rejected the applicant’s counter-claim. It also ordered the applicant to pay a monthly amount in child support, starting from the date of the judgment until his son reached the age of majority. According to the applicant, he made payments as ordered by the District Court until he found out about V.’s adoption by Mr M.K. (see paragraph 26 below).
The applicant appealed against the judgment of 6 May 2011. He argued that deprivation of parental authority was a measure of last resort and should be applied only if relevant and sufficient reasons existed. The District Court, in the applicant’s view, had not found any such reason. He disputed the findings of the first-instance court and insisted that he wished to maintain his ties with his son and to take part in his upbringing.
On 27 June 2011 the Arkhangelsk Regional Court upheld the judgment of 6 May 2011 on appeal, endorsing the District Court’s reasoning.
The applicant’s attempts to have the court decisions of 6 May and 27 June 2011 reviewed in a supervisory review procedure were unsuccessful.
By a court decision of 24 January 2012 Mr M.K. was granted full adoption of V.; as a result of that decision, the applicant’s obligation to pay the child maintenance was terminated.
Article 69 of the Russian Family Code (“the Code”) provides that a parent may be deprived of parental authority if he or she avoids parental obligations, such as an obligation to pay child maintenance; refuses to collect the child from the maternity hospital or from any other medical, educational, social or similar institution; abuses his or her parental authority; mistreats the child by resorting to physical or psychological violence or sexual abuse; suffers from chronic alcohol or drug abuse; or has committed a premeditated criminal offence against the life or health of his or her child or spouse.
By virtue of Article 71 of the Code, parents who have been deprived of their parental authority lose all rights based on their kinship with the child in respect of whom their parental authority has been withdrawn, as well as the right to receive child welfare benefits and allowances paid by the State. Deprivation of parental authority does not absolve parents from their obligation to pay the child maintenance.
Article 129 of the Code provides that the consent of the child’s parents is required for his or her adoption. Such consent must be expressed in a written statement certified by a public notary, or by the head of an entity where the child who has been left without parental care is being looked after, or by a custody and guardianship agency at the place of adoption or at the parents’ place of residence. Alternatively, consent can be expressed directly in the court proceedings for adoption. The parents are entitled to revoke their consent to adoption at any time before a court decision on the adoption is taken.
By virtue of Article 137 of the Code, adopted children lose personal non-pecuniary and pecuniary rights and are relieved of their obligations visà-vis their parents (their relatives).
In its ruling no. 10 on courts’ application of legislation when resolving disputes concerning the upbringing of children dated 27 May 1998, as amended on 6 February 2007, the Plenary of the Supreme Court of Russia stated, in particular:
“...
Only in the event of their guilty conduct may parents be deprived of their parental authority by a court on the grounds established in Article 69 of the [Russian Family Code].
...
... Persons who do not fulfil their parental obligations as a result of a combination of adverse circumstances or on other grounds beyond their control (for instance, [where the person has] a psychiatric or other chronic disease ...) cannot be deprived of their parental authority.
...
Courts should keep in mind that deprivation of parental authority is a measure of last resort. Exceptionally, where a parent’s guilty conduct has been proved, a court, with due regard to [that parent’s] conduct, personality and other specific circumstances, may reject an action for [him or her] to be deprived of his or her parental authority and urge [him or her] to alter [his or her] attitude towards bringing up [his or her] children, entrusting [a competent] custody and guardianship agency with monitoring whether [that parent] duly performs [his or her] parental duties.”
The case concerns the removal by the domestic authorities of the applicant’s parental authority in respect of his son, V., with whom he was considered to have had no contact for seven years, despite the applicant’s counterclaim that he wished to participate in his son’s upbringing, to have contact with him once a fortnight, and to spend his annual leave with him.
At the time of the domestic proceedings, which were instituted by his mother, the child was about ten years old. Shortly after the decision of the domestic courts which divested the applicant of his parental authority and also ordered him to pay a monthly amount in maintenance for his son until maturity, the new husband of the mother – with whom the mother had had another son – adopted V.
Regrettably, I am unable to join my distinguished colleagues in finding that there has been no violation of the right to respect for family life under Article 8 of the Convention, in relation to the decision to strip the applicant of all his parental authority and the absolute restrictions in the restoration of contact with his son. I respectfully disagree for the reasons I will explain below.
On the basis of Article 69 of the Russian Family Code (see paragraphs 26 and 47 of the judgment), the domestic courts removed the applicant’s parental control totally, thus extinguishing all parental rights the applicant had had in respect of his son, including the right to have contact with him (see paragraph 48 of the judgment), on the ground that the applicant had not had contact with his son for seven years (see paragraphs 49 and 55 of the judgment), though the applicant in fact had, pending before the same courts, a request to grant him access to his son which was eventually rejected. Unfortunately, the applicant was punished for not having something which he subsequently asked the domestic courts to grant to him, namely access to his son. Instead, the domestic courts not only refused to grant him such access, they, on the contrary, stripped away all his parental authority, simply because of the delay in his initiative. In my view, parent-child relations and ensuing rights should not be treated like property rights which may lapse if not exercised for a period of time. Whenever there is hope that parent-child relations can be restored, the authorities ought to assist them and not terminate them totally and permanently, as they did in the present case.
Quite rightly, the Russian Supreme Court held that deprivation of parental authority was a measure of last resort (see paragraph 30 of the judgment) and the present judgment, also rightly, reaffirms that such a measure is a far-reaching one which is inconsistent with the aim of reuniting parent and child (see paragraph 48 of the judgment). It is also correct for the judgment to state that such a measure should only be applied in exceptional circumstances which can only be justified if they are motivated by an overriding requirement pertaining to the child’s best interests (ibid). Furthermore, Article 69 of the Russian Family Code does not provide that whenever there is a ground for deprivation of parental authority, the court must automatically proceed with the deprivation without weighing it up against other factors or considerations.
With all due respect, the domestic authorities and the majority in the present case erred as to what constituted exceptional circumstances for the removal of parental authority to be justified by the child’s best interests. Family relationships are complex and they are not linear; families can go through better and worse times. It is not easy for a domestic court to conclude that family relations cannot be salvaged, and, therefore, a court should only deprive parents of such a chance if they pose a real threat to the child’s welfare. Such a risk did not exist in the present case. I am of the opinion that mere inaction of the parent is not sufficient to satisfy the exceptional circumstance under which authorities may resort to the impugned measure, depriving a parent of all connection with a child. In other words, even assuming that it was the applicant’s own inaction that led to the severance of ties between him and his son – and not any alleged parental alienation or psychological manipulation caused to the child by the mother – I am not at all convinced that this factor was sufficient for the purpose of divesting the applicant of his parental authority in respect of his son. Especially so in a situation where the applicant insistently indicated that he wished to restore and develop a relationship with his son (see paragraphs 7 and 22 of the judgment and the present application before the Court).
I believe that this is a very restrictive and harsh measure. It is relevant in this connection that, apart from holding that the applicant had failed to maintain contact with V. and to participate in his upbringing for the past seven years, the domestic courts established no other aspects that could have justified the withdrawal of the applicant’s parental authority. Indeed, in the domestic proceedings, it had never been established that the applicant was unfit for child-rearing, that he had ever inflicted any harm on his son, or that he posed a threat to the child’s health and development or that contact with the applicant might interfere with the child’s relevant rights (compare Haddad v. Spain, no. 16572/17, § 67, 18 June 2019). Stated otherwise, in the present case, neither the life, nor the physical integrity, nor the health nor the morality of the child were at stake and there was no other exceptional circumstance. It is true that during the seven years when there was no contact, the child established strong family ties with his mother, stepfather and half-brother. In the child’s eyes, this was his family and he had no recollection of the applicant. However, there was nothing in these relations to warrant depriving him of the opportunity to rebuild his relationship with his biological father. In order to protect the child’s best interests, it is conceivable that the child had to remain in the family unit with which he had already an existing connection. Yet, to reiterate, this is not sufficient to justify depriving the father of all contact with the child, and all possibility of future contact. Thus, stripping the father of all parental authority does not satisfy the proportionality test and the principle of effectiveness. It is a requirement of the principle of effectiveness that human rights must be practical and effective and not theoretical and illusory. Hence, the interpretative approach to human rights provisions must be pragmatic and realistic, ensuring that they are meaningfully exercised.
Moreover, although the period during which the applicant had no contact with V. was one of considerable length, particularly for a child of his age, this factor alone could not have ruled out the possibility of restoring the ties between the boy and the applicant, his biological father. According to the Court’s case-law, effective respect for family life requires that future relations between parent and child be determined in the light of all the relevant considerations, and not by the mere passage of time (see, as a recent authority, V.D. and Others v. Russia, no. 72931/10, § 116, 9 April 2019). Yet the domestic courts refused the applicant access to V. without examining whether renewed contact between V. and him would be in V.’s best interests. Moreover, according to the Court’s case-law, Article 8 includes a parent’s right to have steps taken with a view to being reunited with his or her child and an obligation on the national authorities to facilitate such reunion, in so far as the interest of the child dictates that everything must be done to preserve personal relations and, if and when appropriate, to “rebuild” the family (see, among many other authorities, Kacper Nowakowski v. Poland, no. 32407/13, § 74, 10 January 2017).
As the domestic courts noted, in an interview with the psychologists, V. stated that, although he knew of the existence of his biological father, the applicant, V. did not remember him and did not wish to have contact with him; his “dad” was Mr M.K. his stepfather (see paragraph 10 of the judgment), which is something that the mother should have discouraged in order not to contribute to the alienation of the biological father. Pursuant to the Court’s case-law, children are entitled to be consulted and heard on matters affecting them. In particular, as children mature and, with the passage of time, become able to formulate their own opinions, the courts should give due weight to their views and feelings, as well as to their right to respect for their private life (see Petrov and X v. Russia, no. 23608/16, § 108, 23 October 2018). At the same time, those views are not necessarily immutable, and their objections, which must be given due weight, are not necessarily sufficient to override the parents’ interests, especially their interest in having regular contact with their child. The right of a child to express his or her own views should not be interpreted as effectively giving an unconditional power of veto to children without any other factors being considered or any examination being carried out to determine their best interests. What is more, if a court based a decision on the views of children who were palpably unable to form and articulate an opinion as to their wishes – for example, because of a conflict of loyalty and/or their exposure to the alienating behaviour of one parent – such a decision could run counter to Article 8 of the Convention (see K.B. and Others v. Croatia, no. 36216/13, § 143, 14 March 2017 and the authorities cited therein). In the latter connection, the applicant argues that the interview in question had been carried out with V. in his absence, and that V. had been living with his mother and might have been influenced by her (see paragraph 35 of the judgment). Besides, it must be pointed out that the judge did not have an interview with the boy to determine his genuine views and ascertain whether he was influenced by his mother (see, about children’s rights to express their views, Articles 3(c) and 6 (b)(c) of the European Convention on the Exercise of Children’s Rights; Article 12.1 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989; and Council of Europe, Guidelines of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on Child-Friendly Justice, Strasbourg, 2010 (available also online), at p. 28, §§ 44-49).
Member States are under a positive obligation before terminating parental authority to make attempts to save the relationships between parents and children. Despite the applicant’s attempt to request access to the child, he was not given the opportunity to salvage the relationship, or even to meet his son in person. Consequently, the door for such a relationship was closed harshly and permanently – given the child’s subsequent adoption by his mother’s new husband – by the domestic courts. The domestic courts should not have ruled out the prospect that regaining contact and building new ties with his biological father would be beneficial for V’s future. Indeed, the authority of the case of Mandet v. France, no. 30955/12, 4 January 2016, should not be overlooked. The facts of Mandet are complex, but a strong analogy can be made with the present case. After a divorce, the mother of the child Ms Mandet entered into a relationship with Mr Glouzmann. She gave birth to a child which was registered in her name. Subsequently, Ms Mandet became reconciled with her ex-husband and they remarried, which had the effect of legitimising the child. The boy grew up believing that Mr Mandet was his father, but when he was 11 years old, Mr Glouzmann applied to the court, which found that the boy was his biological father. The Court also ruled that it was in the child’s best interests to know his biological father. The fact that it took Mr Glouzmann 11 years in order to pursue recognition of paternity and that the child had already existing bonds with his other family members and Mr Mandet, whom he perceived as a father, did not extinguish the biological father’s right to have contact with his child. The 11 years of inaction were not considered an exceptional circumstance such as to prevent recognition of parenthood. Instead, the Court recognised the potential benefit of a future relationship.
Equally, allowing the applicant a chance to regain contact with his son in the present case would not negatively impact the bonds that V shared with his existing family. To re-establish a connection with the applicant would only give the child an opportunity to gain something, not to lose out. Yet when making the decision about the best interests of a child, the domestic courts did not take into account the possibility of restoring their ties, but merely focused on the existing relationship.
Lastly, no complete and absolute contact prohibitions should be used as a means of disciplining or punishing parents. In the majority’s eyes, the parental inaction of the applicant for seven years justified depriving him of his right to family life. Yet such measure, if used as a punishment, would be paradoxical in the light of the very strong case-law of the Court reaffirming that a prisoner, who committed a wrong against society at large should still enjoy his right to family life. As decided in Dickson v. the United Kingdom ([GC], no. 44362/04, 4 December 2007), not only should a prisoner maintain the right to existing family ties, but also the States are under a positive obligations to facilitate starting a family. In the light of this caselaw, the rights entrenched within the Convention are of such importance that they should not be taken away as a means of punishing the individual beyond what is necessary to keep the public or, as in this case, a child, safe. It has previously been stressed that enabling the applicant to have contact with his son would not put V’s welfare at risk, but on the contrary, regaining contact with his biological father would be in his best interests. Therefore, it is inappropriate, and contrary to the spirit of the Convention, to deprive the applicant of his right to family life simply because the Court disapproves of the lengthy period in which he did not initiate contact with his son.
It seems that in the mother’s mind was the idea that her new husband would adopt the child – an adoption which eventually took place a few months after the applicant was deprived of his parental authority (paragraph 25 of the judgment). It is also striking that the domestic court imposed on the applicant an obligation to pay a monthly amount in maintenance until the boy reached the age of majority, notwithstanding the fact that he would no longer have parental authority over the child (see paragraphs 21 and 56 of the judgment), a point which the majority noted with a hint of implicit criticism.
In paragraph 55 of the judgment it is stated that “the national authorities were faced with a difficult task of striking a fair balance between the competing interests – those of the applicant, V., his mother and his de facto family members – in a complex case”. The judgment then goes on to say that “[i]n particular, they [i.e. the national authorities] were called upon to decide whether it was in V.’s best interests to set in motion his bonding with the applicant – his natural father – contact with whom had been lost for the previous seven years, or rather to consolidate the existing ties between V. and the family in which he had been living during that period” (ibid.). Subsequently, the judgment continues that “[t]he Court finds that the domestic courts carried out a detailed and carefully balanced assessment of the entire situation and the needs of the child ...” (ibid.). By stating the above, the Court found that the domestic courts “provided ‘relevant and sufficient’ reasons for their decision, within their margin of appreciation” (ibid). In my humble view, however, the national courts either made no proportionality test at all or erred in what that test should be, and in what the child’s best interests were. With due respect I am unable to understand what is the meaning of “consolidation” of the existing relations of the child with his mother, his half-brother and his stepfather. The child’s relationship with his mother, half-brother and stepfather was very good and there was no evidence that this relationship should be upset if the child’s biological father were also to have contact with him every fortnight. This is a scenario which arises for almost all separated parents. The domestic courts did not take into account the child’s best interests in terms of having contact with his father or the applicant’s right to respect for his family life. What the domestic courts seem only to have taken into account was the wish of the mother and her new husband to legally alienate the child from his biological father. In that connection the intention of the mother and her new husband was for the latter to adopt the child and they ultimately succeeded.
In the light of the foregoing, I submit that the domestic courts did not fairly weigh up the competing interests involved in the decision-making process, and failed to provide “relevant and sufficient” reasons for depriving the applicant of his parental authority, thus extinguishing all his parental rights in respect of his son, including the right to have contact with him (see paragraph 48 of the judgment). It follows that the interference with the applicant’s right to respect for his family life was not “necessary in a democratic society”.
There is another reason why, in my view, there has been a violation of Article 8 of the Convention. The applicant wished to participate in his child’s upbringing (see paragraph 7 of the judgment), which implies a request going beyond the right of access. Russian family law, seen as a whole, does not allow the different aspects of parental authority to be allocated to each parent, no matter to what degree or extent. Indeed, parental authority can be depicted as a wide circle which encompasses various smaller circles within it, representing the different aspects of the child’s well-being over which the parents may exercise some control: for example, decisions concerning custody, everyday childcare, education, medical treatment, travel abroad, representation before a court, administration of property, etc. It is conceivable that it may be in the child’s best interests for a parent to be stripped of some of these rights and obligations, such as for example that of everyday childcare, while also being able to participate in other aspects of the child’s upbringing. Regrettably, the domestic courts not only rejected the applicant’s counterclaim regarding his access to the child, they completely ignored his more general request to participate in the upbringing of his child.
This inflexibility and harshness of the Russian family law system did not give discretion to domestic courts to make a decision allowing one parent to participate in some aspect(s) of the upbringing of the child while leaving the other parent with a more prominent role.
Furthermore, this inflexibility and stringency of the domestic law did not allow the national courts to endorse two of the most basic principles of the Convention, the principle of effectiveness and the principle of proportionality, in dealing with the participation of the two parents in different aspects of the needs of their child, for the sake of its best interests. Of course, the principle of subsidiarity cannot justify a lack of European scrutiny in ensuring that the requirements of Article 8 are met when a domestic legal system, as in the present case, by the indivisibility of parental authority as a legal concept, does not facilitate any proportionality test or any guarantee for the effective protection of the right to respect for family life. In other words, Russian family law by its stringency and inflexibility forces the domestic courts to apply an “all or nothing” approach regarding parental authority and in this sense can be understood the very existence and operation of Article 69 of the Russian Family Code.
The Court has shown its disapproval towards the inflexibility of Russian family law in two cases, namely Nazarenko v. Russia, no. 39438/13, §§ 64-68, ECHR 2015 (extracts), and V.D. and Others v. Russia, cited above §§ 127-131, by finding a violation of Article 8 of the Convention, because Russian family law did not permit a person who was the guardian of a child but not his or her biological parent to maintain access to the child after the biological parents regained their parental authority. The inflexibility of Russian family law is even more striking in the present case than in those other two cases, since here the applicant is the biological parent of the child.
For all the above reasons there has, in my view, been a violation of Article 8 of the Convention and the applicant would be entitled to an award in respect of non-pecuniary damage, which, however, I will not estimate, since I am in the minority.
Ilya Lyapin v. Russia concerns the termination of parental rights, which the father had hitherto enjoyed at law, being a preliminary step in a legal iter which culminated in the adoption of his child by the child’s stepfather. This latter procedure did not require the applicant’s consent under Russian law. I was not part of the majority which decided to find that there had been no violation of Article 8 of the Convention in respect of Mr Lyapin’s complaint.
I must admit that I was of two minds when assessing the facts of this case because it was apparent that, until the mother had brought the legal proceedings which form the merits of this case, the father had displayed no interest in asserting the rights which are encompassed under the umbrella of parental authority such as the right to participate in the decision-making process concerning his son’s welfare or contact and visiting rights. Nothing in the records of the case shows that he had displayed the slightest interest in following his son’s progress during the years preceding his former wife’s request for termination of his authority. Similarly, it was also evident that he had, for the important formative years of his son’s life, neglected the responsibilities which are at the heart of parental authority (a dynamic obligation to ensure his son’s well-being, to follow his son’s development or contribute towards his maintenance) to the extent that his son did not know him and would have nothing to do with him. Viewed from the perspective of the child, children are holders of rights as well as beneficiaries of protection. Parental authority is as much, if not more, an issue of parental responsibilities than a question of parental rights. This opinion is not, therefore, intended to diminish this child-centred approach.
It must be stated at the outset that the applicant did not contest the adoption of his child. If this had been so, then such contestation would have added another layer to this case, as adoption without the biological father’s knowledge and consent has given rise to many applications before this Court (see Keegan v. Ireland, 26 May 1994, Series A no. 290; Görgülü v. Germany, no. 74969/01, 26 February 2004; and K.A.B. v. Spain, no. 59819/08, 10 April 2012). Yet it is undeniable that the proceedings at issue were a precursor to that adoption.
The Court has repeatedly held that measures which entail severing all parental links with a child would only be justified in exceptional circumstances by the overriding requirement of the child’s best interests (see R. and H. v. the United Kingdom, no. 35348/06, § 81, 31 May 2011). That approach, however, may not apply in all contexts, depending on the nature of the parent-child relationship (see P., C. and S. v. the United Kingdom, no. 56547/00, § 118, ECHR 2002VI). Where the decision is explained in terms of a need to protect the child from danger, the existence of such a danger should be actually established (see, mutatis mutandis, Haase v. Germany, no. 11057/02, § 99, ECHR 2004‑III (extracts)).
In the present case, the domestic courts dismissed the applicant’s request to be granted access to the child, finding that the lack of contact over a prolonged period of seven years had effectively severed all ties (see §§ 18, 20 and 21 of the judgment). In the difficult and turbulent context of family disputes, the domestic courts are best placed to assess the evidence, weigh up the facts and determine the child’s best interests.
However, whilst Article 8 contains no explicit procedural requirements, the decision-making process involved in measures of interference must be fair and ensure due respect for the interests safeguarded by Article 8. In particular, stricter scrutiny is called for as regards any further limitations such as those in the present case (see Sahin  v. Germany [GC], no. 30943/96, § 65, ECHR 2003VIII, and Sommerfeld v. Germany [GC], no. 31871/96, § 63, ECHR 2003VIII). Furthermore, in assessing the quality of the decision-making process, the Court will have to see whether the conclusions of the domestic authorities were based on adequate evidence (see N.P. v. the Republic of Moldova, no. 58455/13, § 69, 6 October 2015).
The domestic court, in reaching its decision, applied Article 69 of the Russian Family Code (see paragraph 16) and decided that the deprivation of parental authority was a measure of last resort applicable only in a situation where it was impossible to protect a child’s rights and interests in another way. It is not for this Court to interpret the provisions of domestic law but from a reading of Article 69 grave faults are considered by the legislator as a basis for the measure applied by the domestic courts, none of which appear to be specific to this particular case.
As to the balancing exercise undertaken by the domestic courts, the District Court focused entirely on the father’s passivity during the intervening years – an important factor, no doubt, but one which, to my mind, in the absence of a direct threat to the child’s well-being on the part of the father, required further evaluation. It has been held by the Court that effective respect for family life requires that future relations between parent and child be determined in the light of all relevant considerations and not by the mere passage of time (see V.D. and Others v. Russia, no. 23608/16, § 116, 23 October 2018).
In this connection, the assessment of the parent-child relationship, conducted exclusively with a 10-year old boy who had not seen his father for the past eight years, was one-sided and reliant on the child’s declarations. The right of a child to express his or her opinion, whilst an important evidential element in family proceedings of this nature, is not of itself decisive of the outcome, especially when the father-son ties were to be completely truncated. The father’s request for a rescheduling of the assessment session was rejected for no apparent justifiable reason by the domestic court. Nor was a limited degree of contact, even if only supervised, contemplated prior to the ultimate decision. Consequently the domestic court did not have any opportunity to properly assess the father and child together. These measures would have provided important evidence in assisting the court in a fair balancing exercise prior to the decision to irreparably terminate family ties, in a situation where there were no risk factors for the child.
Without such a proper assessment, and given the absence of any accompanying risks of physical or psychological danger which the father could have posed for the child, a decision of total severance of family ties solely on the basis of the father’s inactivity is disproportionate and consequently in violation of the applicant’s rights under Article 8 of the Convention.