The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 16 September 1996, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 25613/94) against the French Republic lodged with the Commission under Article 25 by a Moroccan national, Mr Abderrahim El Boujaïdi, on 7 November 1994. The applicant, who was initially designated by the letters A.E.B., subsequently consented to the disclosure of his identity.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby France recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 8 of the Convention.
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 § 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicant, who had been granted legal aid before the Court, stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
On 17 September 1996 Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court, decided, pursuant to Rule 21 § 7, that the present case should be allocated to the Chamber already set up to hear the case of Mehemi v. France (no. 85/1996/704/896). That Chamber included ex officio Mr L.-E. Pettiti, the elected judge of French nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), and Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)). On 7 August 1996, in the presence of the Registrar, Mr Ryssdal had drawn by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr R. Macdonald, Mr C. Russo, Mr I. Foighel, Sir John Freeland, Mr M.A. Lopes Rocha,
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the French Government (“the Government”), the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 § 1 and 38). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the Government’s and the applicant’s memorials on 2 and 17 December 1996 respectively. On 22 January 1997 the Secretary to the Commission informed the Registrar that the Delegate did not intend to reply in writing. On 24 March 1997 the applicant filed claims under Article 50 of the Convention.
On 4 February 1997 the Commission had produced various documents requested by the Registrar on the President’s instructions.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 23 April 1997. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Danelius, Mr Debray and Mr Dobelle.
Mr El Boujaïdi was born in Morocco in 1967 and is a Moroccan national. In 1974 he went with his mother, his three sisters and his brother to join his father in France. He has been living in Morocco since enforcement on 26 August 1993 of an order for his permanent exclusion from French territory.
The applicant went to school in France, where he also worked for several years.
In October 1986 a network of traffickers in heroin imported from the Netherlands was discovered in the Saint-Etienne area (Loire). Eight people, including the applicant, were committed for trial at Saint-Etienne Criminal Court charged with consumption of and trafficking in prohibited drugs.
On 24 March 1988 the Saint-Etienne Criminal Court sentenced
On appeal by the prosecution, the Lyons Court of Appeal, in a judgment of 12 January 1989, increased the applicant’s sentence to six years’ imprisonment, with ineligibility for parole during the first two-thirds thereof, and confirmed the permanent exclusion order. The reasons for the judgment were set out as follows:
“In April 1987, in the course of an inquiry aimed at breaking up a heroin-trafficking network operating in Saint-Etienne, the police arrested [the applicant], who had been named as a supplier by various users.
During questioning by the police and the investigating judge El Boujaïdi admitted that he had been using heroin for several months and that he injected himself with up to 1.5 grams per day. According to his statements, he obtained his supplies from [K., A. and I.], who obtained their supplies in Holland.
Again according to his own statements, El Boujaïdi had been peddling heroin since November 1986 to finance his own consumption. He even stated at one interview that each time he bought five grams he sold on three.
The various users named in the charge as buyers from El Boujaïdi confirmed during the course of the inquiry that they had obtained varying quantities of heroin from him throughout the relevant period, namely from September 1986 to April 1987.
According to the statements made by a number of these buyers, El Boujaïdi was known to drug addicts in Saint-Etienne as a supplier and users could meet him in a bar in Place Chavanelle, where the transactions took place.
El Boujaïdi was found guilty of selling heroin to [B.] in a judgment of Annecy [Criminal] Court of 25 September 1987, which has become final. There is therefore no need to rule on that offence. As regards the remaining charges, and in view of the extreme seriousness of the accused’s conduct, the Court upholds the guilty verdict referred from the court below and sentences El Boujaïdi to six years’ imprisonment, to run concurrently with the thirty-month sentence passed on 25 September 1987 by Annecy Criminal Court ...
The Court orders [the applicant’s] permanent exclusion from French territory.
...”
On 25 March 1991, pleading his family ties in France,

In a judgment of 14 May 1991 the Lyons Court of Appeal declared the application inadmissible on the ground that under Article L. 630-1 of the Public Health Code an alien permanently excluded from French territory could not apply for the relevant order to be rescinded.
Following an attempted robbery, the applicant – who had been released on 19 June 1991 – was arrested and, on 6 December 1992, detained under a committal warrant. For this offence and the fact that he had stayed in France in spite of the permanent exclusion order imposed on him, on 11 January 1993 the Saint-Etienne Criminal Court sentenced him to one year’s imprisonment.
On 25 May 1992 Mr El Boujaïdi again applied to have the exclusion order rescinded. He submitted that the length of time he had been living in France brought him into a category of convicted aliens on whom, under Article L. 630-1 of the Public Health Code, in its new version as amended by the Law of 31 December 1991, an exclusion order could not be imposed. He also argued that on account of his family ties in France the exclusion order was in breach of Article 8 of the Convention.
The Lyons Court of Appeal refused this application on 26 November 1992 in a judgment containing the following reasons:
“The applicant has submitted not only that the order permanently excluding him from French territory should be rescinded in the light of Article 8 of the ... Convention ... but also that, as a matter of fact, he has lived in France since 1974 and the whole of his family lives here too.
…
While Mr El Boujaïdi’s application has become admissible since the repeal by the Law of 31 December 1991 ... of the last paragraph of Article L. 630-1 of the Public Health Code, the applicant cannot rely on the substantive provisions of that legislation, which are not retrospectively applicable to convictions that became final, as in this case, before its entry into force.
His application must accordingly be dealt with on its own merits, on the basis of Article 55-1 of the Criminal Code.
Mr El Boujaïdi has adduced no new evidence since his conviction on 
12 January 1989.

He cannot argue, as an unmarried man, that his exclusion from French territory is an intolerable interference in his family life within the meaning of Article 8 of the Convention ...
The offences he has committed, after two previous convictions for drug offences, make his presence on French territory dangerous for public health and public order.
...”
On 15 March 1994 the Court of Cassation (Criminal Division) dismissed an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant on 30 November 1992 against the judgment of the Lyons Court of Appeal on the ground that Mr El Boujaïdi’s statement of the grounds of appeal did not bear his signature.
On 22 July 1993 Mr El Boujaïdi made a third application requesting the Lyons Court of Appeal to rescind the exclusion order. In support of his appeal – which was based on Article 8 of the Convention – he pleaded changes in his personal circumstances, namely the fact that he was living with a Frenchwoman, Mrs M., and was the father of the child she had given birth to on 6 July.
On 5 August 1993 the social worker at the prison where Mr El Boujaïdi was detained wrote to his lawyer in the following terms:
“...
In reply to your letter of 28 July 1993 concerning the steps taken over the last few months regarding recognition of the child of Mr El Boujaïdi, currently imprisoned, for whose social welfare I am responsible, I can inform you that, at the request of 
Mr El Boujaïdi and [Mrs M.], his cohabitant:
In April I prepared the paperwork for a prenatal recognition of paternity and sent the file both to the town hall of La Talandière and to Assistant State Counsel so that the appropriate submissions could be made to the Registrar of Births, Marriages and Deaths.
As this application had been unsuccessful and the child had been born –
...”
On 26 August 1993 the exclusion order was enforced.
On 20 October 1993, at the French Consulate in Fez, Mr El Boujaïdi recognised paternity of Mrs M.’s child.
In a judgment of 16 December 1993 the Lyons Court of Appeal refused the application to have the exclusion order rescinded on the following grounds:
“Mr El Boujaïdi’s lawyer has produced various documents showing that 
Mr El Boujaïdi met Mrs M. in January 1992, that is at a date when he should not have been present on French territory. Their child was born on 6 July 1993. The circumstances he relies on therefore came into being at a time when he was permanently excluded from French territory.
The exclusion order was imposed to penalise a dangerous trade in heroin. That being so, the Court does not see fit to allow the present application.
...”
Relying mainly on Article 8 of the Convention and the European Court’s case-law, the applicant appealed on points of law. In a judgment of 25 October 1994 the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal on the following grounds:
“The judgment under appeal shows that Abderrahim El Boujaïdi, who is a Moroccan national, was sentenced, inter alia, to be permanently excluded from French territory for an offence against the dangerous drugs legislation, in a judgment of the Lyons Court of Appeal of 12 January 1989, which has become final, and that by an application dated 22 July 1993 he sought to have that exclusion order rescinded.
In rejecting that application the Court of Appeal observed that the family circumstances on which the appellant relies came into being while he was permanently excluded from French territory. It further stated that the purpose of the additional penalty imposed on the appellant was to ‘penalise a dangerous trade in heroin’.
… Article 8 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms does not prohibit limitations prescribed by law on the right to respect for family life, provided that they are necessary for, among other things, public safety, the prevention of disorder and the protection of health. That is the position in the present case.
It follows that the appeal, which amounts to a challenge to the courts’ discretionary power under Article 55-1 of the Criminal Code, then in force, cannot be allowed.
...”
Article L. 630-1 of the Public Health Code formerly provided:
“... the courts ... may order an alien convicted of an offence under Article L. 627 to be permanently excluded from French territory.
Exclusion from French territory shall of itself entail the deportation of the convicted person at the end of his sentence.
...
Where a person, on conviction, is permanently excluded from French territory, he may not request the benefit of the provisions of Article 55-1 of the Criminal Code.”
Law no. 91-1383 of 31 December 1991 replaced the last three paragraphs by the following provisions:
“However, exclusion from French territory shall not be imposed on:
...
a convicted alien who is the father or mother of a French child resident in France, provided that he or she is vested with or shares parental authority over that child or provides for its needs;
...
Nor shall exclusion from French territory be imposed on a convicted alien who can prove either:
that he has been normally resident in France since reaching the age of 10 at the most or for more than fifteen years; or
that he has been lawfully resident in France for more than ten years.
...
Exclusion from French territory shall of itself entail the convicted person’s deportation, where necessary after the end of his prison sentence.”
Article L. 630-1 was repealed by Law no. 92-1336 of 16 December 1992.
Article 55-1 of the Criminal Code provides:
“...
Any person who has incurred a disability ... as an automatic consequence of a criminal conviction or on whom such disability ... has been imposed by the convicting court in its judgment ... may request the court which convicted him ... to rescind the disability ..., in whole or in part, or vary its duration.
…”
Mr El Boujaïdi applied to the Commission on 7 November 1994. He submitted that his permanent exclusion from French territory was in breach of Article 8 of the Convention.
On 17 January 1996 the Commission (Second Chamber) declared the application (no. 25613/94) admissible. In its report of 26 June 1996 (Article 31), it expressed the opinion by eleven votes to two that there had been no violation of that provision. The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the dissenting opinion contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
In his memorial the applicant submitted “that there [had] been a violation of Article 8 of the Convention and that the Court should find against the French Government”.
The Government submitted “that the Court should reject the application”.