The case originated in two applications (nos. 48151/11 and 77769/13) against the French Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 23 July 2011 and 6 December 2013 respectively. The applicants in application no. 48151/11 are five legal entities registered in France (see paragraph 6 below) and 99 individuals, including one Georgian national (see Annex). The applicant in application no. 77769/13 is Ms Jeannie Longo.
The applicants in application no. 48151/11 were represented by Mr R. Palao, a lawyer practising in Avignon. Four of them (FNASS, the UNPF, Mr Da Silva and Mr Kerckhof) were represented by Mr L. Misson, a lawyer practising in Liège (Belgium). Ms Longo was represented by Ms C. Ravaz, a lawyer practising in Toulon. The French Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Alabrune, Director of Legal Affairs at the Ministry of European and Foreign Affairs.
The applicants in application no. 48151/11 are sports unions and professional athletes. They alleged that the requirement as to whereabouts, imposed on a “testing pool” of athletes designated by the national antidoping agency for the purposes of carrying out unannounced doping tests, infringed their rights under Article 8 of the Convention and Article 2 of Protocol No. 4. Ms Longo alleged a violation of Article 8 of the Convention.
On 26 June 2013 the Government were given notice of the complaints lodged by the applicants in application no. 48151/11 under Article 8 and Article 2 of Protocol No. 4. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The Georgian Government were informed of their right to take part in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1) but did not reply. On 18 June 2014 the Government were given notice of the complaint under Article 8 lodged by the applicant in application no. 77769/13, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3. In particular, the part of the application lodged by Mr Ciprelli, the applicant’s husband, who had also applied to the Court on 6 December 2013, was declared inadmissible under the provision of the Rules of Court cited above.
On 8 October 2013 the World Anti-Doping Agency (hereafter “WADA”) was given leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
The applicants are the National Federation of Sportspersons’ Associations and Unions (Fédération nationale des associations et syndicats de sportifs – hereafter “FNASS”), the National Rugby Players’ Union (Syndicat national des joueurs de rugby – hereafter “Provale”), the National Professional Footballers’ Union (Union nationale des footballeurs professionnels – hereafter “the UNFP”), the Professional Handball Players’ Association (Association des joueurs professionnels de handball – hereafter “the AJPH”), and the National Basketball Players’ Union (Syndicat national des basketteurs – hereafter “the SNB”). FNASS, which was established in 1992, is a federation of trade unions representing professional athletes, which today comprises the unions representing track and field athletes (SAF), basketball players (SNB), cyclists (UNCP), footballers (UNFP), handball players (AJPH) and rugby players (Provale). It represents around 3,500 professional athletes in France. Its aim is to defend the individual and collective rights and the pecuniary and non-pecuniary interests of professional athletes in all disciplines. The remaining 99 applicants are professional handball, football, rugby and basketball players.
On 14 April 2010 the Government issued Order no. 2010-379 on athletes’ health, bringing the Sports Code into line with the principles of the World Anti-Doping Code (hereafter “the Order of 14 April 2010”). The Order was aimed, firstly, at bringing the provisions of the Sports Code into line with the most recent version of the World Anti-Doping Code (hereafter “the WADC”), which entered into force on 1 January 2009 (see paragraph 45 below) following the Third World Conference on Doping in Sport held in Madrid in November 2007 (Title I) and, secondly, to clarify certain provisions of the Sports Code concerning athletes’ health and efforts to combat doping (Title II). The provisions of the Order were ratified by Law no. 2012-158 of 1 February 2012 on strengthening sports ethics and athletes’ rights. They were codified in Articles L. 232-2 et seq. of the Sports Code, which has undergone several amendments since.
Article 3 of the Order (Article L. 232-5 of the Sports Code) set forth the tasks and powers of the French Anti-Doping Agency (Agence française de lutte contre le dopage – hereafter “the AFLD”) and provided as follows:
“I. – In paragraph I of Article L. 232-5 of the Code, sub-paragraphs 1 to 13 shall be replaced by the following provisions:
(1) It shall define an annual programme of tests;
...
(3)  In the case of athletes subject to the whereabouts requirement referred to in Article L. 232-15, it shall carry out tests subject to the conditions laid down in Articles L. 232-12 to L. 232-16:
(a)  during sporting events organised by federations approved or licensed by the federations to which powers have been delegated;
(b)  during the international sporting events defined in Article L. 230-2 with the agreement of the competent international body or, failing that, the World Anti-Doping Agency;
(c)  during periods of training in preparation for the sporting events referred to in Article L. 230-3;
(d)  independently of the sporting events referred to in Article L. 230-3 and the periods of training in preparation for them;
...”
Article 6 of the Order (Article L. 232-13-1 of the Sports Code, see paragraph 63 below) provided, in particular, that individualised anti-doping testing of athletes included in the testing pool could be carried out at training and sporting venues, but also “at any location chosen with the athlete’s agreement at which the test can be carried out in compliance with the athlete’s right to respect for his or her privacy, including, at his or her request, at home.”
Article 7 of the Order added the following:
“Article L. 232-15 of the Code shall read as follows:
The athletes in the testing pool, designated for a period of one year by the French Anti-Doping Agency, shall be required to provide accurate and up-to-date information on their whereabouts for the purposes of conducting the tests referred to in Article L. 232-5. The athletes concerned shall be:
(1)   those whose names are on the list of elite athletes or the list of promising young athletes (Espoir) within the meaning of the present Code, or athletes whose names have featured on one of those lists for at least one of the past three years;
(2)  professional athletes who are licensed by the approved federations or who have been engaged in professional sport for at least one of the past three years;
(3)  athletes who have been the subject of a disciplinary sanction on the basis of Articles L. 232-9, L. 232-10 or L. 232-17 during the past three years.
The information concerned may be computerised by the Agency with a view to organising tests. Computerised processing of information concerning athletes’ whereabouts is authorised by a decision of the Agency’s Board, taken after consultation with the National Commission on Data Processing and Civil Liberties.”
In an application registered on 1 June 2010 some of the applicants (unions and twenty-four individual applicants), together with other athletes, requested the Conseil d’État to set aside the Order, and in particular Articles 3 and 7 thereof (see paragraphs 8 and 10 above). With regard to the whereabouts requirement provided for in those Articles, they complained of a “particularly intrusive” testing system which compelled athletes in the testing pool to provide the AFLD with information concerning their places of residence, training and competition so that they could be located at any time, and to undergo immediate tests ordered on a discretionary basis and without advance notice. They complained in particular of the fact that the tests could be carried out independently of sporting events and outside training periods, that is, during periods when athletes were no longer at the disposal of their employer but were on holiday, resting or on sick leave or leave following an occupational injury. They argued that Article 3 infringed their freedom of movement by requiring them to give notice of their whereabouts on an ongoing basis, including during non-professional activities, and also infringed their right to a normal family life and their individual freedom as athletes. In their view, the unconditional implementation of Article 3(I)(3)(d) of the Order, allowing tests to be carried out independently of sporting events and outside training periods, meant that between 6 a.m. and 9 p.m. (the testing period laid down by Article L. 232-14 of the Sports Code, see paragraph 64 below) the athletes in the testing pool faced the permanent prospect of physically intrusive tests. This entailed systematically giving advance notice of their schedule, in breach of the right to establish relationships with their peers and the right to the peaceful enjoyment of their private lives. Lastly, the applicants complained of a breach of the principle of equality, as the whereabouts requirement for the purposes of anti-doping tests was confined to athletes included in the testing pool.
In a judgment of 24 February 2011 the Conseil d’État rejected the application in the following terms:
“... As regards Articles 3 and 7 of the impugned Order:
These provisions provide a strict framework governing the locations where AFLD testing of athletes in the ‘testing pool’ may take place, and the period during which such tests may be carried out. They require the athletes in question, in view of the demands of efforts to combat doping, to provide accurate and up-to-date information on their whereabouts for the purposes of organising tests, including unannounced tests, with a view to the effective detection of the use of doping substances, which can be detected only for a short time after being taken despite having lasting effects. Hence, Articles 3 and 7 of the impugned order, which do not hamper athletes’ freedom of movement, interfere with their right to respect for their private and family life as guaranteed by Article 8, and with individual freedoms, only to the extent that is necessary and proportionate to the general-interest aims pursued by efforts to combat doping, namely to protect athletes’ health and to ensure fair and ethical sporting competitions. In any event, the order under challenge also complies with the provisions of the International Convention against Doping in Sport, which do not have direct effect.
The principle of equality does not prevent the regulatory authority from laying down different rules for different situations or from derogating from equality on generalinterest grounds, provided that, in both cases, the resulting difference in treatment is proportionate to the purpose of the rule establishing it. Athletes whose names feature on the list of elite sportsmen and women or the list of promising young athletes, which include amateur athletes and licensed professionals who may be required to notify their whereabouts with a view to anti-doping tests, are not in the same situation as other athletes, in view of the level at which they compete and the greater risk of doping such competition may entail. Likewise, athletes who have been the subject of disciplinary sanctions for doping during the past three years are not in the same situation as other athletes. Furthermore, athletes belonging to the ‘testing pool’ are not in the same situation as persons in other professions and may therefore be made subject to special doping control measures without the principle of equality being breached.”
In their initial and additional observations of 22 October 2013 and 17 February 2014 the Government provided the Court with the following information concerning the situation of the individual applicants with regard to the impugned legislation.
(a)  Eight of the ninety-nine applicants had never been included in the AFLD testing pool (Mr Millo-Chluski, Mr Nallet, Mr Traille, Mr Mas, Mr Domingo, Mr Dusautoir, Mr Heymans and Mr Para).
(b)  Of the twenty-four applicants who had participated in the domestic proceedings, none had belonged to the testing pool on the date on which the application was lodged with the Court.
(c)  Eleven applicants who had not participated in the domestic proceedings had belonged to the testing pool on the date on which the application was lodged (Mr Da Silva, Mr Gomis, Mr Ho You Fat, Mr Perquis, Mr Congre, Mr Coulibaly, Mr Cavalli, Mr Cabarry, Mr Huget, Mr Honrubia and Mr Gharbi). According to the Government, these athletes had been included in the testing pool in September and October 2010. They had all undergone testing, some of them between two and eight times. Nine of them had been issued with one or two warnings. One (Mr Huget) had received three warnings, leading to the institution of disciplinary proceedings and to an administrative penalty which he had not contested before the Conseil d’État. Of the eleven aforementioned applicants, six had had their inclusion in the testing pool renewed following two decisions of the AFLD Board of 12 and 25 September 2013. Mr Coulibaly, Mr Cavalli, Mr Gomis, Mr Cabarry and Mr Huget had been removed from the list.
(d)  With regard to Mr Kerckhof, the Government stated that he had been included in the testing pool on 7 November 2009 and had been kept on the list for a further year from 17 September 2010. During that time he had been found to be in breach of the whereabouts requirement on one occasion.
In a letter of 22 August 2016 the Government informed the Court that, by decisions of the AFLD of 4 September and 22 October 2014, five of the six athletes still belonging to the AFLD’s testing pool in 2013 (Mr Honrubia, Mr Perquis, Mr Congre, Mr Da Silva and Mr Gharbi, see paragraph 13 (c) above) had been removed from the list at their request, on the grounds that their names had been on it for four years.
In their observations in reply of 3 December 2013 the eight applicants who were not in the AFLD testing pool (see paragraph 13 (a) above) stated that they were in the testing pool of the International Rugby Board (IRB). They stated that they were required to declare their whereabouts in France on the same basis as the applicants included in the AFLD testing pool and that the AFLD, which had subsidiary powers in that regard, was empowered to impose sanctions on them.
The twenty-four applicants who had applied to the Conseil d’État also reported as follows on their situation at the time of lodging of the application on 23 July 2011.
(a)  Four of them (Mr Pierre, Mr Sissokho, Mr Psaume and Mr Talmont) had been included in the testing pool in 2010, and had remained in it for a further twelve months from 11 June 2010. They produced a letter from the AFLD dated 17 June 2011 asking the President of the Professional Football League to send a list of players by 2 September 2011 who should be included or retained in the testing pool. However, they did not produce the updated list of athletes who had been retained in the pool.
(b)  A further four (Mr Busselier, Mr Ternel, Mr Kiour and Mr Haon) had been included in the testing pool in 2009 or 2010 and had been retained for another twelve months from 23 September 2010. In a letter dated 23 September 2010 to the President of the National Handball League and the President of the French Handball Federation, forwarding the updated list of athletes in the testing pool, the President of the AFLD pointed out that the athletes in question were required to declare their whereabouts every day in accordance with decision no. 54 of 18 October 2007 (see paragraphs 69 and 70 below).
(c)  A further thirteen applicants who had been included in the testing pool in 2009 submitted that they had been included or retained in the pool on 11 June 2010 for a minimum twelve-month period (Mr Strunc, Mr Soliman, Mr Dondon, Mr Jeanneau, Mr Melody, Mr Kerckhof, Mr Linehan, Mr Maynier, Mr Ouattara, Mr Tsagarakis, Mr Moncade, Mr Pons and Mr Toffin). They produced a letter from the AFLD to the President of the National Basketball League dated 11 June 2010, asking the latter to send a list of players by 30 August 2010 who should be included or retained in the testing pool. The applicants did not furnish the updated list of the athletes retained in the testing pool (however, as regards Mr Kerckhof, see the Government’s observations at paragraph 13 (d) above).
(d)  Three applicants had been included in the pool in 2009 for a twelvemonth period (Mr Ayed, Mr Guilbert and Mr Dearlove).
The remaining applicants stated that they had been included in the testing pool following the Conseil d’État ruling and had joined the application to the Court in their capacity as union members. They did not provide any documents demonstrating that they belonged to the testing pool.
In additional observations of 5 December 2013 Mr Da Silva’s lawyer informed the Court that his client had appealed in the following terms to the President of the AFLD against the decision to retain him in the testing pool for an eighteen-month period from 26 September 2013:
 “... I was first included in the testing pool on 20 September 2010, in other words a full three years ago, and you have just retained my name on the list until 2015 at least, making a total of five years! This is completely unacceptable and disproportionate.
I have complied with all the obligations entailed in belonging to the testing pool. This has affected my family life and had a considerable impact on my children, who often see inspectors turn up on my doorstep at 6 a.m. I have always provided details of my whereabouts in good time, have never missed a test and, in three years, have never received the slightest warning, still less tested positive for any banned substance ...
Can you kindly explain [the] scientific reasons for keeping me in the testing pool? Does the fact that I’m nearing the end of my career make me a potential cheat? ... Keeping me in the testing pool for another 18 months stigmatises me in the eyes of my teammates as a potential cheat and is not acceptable.
I agree that it’s necessary to tackle doping in sport, but not to the detriment of MY life. ... I am therefore asking you to review your position on my inclusion in the testing pool: keeping the same person in the pool for five consecutive years is not an effective way of tackling doping.”
The applicant, who was born in 1958, is a French national. She is an international racing cyclist who is on the list of elite athletes and has set numerous world records. She stated that she had undergone more than 1,200 anti-doping tests in the course of her career. She maintained that she had undergone unannounced tests abroad (in the United States, China, Switzerland and Australia) as well as regular tests at World Championship and Olympic events.
By a decision of the AFLD’s director of testing of 14 March 2008 the applicant was designated as one of the athletes in the testing pool and subject to individualised testing. At that time athletes could be included in the testing pool for an indeterminate period.
The Order of 14 April 2010, cited above (see paragraph 10), laid down a one-year time-limit for inclusion in the pool of athletes to be tested.
By a decision of 10 June 2010 taken under the transitional rules, the applicant was re-registered as belonging to the testing pool.
In 2011, following three failures to comply with the rules on whereabouts, the applicant gave evidence before a disciplinary board of the French Cycling Federation. She was cleared of misconduct on the grounds that, at the time of the most recent failure to comply, in the United States in June 2011, she had no longer been in the testing pool and had thus no longer been liable for testing.
In a letter of 20 December 2011 the AFLD invited the applicant to submit observations on her possible re-inclusion in the testing pool. In a letter, and subsequently during an interview with the President of the AFLD at which her lawyer was present, the applicant expressed her objections. She argued, among other things, that she was included in the testing pool of the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI). In an email of 16 March 2012 the UCI informed the AFLD that the applicant was no longer in the UCI testing pool.
In the meantime, on 10 February 2012, the applicant’s husband and coach was placed under investigation for importing prohibited goods, infringements of the regulations on the trading and use of poisonous substances, and importing doping substances without duly substantiated medical reasons.
On 19 March 2012 the AFLD’s director of testing included the applicant in the testing pool. She lodged an application for reconsideration of that decision which was rejected on 22 May 2012.
A few days previously the President of the French Cycling Federation (Fédération française de cyclisme) had contacted the President of the AFLD in connection with the applicant’s planned selection for the London Olympics, expressing regret at the time taken to include the applicant in the testing pool.
In a decision taken on 27 September 2012, anticipating a Conseil d’État decision of 10 October 2012 (CE, no. 357097) to the effect that the director of testing did not have power to decide on the inclusion of an athlete in the testing pool (see paragraph 60 below), the AFLD Board, in order to prevent a legal vacuum that might adversely affect the implementation of checks on athletes’ whereabouts, approved the applicant’s inclusion in the testing pool.
On 11 February 2013 the applicant and her husband brought proceedings in the Paris Criminal Court against the AFLD and three of its senior officials, accusing them of forwarding confidential information to the newspaper L’Équipe concerning the disciplinary proceedings instituted in 2011 and the ongoing criminal proceedings.
In a letter dated 20 March 2013 the applicant contested the possibility of her renewed inclusion in the testing pool.
By a decision of the AFLD Board of 28 March 2013 the applicant was again designated for inclusion in the “testing pool”. The decision contained the following reasoning:
“She maintains ... that, since the entry into force of the Order of 14 April 2010, inclusion in the testing pool is possible only for a non-renewable one-year period. This argument has to be dismissed on the grounds that the provisions of the Sports Code concerning the whereabouts requirement must be read in the light of the ‘principles’ established by the World Anti-Doping Code ... Article 2.4 of the World Anti-Doping Code lays down the principle of checks on whereabouts and possible sanctions for violations of the resulting requirements in the event of three failures to comply ‘within a twelve-month period’. Moreover, limiting inclusion in the pool to a non-renewable one-year period could render the whereabouts checks ineffective; this is clearly not what the legislature intended.”
On 28 December 2012 and 28 May 2013 the applicant lodged an application with the Conseil d’État for judicial review of the AFLD’s decisions of 27 September 2012 and 28 March 2013. She argued, in particular, that the rules on whereabouts and the unannounced testing of athletes in the testing pool were contrary to Article 8 of the Convention, and complained of being made subject to these rules for several years.
In the meantime, in a memorial of 11 March 2013, the applicant requested the Conseil d’État to refer the following question to the Constitutional Council for a preliminary ruling on constitutionality with regard to the whereabouts requirement:
 “Do the provisions of Articles L. 232-5-3 and L. 232-15 of the Sports Code establishing rules on the whereabouts and unannounced testing of athletes in the testing pool infringe the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, in the light of Article 34 of the Constitution, Articles 2 and 4 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (freedom of movement, respect for private life and inviolability of the home), Article 66 of the Constitution (‘No one may be detained arbitrarily. The judicial authority, as the guardian of individual freedoms, shall ensure compliance with this principle ...’) and, finally, the principle of equality before the law?”
In a decision of 29 May 2013 the Conseil d’État decided not to refer the question. It observed that the provisions complained of did not call into question the individual freedom which Article 66 of the Constitution placed under the protection of the ordinary courts (arbitrary detention), but fell within the jurisdiction of the administrative courts (see the position of the Court of Cassation on this issue at paragraph 73 below).
In a judgment of 18 December 2013 the Conseil d’État joined the two applications of 28 December 2012 and 28 May 2013 and rejected them, after deciding not to refer a second question for a preliminary ruling on constitutionality. With regard to the alleged violation of the right to respect for private and family life, the Conseil d’État found as follows:
 “... Firstly, the aforementioned provisions of the Sports Code relating to the obligations of athletes in the ‘testing pool’ do not infringe the right to freedom of movement or the equivalent right under Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 to the [Convention]. They lay down strict rules for determining the locations where testing of athletes in the ‘testing pool’ may be carried out and the periods and hours during which these tests may be conducted, and preclude the testing of athletes at home without their consent. The computer processing provided for in Article L. 232-15 for the purposes of organising tests is subject to the Law of 6 January 1978 on data processing, files and freedoms. While the arrangements thus defined place restrictions on athletes, notably by requiring them to provide accurate and up-to-date information on their whereabouts, the legislative provisions at issue are justified by the demands of efforts to combat doping. These entail, in particular, the ability to carry out unannounced tests in order effectively to detect the use of certain performance-enhancing drugs which can be detected only for a short time after being taken despite having more lasting effects. Hence, these provisions interfere with the right of the athletes concerned to respect for their private and family life, as guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention, only to the extent that is necessary and proportionate to the general-interest aims pursued by efforts to combat doping, namely to protect athletes’ health and to ensure fair and ethical sporting competitions. ...
Seventhly, although the provisions of L. 232-15 of the Sports Code, which provide that inclusion in the ‘testing pool’ is ‘for a period of one year’, require the [AFLD] to review periodically the composition of the testing pool, in order to ensure that the athletes are not subjected for unduly long periods and without specific reasons to the constraints linked to the requirement to provide accurate and up-to-date information on their whereabouts, those provisions do not have the purpose or effect of prohibiting the Agency from designating athletes who have already been included in the ‘testing pool’. Thus, the argument that Article L. 232-15 of itself prevents the Agency from designating an athlete previously included in the testing pool must be dismissed.”
In a judgment delivered in 2014 the Paris Criminal Court dismissed the applicant’s action against the AFLD.
By a decision of 9 April 2015 the AFLD removed the applicant from the list of athletes in the testing pool.
In a judgment of 9 March 2017, following proceedings whose fairness he challenged before the Court (see paragraph 4 above), the applicant’s husband was sentenced to one year’s imprisonment, suspended, for importing erythropoietin (EPO).
In 1967 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe (“the Committee of Ministers”) adopted Resolution (67) 12 on the Doping of Athletes. This was followed in 1979, 1984 and 1988 by three recommendations, the most recent of which provided for the introduction of out-of-competition doping controls without prior notice (Recommendation No. R (88) 12 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on the Institution of Doping Controls without Warning outside Competitions).
Subsequently, the Anti-Doping Convention (ETS No. 135, hereafter “the Council of Europe Convention”) was adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 16 November 1989. This convention, which is the European reference instrument, has been ratified by all the Council of Europe member States and by five non-member States (Australia, Belarus, Canada, Morocco and Tunisia). It lays down a number of common rules and standards on the basis of which the States Parties undertake to adopt the necessary harmonisation measures at national and international level in order to effectively combat doping in sport. A Monitoring Group was set up to monitor implementation of the Convention; its activities involve working with the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA, established in 1999, see paragraph 45 below) and the international sports federations. There is also an Ad Hoc European Committee for the World Anti-Doping Agency (CAHAMA), which is a committee of experts responsible for coordinating the positions of the European countries acting on behalf of WADA.
The preamble to the Council of Europe Convention highlights the ethical, moral and health-related aspects of efforts to combat doping:
 “... Concerned by the growing use of doping agents and methods by sportsmen and sportswomen throughout sport and the consequences thereof for the health of participants and the future of sport. ...
Aware that public authorities and the voluntary sports organisations have complementary responsibilities to combat doping in sport, notably to ensure the proper conduct, on the basis of the principle of fair play, of sports events and to protect the health of those that take part in them.”
Point 3 of Article 7 of the Council of Europe Convention, entitled “Co-operation with sports organisations on measures to be taken by them”, reads as follows:
 “Moreover, the Parties shall encourage their sports organisations:
(a) to introduce, on an effective scale, doping controls not only at, but also without advance warning at any appropriate time outside, competitions, such controls to be conducted in a way which is equitable for all sportsmen and sportswomen and which include testing and retesting of persons selected, where appropriate, on a random basis ...”
An Additional Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention was opened for signature on 12 September 2002 and entered into force on 1 April 2004. Its aim is to ensure the mutual recognition of doping controls and to reinforce the application of the Convention by means of a binding monitoring mechanism.
At the fourteenth Council of Europe conference of Ministers responsible for sport, held on 29 November 2016, the Ministers adopted Resolution No. 1.1 on the role of the governments in addressing emerging challenges in the fight against doping in sport at national and international level. The resolution recognised the considerable challenges that had recently threatened the integrity of the international anti-doping system and observed the need to protect athletes against forced or encouraged doping schemes and to provide them with proper anti-doping education. It reaffirmed the Ministers’ support for WADA as the “global anti-doping regulator responsible for standard-setting and monitoring”, and called for a strengthening of WADA’s capacity. It welcomed the enhanced cooperation between the Council of Europe and WADA, and encouraged the Monitoring Group set up to monitor the implementation of the 1989 Convention to continue its standard-setting work in order to offer practical guidance to the States Parties on addressing emerging anti-doping issues in compliance with the Convention. The Ministers recognised that all anti-doping organisations must comply with the rules of good governance and the principle of proportionality, while respecting the fundamental rights of the individuals subjected to the anti-doping regulations, particularly when it came to data protection.
Anti-doping activities took on a new dimension in the early twentyfirst century. The World Anti-Doping Agency (hereafter “WADA”) was established in the wake of the scandal that followed the discovery at the 1998 Tour de France of large-scale trafficking in doping substances involving one team and several well-known cyclists. WADA is an independent international organisation and a foundation under Swiss private law. It is composed of and financed by the Olympic Movement and governments. It draws up the WADC, which was adopted in 2003 and came into force on 1 January 2004 and which was subsequently revised in 2009 and 2015. WADA coordinates and supervises worldwide anti-doping activities in all sporting disciplines, with a view to harmonised implementation of a common set of general principles at international level, encompassing the definition of doping offences, the list of prohibited substances, tests, sanctions and the system of exemptions for therapeutic use.
The WADC is the instrument for bringing consistency to the antidoping practices of the different international federations and States. The introductory part spells out the “fundamental rationale for the World Anti-Doping Code” as follows:
“Anti-doping programs seek to preserve what is intrinsically valuable about sport. This intrinsic value is often referred to as ‘the spirit of sport’. It is the essence of Olympism, the pursuit of human excellence through the dedicated perfection of each person’s natural talents. It is how we play true. The spirit of sport is the celebration of the human spirit, body and mind, and is reflected in values we find in and through sport, including: ethics, fair play and honesty, health, excellence in performance, character and education, fun and joy, teamwork, dedication and commitment, respect for rules and laws, respect for self and other participants, courage, community and solidarity. Doping is fundamentally contrary to the spirit of sport.”
Article 2 of the WADC lists violations of the anti-doping rules, including the rule on athletes’ whereabouts, which at the relevant time read as follows:
 “2.4 Violation of applicable requirements regarding Athlete availability for OutofCompetition Testing, including failure to file required whereabouts information and missed tests which are declared based on rules which comply with the International Standard for Testing. Any combination of three missed tests and/or filing failures within an eighteen-month period as determined by Anti-Doping Organizations with jurisdiction over the Athlete shall constitute an anti-doping rule violation.”
As worded at the relevant time, Article 5 of the WADC concerning testing specified that the national anti-doping organisations and international federations had jurisdiction in the matter. The relevant parts read as follows:
 “5.1.1 [The above-mentioned organisations shall p]lan and conduct an effective number of In-Competition and Out-of-Competition tests on Athletes over whom they have jurisdiction, including but not limited to Athletes in their respective Registered Testing Pools. Each International Federation shall establish a Registered Testing Pool for International-Level Athletes in its sport, and each National Anti-Doping Organization shall establish a national Registered Testing Pool for Athletes who are present in that National Anti-Doping Organization’s country or who are nationals, residents, license-holders or members of sport organizations of that country. In accordance with Article 14.3, any Athlete included in a Registered Testing Pool shall be subject to the whereabouts requirements set out in the International Standard for Testing.
1.2 Except in exceptional circumstances all Out-of-Competition Testing shall be No Advance Notice.
1.3 Make Target Testing a priority. ...”
In its wording at the time of the events, Article 10.3.3 of the WADC, entitled “Sanctions on Individuals”, provided as follows:
“For violations of Article 2.4 (Whereabouts Filing Failures and/or Missed Tests), the period of Ineligibility shall be at a minimum one (1) year and at a maximum two (2) years based on the Athlete’s degree of fault.”
Article 14.3, entitled “Athletes whereabouts information” provided at the relevant time that the International Federation and the national antidoping organisation were to coordinate the identification of athletes and the collecting of current location information and submit them to WADA.
The revised version of the WADC, which entered into force on 1 January 2015, contained numerous amendments. Those of interest in the context of the present applications are as follows. Under the revised Article 2.4, a violation is established where three “whereabouts failures” occur within a twelve-month period (rather than eighteen months as previously, see paragraph 47 above). The revised Article 5.2 now provides that “[a]ny Athlete may be required to provide a Sample at any time and at any place” if, according to the comment on the Article by WADA itself, the antidoping organisation has a serious and specific suspicion that the athlete may be engaged in doping.
The provisions of the WADC operate in conjunction with five international standards. Section 11 of the standard on testing (“Athlete whereabouts Requirements”), as in force at the material time, read, inter alia, as follows:
 “11.1 Objective/general principles
1.1 It is recognised and accepted that (a) No Advance Notice Out-of-Competition Testing is at the core of effective Doping Control; and (b) without accurate information as to an Athlete’s whereabouts, such Testing can be inefficient and often impossible.
[11.1.1 Comment: Such recognition is the fundamental rationale underlying Code Article 2.4 and this Section 11 of the International Standard for Testing.]
1.2 Therefore, in addition to developing a Test Distribution Plan in accordance with Section 4 of this International Standard, each IF [International Federation] and NADO [National Anti-Doping Organisation] shall create a Registered Testing Pool of Athletes ... Athletes in a Registered Testing Pool shall be subject to and required to comply with the Athlete whereabouts requirements set out in this Section 11: see Code Article 14.3.
1.3 An Athlete in a Registered Testing Pool is required to make a quarterly Whereabouts Filing that provides accurate and complete information about the Athlete’s whereabouts during the forthcoming quarter, including identifying where he/she will be living, training and competing during that quarter, so that he/she can be located for Testing at any time during that quarter: see Clause 11.3. A failure to do so amounts to a Filing Failure and therefore a Whereabouts Failure for purposes of Code Article 2.4.
1.4 An Athlete in a Registered Testing Pool is also required to specify in his/her Whereabouts Filing, for each day in the forthcoming quarter, one specific 60-minute time slot where he/she will be available at a specified location for Testing: see Clause 11.4. This does not limit in any way the Athlete’s obligation to be available for Testing at any time and place. Nor does it limit his/her obligation to provide the information specified in Clause 11.3 as to his/her whereabouts outside of that 60minute time slot. However, if the Athlete is not available for Testing at such location during the 60-minute time slot specified for that day in his/her Whereabouts Filing, and has not updated his/her Whereabouts Filing prior to that 60-minute time slot to provide an alternative time slot/location for that day, that failure shall amount to a Missed Test and shall therefore constitute a Whereabouts Failure for purposes of Code Article 2.4.
[11.1.4 Comment: The purpose of the 60-minute time slot is to strike a balance between the need to locate the Athlete for Testing and the impracticality and unfairness of making Athletes potentially accountable for a Missed Test every time they depart from their previously-declared routine. ... After extensive consultation with stakeholders with substantial whereabouts experience, the view was taken that the best way to maximize the chances of finding the Athlete at any time, while providing a reasonable and appropriate mitigation of ‘24/7’ Missed Test liability, was to combine the best elements of each system, i.e. requiring disclosure of whereabouts information on a ‘24/7’ basis, while limiting exposure to a Missed Test to a 60-minute time slot ...]”
Under heading 11.3 (“Whereabouts Filing Requirements”), Clause 11.3.1 stated that the athletes concerned had to provide the International Federation or the national anti-doping organisation with the following information: a complete mailing address; details of any disability; specific confirmation of their consent to the sharing of their whereabouts information with other organisations having authority to test them; for each day during the following quarter, the full address of the place where they would be residing (for example, home, temporary lodgings, hotel, and so on); and for each day during the following quarter, the name and address of each location where they would train, work or conduct any other regular activity (for instance, school), as well as the usual time-frames for such regular activities. Clause 11.3.2 provided that the whereabouts information also had to include, for each day during the following quarter, one specific sixty-minute time slot between 6 a.m. and 11 p.m. each day during which the athlete concerned would be available and accessible for testing at a specific location. The comment on this clause stated that the athletes concerned could choose which location to nominate for this sixty-minute time slot: it could be their place of residence, training or competition, or it could be another location (for instance, work or school). A failure to be available for testing at the specified location during the specified time slot would be regarded as a missed test. Clause 11.3.6 specified that athletes could delegate the filing of the information to a third party.
Under heading 11.4 (“Availability for Testing”), Clause 11.4.1 provided as follows:
“11.4.1 An Athlete in a Registered Testing Pool must specifically be present and available for Testing on any given day in the relevant quarter for the 60-minute time slot specified for that day in his/her Whereabouts Filing, at the location that the Athlete has specified for that time slot in such filing.”
The International Convention against Doping in Sport, adopted under the auspices of UNESCO (hereafter “the UNESCO Convention”) came into force on 1 February 2007. The preamble to this Convention reads as follows:
 “... Conscious that sport should play an important role in the protection of health, ...
Concerned by the use of doping by athletes in sport and the consequences thereof for their health, the principle of fair play, the elimination of cheating and the future of sport, ...
Mindful also of the influence that elite athletes have on youth, ...
Aware that public authorities and the organizations responsible for sport have complementary responsibilities to prevent and combat doping in sport, notably to ensure the proper conduct, on the basis of the principle of fair play, of sports events and to protect the health of those that take part in them, ...
Recognizing that the elimination of doping in sport is dependent in part upon progressive harmonization of anti-doping standards and practices in sport and cooperation at the national and global levels, ...”
As the WADC is not binding on States because the instruments adopted by WADA are governed by private law, it was decided to draw up an international Convention in order to provide an internationally recognised legal framework allowing States to incorporate the Code into their domestic legislation. The UNESCO Convention has hitherto been ratified by France and by 186 other States. Article 4 stipulates that the provisions of the WADC are not an integral part of the Convention and do not have direct effect in national law. It states that “[i]n order to coordinate the implementation, at the national and international levels, of the fight against doping in sport, States Parties commit themselves to the principles of the Code as the basis for the measures provided for in Article 5 of this Convention.” Articles 3 and 5 provide that States undertake to “adopt appropriate measures at the national and international levels which are consistent with the principles of the Code” and that “such measures may include legislation, regulation, policies or administrative practices”. According to Article 12, States are to encourage the implementation of doping controls in a manner consistent with the Code, including noadvance-notice and out-of-competition testing. Article 19 encourages States to implement education and training programmes on anti-doping, both for athletes and for the sporting community in general, who should be provided with information on “the harm of doping to the ethical values of sport” and “the health consequences of doping”.
Articles 6 and 165 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) provide as follows:
 “The Union shall have competence to carry out actions to support, coordinate or supplement the actions of the Member States. The areas of such action shall, at European level, be: ...
(e) education, vocational training, youth and sport; ”
 “1. ... The Union shall contribute to the promotion of European sporting issues, while taking account of the specific nature of sport, its structures based on voluntary activity and its social and educational function.
Union action shall be aimed at: ...
- developing the European dimension in sport, by promoting fairness and openness in sporting competitions and cooperation between bodies responsible for sports, and by protecting the physical and moral integrity of sportsmen and sportswomen, especially the youngest sportsmen and sportswomen.
The Union and the Member States shall foster cooperation with third countries and the competent international organisations in the field of education and sport, in particular the Council of Europe. ...”
The EU contributes to the revision of the WADC. Hence, in a contribution sent to WADA in March 2012 (6846/12), the Council of the European Union expressed its point of view on the whereabouts requirement, referring to an opinion of the “Article 29” Data Protection Working Party (opinion 4/2009). That opinion stressed that the information to be provided concerning the whereabouts and the time slots for controls should be clearly determined by taking into account the requirements of the principles of necessity and proportionality with respect to the purposes of out-of-competition testing. In another contribution concerning the revision of the WADC (no. 6427/13), the Council observed that athletes’ rights could be enhanced by the preparation of guidance aimed at ensuring the proportionality of measures concerning registered testing pools and athletes’ whereabouts.
In France, Law no. 2006-405 of 5 April 2006 amended the French legislation to meet the requirements of the WADC and established the AFLD, which took over responsibility for anti-doping testing from the Ministry of Sport. Article L. 235-5-1 of the Sports Code (contained in Part III (Athletes’ health and efforts to combat doping) of Book II (Sports stakeholders)), states that this agency is an independent public authority with legal personality which defines and implements measures to combat doping. It has limited regulatory powers and has exclusive power to conduct anti-doping tests and analyse the results. It also has disciplinary powers in addition to the powers exercised in principle by the sports federations.
Unlike in many countries, sport in France is regarded as a public service, a fact which explains the State’s involvement. Under Article L. 230-1 of the Sports Code “the Minister of Sport, in cooperation with the other ministers and organisations concerned, shall initiate and coordinate actions in the sphere of prevention, medical supervision, research and education, with the assistance, among others, of the approved sports federations ..., with a view to protecting athletes’ health and combating doping”. The sports federations are associations, and hence private entities, but are granted approval “with a view to participating in a public-service activity” (Article L. 131-15 of the Sports Code). They have powers delegated to them by the Sports Minister for the purpose of organising competitions (Article 131-8 of the Sports Code).
The above-mentioned Law of 5 April 2006 also introduced a whereabouts requirement for some elite athletes. The Order of 14 April 2010 at issue in the present case brought the Sports Code into line with the WADC by broadening the scope of the rules on unannounced testing with regard to the categories of athletes concerned and the periods during which tests could be carried out.
Inclusion in the registered testing pool of athletes required to provide whereabouts information is preceded by an adversarial stage. From the date of receipt of the letter informing them of their inclusion in the testing pool, athletes have fifteen days in which to contest the measure. The decision to include an athlete in the pool was taken at the relevant time by the AFLD’s director of testing. Nowadays, the decision is taken by the AFLD Board (see paragraph 28 above). It must be accompanied by reasons and is open to appeal before the Conseil d’État. Since 2010, under Article R. 311-1 of the Administrative Courts Code, the Conseil d’État has jurisdiction at first and last instance to hear appeals against decisions taken by the AFLD in the performance of its supervisory or regulatory tasks.
In addition to the impugned provisions of the Order contained in Articles L. 232-5 and L. 232-15 of the Sports Code (see paragraphs 8 and 10 above), the Articles of relevance at the material time were as follows.
Article L. 232-13 provided that anti-doping tests could be carried out as part of the AFLD’s annual testing programme or as requested by an approved federation, WADA, a national anti-doping organisation or an international sports body.
Article L. 232-13-1 concerned testing locations. It read as follows:
“Tests may be carried out:
(1)  at the location of any training session or event referred to in Article L. 230-3 [sporting events organised by an approved federation or authorised by a federation to which powers have been delegated, and international sporting events];
(2)  in any establishment referred to by Article L. 322-2 [establishments where one or more physical or sports activities are practised and which must afford, for each type of activity, the safeguards required by the rules on hygiene and safety] in which physical or sports activities are practised, and by the Annexes to that Article;
(3)  at any location chosen with the athlete’s agreement at which the test can be carried out in compliance with the athlete’s right to privacy, including, at his or her request, at home;
(4)  in the context of the police custody of an athlete suspected of committing one of the offences referred to in Articles L. 232-9 and 232-10.”
Articles L. 232-14 and L. 232-17 concerned the time slots for testing and the sanctions applicable in the event of failure to comply with the whereabouts requirements in particular. They provided as follows:
“In the performance of their testing duties, the persons referred to in Article L. 23211 may enter the premises referred to in Article L. 232-13-1 only between 6 a.m. and 9 p.m., or at any time if the premises are open to the public or a sporting event or pre-event training session is in progress. Tests at athletes’ homes may be carried out between 6 a.m. and 9 p.m. only. ...”
“I.- Persons evading, attempting to evade or refusing to undergo the tests provided for in Articles L. 232-12 to L. 232-16 or to comply with the arrangements governing them shall be liable to incur the administrative sanctions laid down in Articles L. 23221 to L. 232-23.
- Failure to comply with the whereabouts requirements laid down in Articles L. 232-15 may also give rise to the administrative sanctions provided for in Articles L. 232-21 to L. 232-23.”
Articles L. 232-21 and L. 232-23 of the Sports Code stated that the sanctions were administrative in nature (warning, temporary or permanent ban on participating in sporting events) and could be accompanied by a fine not exceeding 45,000 euros (EUR). Under Article L. 232-24, the decisions taken were open to appeal before the administrative courts. WADA could also lodge an appeal with the administrative courts against a decision of a sports federation or the AFLD.
In addition to the doping controls consisting in the taking of samples, the Sports Code (Article L. 232-19) specified that checks (house searches and seizures) could be carried out in order to investigate possible offences, under the supervision of the public prosecutor and the liberties and detention judge.
France transposed the provisions of the most recent WADC (see paragraph 51 above) in the Order of 30 September 2015, which was ratified by Law no. 2016-41 of 26 January 2016 and was followed by two implementing decrees of 29 January 2016. In particular, Article L. 232-13-1 of the Sports Code (see paragraph 63 above) was revised, with the reference in the third sub-paragraph to the athlete’s agreement being deleted. In addition, Article L. 232-14 (see paragraph 64 above) now provides that antidoping tests may be carried out between 6 a.m. and 11 p.m. (compared with 9 p.m. previously). The 2015 Order also made it possible to carry out night-time tests, subject to the athlete’s consent. Article 232-14-1 of the Sports Code now provides that tests may be conducted at the athlete’s home address or temporary lodgings between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m., subject to respect for his or her privacy, if the athlete concerned is in a registered testing pool or is taking part in an international sporting event and there are strong and consistent reasons to suspect that he or she has violated or is about to violate the anti-doping rules and that there is a risk of the evidence being lost.
The whereabouts requirements for athletes are laid down in AFLD decision no. 54, as rectified on 12 July 2007 and 18 October 2007, on arrangements for the filing and management of whereabouts information for athletes subject to individualised testing and to sanctions in the event of an infringement (hereafter “decision no. 54”), and in decision no. 219 of 29 March 2012 supplementing Article 2 of decision no. 54. Articles 16 and 36 of Annex II-2 (Article R. 232-86 of the Sports Code – Model disciplinary regulations for approved sports federations on combating doping), as in force from 25 July 2007 to 16 January 2011 (Decree no. 2007-1133 of 24 July 2007 on the regulatory provisions of the Sports Code), provided that the arrangements for the filing of information on athletes’ whereabouts were to be determined by a decision of the AFLD Board. The preamble to decision no. 54 refers to Article 36 of Annex II-2, cited above. Decision no. 53 of 7 June 2007 authorised the automated processing of data concerning the whereabouts of athletes subject to individualised testing. In decision no. 68 of 4 October 2007, the AFLD Board undertook to comply with the principles set forth in the WADC and to implement the provisions of the WADC in its spheres of responsibility. Its commitment to the principles set forth in the 2009 revision of the WADC was reiterated in a 2011 decision.
At the relevant time, Articles 1, 2, 3, 9, 12 and 13 of decision no. 54 read as follows:
“The Agency shall inform ... the persons designated by the Agency’s director of testing from the lists of elite athletes and professional sportsmen and women licensed by the approved sports federations that they may be the subject of individualised testing as provided for by Article L. 232-5 of the Sports Code and that they are therefore required to provide information on their whereabouts for the purposes of unannounced doping controls. ...
The Agency shall draw the attention of athletes who are subject to this requirement to the fact that failure to submit information on their whereabouts within the timelimits laid down in Article 2 of this decision, or the filing of insufficiently accurate and up-to-date information concerning the one-hour time slot, or absence during this time slot from the address or location indicated, shall constitute failure to comply with the whereabouts requirement leading, save in exceptional circumstances, to the issuing of a warning.”
“The information in question must make it possible to establish a detailed daily schedule for the athletes concerned so that samples can be taken at their place of training, on any premises that ensure respect for their privacy, or at their home address. The information for each quarter must be submitted to the Agency no later than the fifteenth day of the month preceding that quarter ...”
“Athletes identified by the Agency’s director of testing as targets for individualised testing must declare, for each day, a one-hour time slot during which they may be required to undergo one or more individualised tests by the French Anti-Doping Agency under Article L. 232-15 of the Sports Code. The test may be carried out only between 6 a.m. and 9 p.m., unless the premises are open to the public or a sporting competition or event, or a preparatory training event, is in progress and the athlete concerned is taking part or has taken part in it.
Individualised tests may be carried out at any time within the time slots declared by the athlete.
The Agency may also conduct tests outside these time slots. ...”
“In order to submit the whereabouts information the athlete concerned, his or her legal representative or the person or persons with parental responsibility may:
-  either send the form referred to in Article 5, duly completed, to the Agency by registered letter with recorded delivery, by fax or by email;
-  or connect to the server referred to in Article 6 and enter the details online via the management module for the athletes’ whereabouts information referred to in the aforementioned decision of the National Commission on Data Processing and Civil Liberties of 25 April 2007.
The athlete may delegate in writing to a person of his or her choosing the task of submitting his or her whereabouts information to the Agency, by means of the form attached to this decision. The delegation must be sent to the Agency’s director of testing by registered letter with recorded delivery. However, the athlete shall continue to have sole responsibility for the information submitted to the Agency. ...”
“Any change to the information declared must be made as soon as possible, and no later than 5 p.m. on the day before the date of effect. In order to make changes, the athlete concerned may either use the change-of-information form attached to this decision, to be sent to the Agency by registered letter with recorded delivery, by fax or by email, or update the information online using the software referred to in Article 4.
In exceptional circumstances, and provided that the athlete has previously informed or tried by all possible means to inform the Agency’s testing department, changes may be made up to the beginning of the time slot. ...”
“The following shall constitute failures to comply with the requirement for athletes in the Agency’s testing pool to submit whereabouts information:
-  failure to submit the requisite whereabouts information to the Agency within the time-limit specified in the second paragraph of Article 2;
-  submission to the Agency of insufficiently accurate and up-to-date information to enable individualised tests to be conducted under Article L. 232-5 of the Sports Code during the one-hour time slot declared by the athlete;
-  absence of the athlete during the one-hour time slot from the address or location that he or she has declared for the purposes of individualised testing. The official responsible for taking the sample shall record a failure to comply if the athlete has been continuously absent from the address or location concerned for thirty minutes during the time slot.
The fact of being able to carry out a test on the athlete in question the same day, outside the specified time slot or despite a failure to submit the required information, will not alter the finding of failure to comply. ...”
“As regards failure to submit the required information, or the submission of information that is insufficient to enable individualised tests to be carried out during the daily one-hour time slot, a further warning may be issued to the athlete concerned if he or she has not satisfied the information requirements within seven working days from notification of the first warning.
In the case of all athletes subject to the whereabouts requirement, a first finding by the Agency of one of the failures referred to in the previous paragraph shall give rise to a reminder, sent by registered letter with recorded delivery, of the athlete’s obligations as specified in Article 2 of this decision. The athlete concerned then has three working days from notification of the letter in which to submit the information requested without a warning being issued by the Agency. If the information is not submitted within that period, the Agency shall issue a warning to the athlete, sent by registered letter with recorded delivery.
Further attempts to test an athlete belonging to the Agency’s testing pool during the daily one-hour time slot shall not be considered as a missed test resulting in a warning unless the attempts are made after the date on which the athlete received notice of the previous missed test.”
“In the event of three failures of the kind referred to in Article 9 over a period of eighteen consecutive months, the Agency shall send a notice of violation to the competent federation with a view to implementation of the sanction provided for in Article 36 of the model disciplinary regulations for approved sports federations on combating human doping attached to Article R. 232-86 of the Sports Code.”
According to the AFLD whereabouts form, athletes in the testing pool must provide information for the coming quarter no later than the fifteenth day of the month preceding the start of the quarter. The following personal information must be provided: name, home address, nationality, telephone number, email address, federation, discipline and licence. The whereabouts information must include the following details: main training location, secondary training location, other regular activities, further temporary addresses, competitions, training sessions, and a timetable for the quarter, that is, for each day, the address at which the athlete can be found during the chosen time slot.
By decision no. 2014-145 of 3 December 2014 the AFLD amended the above-mentioned decision no. 54 and decided to reduce from eighteen to twelve months the period during which a specified number of failures to comply could result in disciplinary proceedings (see paragraph 51 above).
In a decision of 9 July 2014 (CE, No. 373304), the Conseil d’État reaffirmed its position on the whereabouts rules (see paragraphs 12 and 35 above).
In a judgment of 16 October 2013 the Court of Cassation rejected a request for a preliminary ruling on constitutionality regarding the whereabouts requirement for athletes in the testing pool. It dismissed the possibility that allegations of breaches of their rights raised by athletes subject to the whereabouts requirement could come within the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts. The Court of Cassation found as follows:
 “... the action brought by Mr X and Mr Y against the [AFLD] – an independent public authority with legal personality which carries out public duties, in the performance of which it took the measure which this court is requested to lift while providing compensation for the damaging consequences thereof – falls by its nature within the jurisdiction of the administrative courts. ... The constitutional rights and freedoms which the impugned provisions allegedly infringe do not come within the scope of individual liberty within the meaning of Article 66 of the Constitution as interpreted by the Constitutional Council. Furthermore, the whereabouts requirement for athletes in the testing pool does not of itself amount to a restriction of freedom of movement, as the controls must respect athletes’ privacy, are carried out at home only at the athlete’s request and within a fixed time slot, and are subject to the supervision of the courts where they are aimed at investigating offences or are liable to give rise to seizures. Accordingly, in the absence of a violation of a right or freedom placed under the sole protection of the ordinary courts, the ground of appeal alleging that the legislative provisions complained of infringe the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution cannot be raised before the ordinary courts, which do not have jurisdiction to hear the dispute.”
In February 2013 a commission of inquiry was set up within the Senate with a view to proposing new approaches to anti-doping policy. The report, which was submitted on 17 July 2013 and runs to around 235 pages, is divided into two sections, entitled “Doping: an ethical and health-related issue” and “Ways and means of combating doping” (including improved monitoring of competition schedules), with a concluding part under the heading “A multi-faceted approach”. The rapporteur’s introduction states that “the real dangers of doping for users are well documented”. According to the report, between 1% and 2% of tests worldwide are positive. However, the statistics underestimate the scale of doping practices within sport, in particular because the development of detection methods always lags behind the emergence of new substances and the ingeniousness of doping protocols. More generally, the report criticises the culture of silence encountered by efforts to combat doping: the difficulty of obtaining evidence, attempts at intimidation, the lack of credibility of the sporting world’s attempts at self-regulation, a general denial of the problem in society, and threats to information and educational activities.
In the part entitled “The dangers of doping” the report stresses that, at first, doping was largely confined to the improper use of medication, hormones and psychoactive substances: anabolic steroids in the 1970s, and testosterone, peptide hormones (EPO and growth hormones) from the 1990s onwards. Today, improper use of medication and hormones co-exists with the development of particularly sophisticated doping protocols and even the emergence of molecules created specifically for doping purposes. The report states that “[d]oping protocols are based in particular on the simultaneous use of minute doses of several substances with different chemical structures and on a subtle balancing act between the duration of the desired effects and the duration of the window for detection”. One of the salient features of modern-day doping, according to the report, is the misuse of certain molecules that have not been placed on the market and the emergence of a specific doping-related industry. Genetic doping also constitutes a very real threat.
According to the report, the threat to public health from doping is twofold:
 “ -  the substances used have potentially serious secondary effects, most of which are known [the report refers to a report by the Medical Academy, see paragraph 81 below], resulting directly from their use or indirectly from the increased exercise intensity which they make possible;
-  doping undermines the effectiveness of campaigns to promote sporting activities based on the health benefits of sport.”
The report goes on to state that “although the undesirable effects of doping products are well known, efforts to combat doping are hindered by the lack of reliable health indicators based on accurate epidemiological data (mortality, morbidity, and so on)”. Among the proposals made by the report in that regard is the funding of epidemiological studies with a view to improving the state of knowledge concerning doping practices and the health risks involved.
The report also stresses the extent of doping among amateur and non-licensed athletes, especially the young. It notes that this group is not covered by the provisions of the Sports Code relating to athletes’ health and efforts to combat doping. “Thus, there continues to be very little monitoring of the non-licensed sector despite the fact that this appears to be the very area affected by what could be termed ‘mass doping’”. The report makes numerous recommendations for preventive and educational action in this regard.
The report states that doping is in very many respects an international issue which requires a worldwide response. It stresses the importance of the above-mentioned European and international instruments (the Council of Europe Convention, the WADC, and so on). At the level of the European Union in particular, it notes the differences in anti-doping legislation and encourages the EU to adopt harmonising directives on measures to combat trafficking in doping products.
The report regards the whereabouts requirement for athletes as a severe but necessary constraint. It refers to the decisions of the Conseil d’État (see paragraphs 12 and 35 above) and to the safeguards and adjustments provided for by the relevant instruments, concluding that the interference with athletes’ private lives and with the opportunity to live a normal family life “appears to be proportionate to the general-interest objectives pursued by efforts to combat doping”.
With regard to the list of locations for the unannounced testing provided for by Article L. 232-13-1 of the Sports Code, the report goes on to state that no exemption from these rules is possible. If an athlete does not wish the test to be carried out at home, he or she can be escorted to the location of his or her choice (the sample-taker’s surgery, the athlete’s club, and so on). As to the timing of the unannounced tests, which is often viewed unfavourably by athletes because it disrupts the training or recovery cycle, the report stresses that these are the very stages that are “risky” in terms of the taking of doping substances. The report further specifies that the only time when unannounced tests may not be carried out is during the night, from 9 p.m. to 6 a.m.
Lastly, the report advocates systematic recourse to athletes’ biological reports as a tool for targeting tests in accordance with Law no. 2012-348 of 12 March 2012, which introduced the concept of athletes’ “biological profiles”. The procedure consists in examining the results of athletes’ successive tests, looking for abnormal variations in athletes’ biological parameters revealing the use of prohibited substances rather than for traces of the substances themselves.
This report provides an overview of European sports policy. While, under European law, sport was initially regarded purely as an economic activity, the Lisbon Treaty established the EU’s role in the field of sport (see paragraph 55 above). The report contains a section on measures to combat doping, which emphasises the following:
“The nature of anti-doping measures varies from one European Union member State to another. Hence three categories of countries can be distinguished: those which have legislation on the subject, where the public authorities lay down anti-doping rules, as is the case in France; those in which the Government and the sports authorities work together to tackle the phenomenon, as in Austria; and those in which doping issues come mainly within the remit of the sports associations, as in Germany.”
The report also observes a wide disparity between certain member States as regards the formation of the testing pools:
“In 2010 Belgium, Estonia, Lithuania and Slovakia were notable in having a very high number of athletes in the testing pool as a proportion of the country’s population. Meanwhile, this kind of monitoring was not carried out in Bulgaria, Cyprus, Malta, Poland or Romania.”
In the section of its report entitled “Use and dangers of doping agents”, the Medical Academy states that doping pursues three main aims:
 “-  To increase the sustainable level of intensity in training and in competition by masking the physiological warning signals (euphoria and aggressiveness overcoming the sensation of tiredness, pain-relieving effects).
This is achieved by the use of stimulants, and in particular amphetamine derivatives; by narcotics and opioids, cocaine and cannabinoids; and by glucocorticoids. Mixtures of drugs are common, the most famous being the pot belge, comprising a mix of amphetamines, cocaine and heroin! In the short term, exceeding the body’s limits may result in exhaustion, heat stroke or even death, especially in adverse heat conditions (the death of Tom Simpson during the 1967 Tour de France is an example). In the medium and long term, behavioural problems, psychiatric decompensation and drug addiction may develop and, more particularly with the use of amphetamines, cardiovascular diseases may occur such as arterial hypertension or valvular heart disease, or cardiomyopathy in the case of cocaine use. Particular mention should be made of the regular, prolonged used of glucocorticoids, the adverse effects of which are well documented and include increased fragility of the muscles and tendons, immunosuppression, arterial hypertension and corticoadrenal insufficiency.
-  To enhance aerobic capacity through the use of erythropoietin (EPO) or autologous blood transfusion, most commonly in endurance sports such as marathon running and road cycling. These methods are linked to a significant risk of increased blood viscosity leading to thrombosis and embolisms, and to intolerance syndromes or transfusion-related adverse events and transmission of infectious agents.
-  To increase muscle mass, in sports such as sprinting and weight lifting where explosive power is key. Growth hormones, anabolic steroids and beta2-agonists are the most commonly used drugs. The consequences of abuse of these drugs, which are usually administered in supra-therapeutic doses, are many and varied and include cardiovascular problems (enlarged heart, coronary disease, arterial hypertension, rhythm disorders) and cancer (of the colon, prostate and liver).
In addition, more specific adverse effects are associated with anabolic steroids (dermatological – acne; psychiatric – aggressiveness and dependency; sexual – testicular insufficiency and development of breast tissue in men, change in morphotype and hypertrophied clitoris in women) and with growth hormones (morphological – hypertrophied jaw and extremities; metabolic – development of insulin resistance and lipid disorders such as elevated triglyceride levels; and endocrinological – thyroid insufficiency).
The harmful consequences of this misuse of drugs are even greater when the drugs are administered to growing children. The disastrous effects of these practices are extensively documented in the Spitzer report on the consequences of State-sponsored doping as practised on very young athletes in the German Democratic Republic (GDR). The study, which covered 10,000 athletes who had taken doping agents, identified 1,000 minor disorders and 500 serious disorders including sex change, sterility and cancer.”
According to the section of the report entitled “At-risk populations”, it is difficult to conduct epidemiological studies on the issue of doping in view of the extreme reluctance of those concerned to discuss the issue. Nevertheless, the findings made in France and certain research studies suggest that the phenomenon extends far beyond the confines of top-level sports. According to studies conducted worldwide, between 3% and 5% of adolescents who train on a daily basis have already been confronted with the issue of doping. The report quotes an article from the newspaper La Libre Belgique which was posted online in 2010 and which states that “almost 8% of young people between the ages of 14 and 18 reportedly use growth hormones, which they order for home delivery on Belgian and foreign websites”. The report adds that while the impact of doping on adults is less well known, “an older series of articles revealed that the prevalence of doping among adults was between 5% and 15%”.
The difficulties in tackling doping, according to the report, are of a scientific, regulatory and sociological nature. Among the scientific aspects it notes that “certain products are the result of chemical manipulation of the structure of drugs already on the market by small laboratories operating to a greater or lesser extent illegally ... What is more worrying is the emergence of new products currently being developed by the pharmaceutical industry.” Moreover, “possibly in the near future, there is a danger of the spread of abusive techniques involving the use of ‘normal or genetically modified cells or the transfer of nucleic acids’”. The difficulties facing anti-doping organisations also include the speed of metabolisation of certain products such as EPO, and very sophisticated doping protocols. In that regard the report states that doping in top-level sports is now:
“... in the hands of professionals with a good knowledge of pharmacology, the pharmacokinetics of the drugs and the physiology of the practice: the elimination time and the period during which the products or their metabolites can be detected in urine, the duration of the effects and the mixtures of drugs which reduce the dose administered and result in a shorter window of detection. They also have access to laboratories capable of testing before a competition for the residual presence or absence of illegal products in the blood and urine. It is clear that the current doping protocols could not be established without the active participation of scientists, doctors and pharmacists.”
The report also notes the regulatory obstacles to anti-doping measures, including the pre-eminent but ambiguous role of the federations.
The report stresses the need for “proactive, targeted and large-scale” prevention in order to tackle doping. This prevention requires the involvement of top-level sports:
 “Efforts to tackle doping in top-level sports and particularly in spectator sports should be given special priority since sporting champions, who are celebrated in the sports press and are the focus of much attention from the political authorities, act as role models for young athletes, for whom they represent the pinnacle of social and financial success.”
The report goes on to note that the merits of anti-doping measures are the subject of debate. It observes the following:
 “Those who cast doubt on this approach point to the increasing reliance on medication in contemporary societies, the failure of prohibition in the US in the 1930s and the economic cost. They cite the fact that administering the biological passport programme costs the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI) around four to five million euros annually. Opponents of this approach advocate legalising doping and placing it under medical supervision. This position appears to ignore the reality. Sporting careers are continuous: elite athletes are not ‘born’, they evolve gradually through talent and hard work and after overcoming numerous selection hurdles. This lengthy process begins at a young age and may result in addictive behaviours. Consequently, if doping were to be made legal and appeared essential in order to succeed in sport, children would follow the example of their role models, magnified by the media, and would engage in doping very early on, with potentially harmful consequences for their health.
Lastly, sports ethics are based on equality of opportunity. If doping were authorised, champions’ victories and performances would be largely the result of the skill of the teams of scientists; the latter’s reputation would grow accordingly, placing athletes at risk of turning into human guinea pigs.”
The report makes the following recommendations. The State should devise a proactive anti-doping policy, independent of any economic, sporting or political pressures; a watchdog should be set up to monitor doping-related incidents and complications; all possibilities for cooperation should be used in order to share useful information concerning doping agents, including those under development, as well as analytical methods enabling them to be detected at an early stage; the WADC should provide for a reduction in the number of sporting fixtures, or rules should be laid down setting limits for each sport on the number of competitions in which an athlete may participate; the remit of the international federations should be restricted to major high-profile sporting events of a genuinely international nature; a research policy should be devised, especially in the field of epidemiology, in order to assess the extent of the doping scourge and its health impact; in-depth training on doping, doping methods and the risks entailed should be provided and should be the main focus of preventive measures aimed at young people; and audiovisual companies should be required to broadcast information campaigns on doping.