The case originated in an application (no. 67068/11) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Ms Laimutė Stankūnaitė (“the applicant”), on 2 September 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr G. Černiauskas, a lawyer practising in Kaunas. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their former Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicant alleged that proceedings regarding her daughter’s temporary guardianship and return to her had been in breach of Article 8 of the Convention.
On 3 February 2012 the Government were given notice of the application.
Mr Egidijus Kūris, the judge elected in respect of Lithuania, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28 § 3 of the Rules of Court). Accordingly, the President of the Section appointed Ms Danutė Jočienė to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1 (a) of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1986. Her current address is unknown to the Court (see paragraphs 14 and 105 in fine below).
The applicant lived with D.K. On 19 February 2004 a daughter was born to the couple, who were not married.
On 19 March 2008 the Vilnius City First District Court approved a settlement agreement between the applicant and D.K., who by that time had been living separately, in which it was agreed that the daughter would live with D.K. The first-instance court’s decision was upheld by the Vilnius Regional Court on 29 May 2008, which dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The applicant retained the right to see her daughter and would periodically take her to her home.
On 30 November 2008, on the basis of an application by D.K., the authorities started a pre-trial investigation on suspicion that the girl had been sexually molested (Article 153 of the Criminal Code, see paragraph 85 below) by a certain A.Ū. (also see paragraphs 26-28 below). D.K. alleged that the crime had taken place in the applicant’s rented apartment in Kaunas, and in her presence.
On 22 December 2008 D.K. lodged an application with the Kaunas City District Court to restrict the applicant’s parental rights. He argued that, pursuant to the settlement agreement, the applicant had been communicating with their daughter and taking her to her home. According to D.K., when the girl had returned to him having visited her mother between 21 and 23 November 2008, she had started telling him about how her mother and some men who had come to her mother’s home had been behaving with her. D.K. noted having already lodged an application with the police regarding his daughter’s molestation, and that a criminal investigation had been opened (see paragraph 9 above). D.K. then asked the court to apply temporary protective measures in order to restrict the applicant’s ability to see her daughter until the civil case for the restriction of her parental rights had been resolved.
By a ruling of 23 December 2008 the Kaunas City District Court granted D.K.’s request for temporary protective measures, prohibiting the applicant from seeing her daughter until the civil case for the temporary restriction of her parental rights had been terminated. The court noted that a pre-trial investigation had been opened concerning the alleged sexual molestation. Accordingly, there was sufficient basis to apply temporary protective measures. The court also cited Article 3.65 § 2 (7) of the Civil Code as the legal basis for the measures (see paragraph 79 below).
However, following an appeal by the applicant, by a ruling of 27 April 2009 made in written proceedings the Vilnius Regional Court varied the temporary protective measure by allowing the applicant to see her daughter in the presence of a representative from the Kaunas city childcare authorities. The Regional Court pointed out that any suspicions against the applicant had not yet been proven, therefore to completely forbid the child from seeing her mother could be detrimental to the child’s best interests.
On 8 July 2009 the Kaunas City District Court amended the contact order between the applicant and her daughter: they were to meet twice a week between 9 and 11 a.m. at the premises of the Kaunas city childcare authorities, in the presence of their representative. D.K. was responsible for taking his daughter to those meetings. The court also suspended the examination of the civil case concerning the restriction of the applicant’s parental rights until the pre-trial investigation in the criminal case about the girl’s sexual molestation had been terminated. The applicant and her lawyer took part in that hearing.
By a final ruling of 15 December 2009 the Vilnius Regional Court examined an appeal lodged by the applicant and essentially left the District Court’s decision of 8 July 2009 unchanged, with the exception that D.K.’s sister N.V. had become responsible for taking the girl to the meetings, which were to take place in a secure location designated by the Lithuanian witness protection authorities, and in the presence of a representative from the childcare authorities. The reason for that was a change in circumstances – there had been an incident on 5 October 2009 in which two people had been shot (see paragraphs 16 and 17 below), and State protection had been instituted in respect of both the applicant and her daughter. When upholding the temporary protective measure as set out earlier, the Regional Court highlighted the principle that priority had to be given to the interests of the child. It relied on Article 3.3 § 1 of the Civil Code and Article 4 § 1 (1) of the Law on the Fundamentals of Protection of Children’s Rights (see paragraphs 77 and 79 below). The Regional Court also considered that the District Court had properly assessed the situation, having taken into account the opinion of the Kaunas childcare authorities, which had been the institution providing a conclusion in the case. Lastly, it pointed out that the applicant had herself limited contact with her daughter in the past period, although it did not elaborate further.
According to the Government, who have not been contradicted on these points by the applicant, from 5 October 2009 onwards the meetings between the girl and the applicant did not take place based on reasons that lay with the latter. Specifically, on 27 October 2009 the applicant asked the childcare authorities to postpone her meetings with her daughter. She resumed the meetings on 17 December 2009. Despite being informed in writing, the applicant also failed to appear at a review meeting concerning the drafting of a temporary guardianship plan for her daughter, which had been organised by the childcare authorities to take place on 21 October 2009.
On 5 October 2009 two people were gunned down in Kaunas. One of them was a judge of the Kaunas Regional Court, J.F., the other was the applicant’s sister, V.N. It was suspected that D.K. had committed that crime. He fled from the law enforcement authorities and, in rather unclear circumstances, was found dead on 17 April 2010, the day which the court later pronounced as his date of death. On the basis of expert reports, including from the Swedish National Forensic Service (Rättsmedicinalverket), the Lithuanian authorities found that D.K. had actually died from alcohol and drug poisoning, and that he had choked on the contents of his own stomach.
On 8 October 2009 the director of the Kaunas Municipal Administration, on the basis of Articles 3.261 and 3.265 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 79 below), issued a temporary guardianship in respect of the applicant’s daughter, effective as of 5 October 2009. She was supposed to reside at the child development centre at the Vilnius University Hospital. Afterwards, on 12 October 2009 the director of the Kaunas Municipal Administration, on the basis of Article 3.264 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 79 below), appointed N.V., who was D.K.’s sister and a judge at the Kaunas Regional Court, as the temporary guardian of the child who should live with N.V. at her home in the township of Garliava, in Kaunas district. The decision stipulated that it could be appealed against under the rules set out in the Law on Administrative Proceedings (see paragraph 86 below). No such appeal was lodged.
During the pre-trial investigation regarding the sexual molestation of the applicant’s daughter (see paragraph 9 above), the prosecutor questioned a number of individuals, including the applicant, D.K., A.Ū. (the main suspect) and J.F. At a certain point additional charges of sexual assault under Article 150 § 4 of the Criminal Code were brought in respect of the applicant, her sister V.N., as well as A.Ū. and J.F.
In the course of the pre-trial investigation the authorities questioned the applicant’s daughter as a victim on four occasions: on 17 and 30 December 2008, and on 9 June and 23 October 2009. Her testimony varied: during the first two interviews she said that acts of molestation had been performed on her by the suspect A.Ū., and also testified that her mother had been present. Later, however, her account of what had happened became more and more detailed. According to the submissions of D.K. and his relatives, and, partly, the interviews with the applicant’s daughter, she started remembering more and more details of her sexual abuse: that besides the main suspect, A.Ū., there were two other men who had molested and sexually assaulted her on a number of occasions and in the presence of the applicant and the applicant’s sister V.N.; this had taken place at the applicant’s home, V.N.’s home and a hotel.
In the course of the criminal proceedings the girl was assessed by the psychologist I.Č., whose conclusion of 12 August 2009 stated that the girl had been capable of talking about events that had happened in the past. That said, it was not possible to ascertain whether the girl’s experience had been direct, that is, whether the acts of sexual molestation had been performed on her, or whether that experience had been indirect, that is, whether she had watched the sexual acts of others, seen pornographic films, or heard adult conversations and questions on the topic. It was also not possible to ascertain whether those actions actually had been performed with the girl because later on she had been too often and improperly questioned about the alleged sexual abuse. The psychologist also addressed, as a separate matter, the video material provided by D.K. with the girl’s accounts of sexual abuse. The psychologist pointed out that the very clear and specific description of A.Ū. provided by the girl in the video-recordings, that her father had given to the authorities, had differed from how she had described him in her interview with the authorities of 17 December 2008. The psychologist concluded that the father had influenced the girl’s real experience by constantly talking with his daughter about that topic and giving her leading questions.
The State Forensic Psychiatry Service’s specialist report no. 92TPK1 of 25 November 2009, based on the psychological assessment of the girl, also supported the conclusions of psychologist I.Č. According to this report, the girl’s age and individual experience, as well as the fact that from the start of the talks about sexual violence she had been living with her father, could have had an impact on her testimony. In general, the information which the girl had obtained from the adults, and the adult conversations and opinions expressed in her presence, had influenced the child’s understanding about those events and the way she had described them. For children of her age, recognition and positive evaluation by adults, especially those who were important to them and had authority, was important. Accordingly, in order to please, children would adjust their statements and answer as asked.
On 26 January 2010 a prosecutor at the Vilnius Regional Prosecutor’s Office discontinued the criminal investigation in respect of the applicant and the two people who had been shot, V.N., and J.F. (see paragraph 16 above), holding that they had not committed the crimes of sexual assault and sexual molestation (Articles 150 § 4 and 153 of the Criminal Code).
Among other evidence, the prosecutor relied on the conclusion by the forensic psychiatrists, which had evaluated the applicant’s daughter’s testimony as not entirely credible, given that she had been questioned while she had already been living with her father and his family members, who could have indirectly influenced her perceptions (see paragraphs 20 and 21 above). Moreover, in none of her interviews or occasions when her behaviour had been observed had the specialists noticed any behaviour to show that she had experienced long-term sexual abuse. The girl’s testimony had not been sufficiently precise and consistent.
In so far as the suspect A.Ū. was concerned, the suspicions against him were changed to sexual molestation, and he was charged with that crime on 23 February 2010.
The prosecutor informed the girl’s representative N.V. about the right to challenge this decision via a higher prosecutor.
N.V. then challenged the prosecutor’s decision. Having examined the material in the pre-trial investigation file, on 23 February 2010 a higher prosecutor dismissed the appeal, upholding the decision of 26 January 2010 as reasonable and sound.
By a final and unappealable ruling of 3 November 2010 the Panevėžys Regional Court upheld the prosecutors’ conclusions as wellfounded. The court observed that when considering the girl’s testimony, the circumstances in which the testimony about sustained sexual abuse had been given had been particularly important. The same importance should have been attributed to the specialists’ conclusions. Those circumstances had been examined in this case – the girls’ family members had been questioned and the prosecutors had stated their opinions about the credibility of that testimony.
The Regional Court also stressed that, as established by the prosecutors, the dispute between the applicant and D.K. over their daughter had started in 2006, and their relationship had become hostile. Moreover, as pointed out by the prosecutor in the decision of 23 February 2010, the video recordings which D.K. had made of the girl clearly showed that on more than one occasion it had been talked at length with the girl about sexual actions and sexual violence, and in this way her understanding of sexual experience and her subsequent statements had been influenced (see also paragraphs 20 and 23 above).
The Regional Court noted that the prosecutor’s assessment had been based on the experts’ opinion and specialists’ conclusions, as well as D.K.’s own admission that the video-recordings had started to be made in December 2008, that is, from the very beginning of the pre-trial investigation (see paragraph 9 above). It also pointed to the conclusions by the psychologist I.Č. and the report no. 92TPK-1 (see paragraphs 20 and 21 above).
As to the applicant, the Regional Court noted that the prosecutor’s decision to discontinue the pre-trial investigation had been based on the gathered material, which had been carefully and thoroughly examined.  Although N.V. and her family members had claimed that the applicant’s involvement in her daughter’s sexual abuse and molestation had been proven by the girl’s testimony, the Regional Court considered that testimony to be inconclusive. It upheld the prosecutor’s conclusions that the vague and inconsistent data could not form a basis for holding that the applicant had been involved in the girl’s molestation.
As to the main suspect in the case, A.Ū., on 23 February 2010 a bill of indictment on charges of sexual molestation of a minor (Article 153 of the Criminal Code) was drawn up and the criminal case was transferred to the court for examination.
However, on 13 June 2010 A.Ū. was found dead. By a decision of 17 November 2010 the District Court discontinued the criminal case against A.Ū. on the grounds that the accused had died. It was later reopened at the request of A.Ū.’s relatives, who sought to clear his name.
By a judgment of 30 November 2012 the Vilnius City Second District Court acquitted A.Ū. in respect of the charges of sexual molestation, under Article 153 of the Criminal Code. That judgment was upheld by the Vilnius Regional Court on 10 April 2013, which held that the charges had not been proven. In its reasoning the Regional Court also extensively relied on the psychologists’ conclusions (see paragraphs 20 and 21 above).
On an unspecified date in 2009 the authorities started a pre-trial investigation in respect of D.K. on the grounds that he, by sending to the media and other individuals filmed recordings of his daughter recounting the sexual acts possibly performed against her, had not only made public the material of a criminal investigation, but had also made public information about his minor daughter’s private life, it being degrading to her honour and dignity. The criminal investigation against D.K. was based on allegations of abuse of parental rights and duties (Article 163 of the Criminal Code, see paragraph 85 below). It was discontinued on 3 May 2010, upon D.K.’s death (see paragraph 16 above).
On 23 December 2009 the applicant applied to the Kėdainiai District Court for a permanent residence order in respect of her daughter. She submitted that she could take care of her daughter and that there had been no reason to prevent her and her daughter communicating. She also pointed out that her parental rights had not been restricted.
Within those proceedings N.V. lodged a counterclaim, applying for residence in respect of the child and asking that the applicant’s parental rights in respect of her daughter be permanently restricted.
In the spring of 2010 the applicant asked the courts to lift the temporary protective measure, on the grounds that by a decision of 26 January 2010 the prosecutor had dropped the criminal charges against her (see paragraph 22 above). However, by a ruling of 4 June 2010 the Panevėžys Regional Court dismissed her request, noting that the contact schedule for the applicant and her daughter, as set out by the Vilnius Regional Court on 15 December 2009 (see paragraph 14 above), was sufficient for them to maintain contact and implement her parental rights.
 The court also noted that in order to annul or change the temporary protective measure a factual basis was necessary. In the present case, such a basis could be the child’s suffering when living with the guardian or her interest in communicating with her mother. However, according to the court, the applicant had not provided any factual proof that her and her daughter’s relationship could break up because of the contact schedule set by the court on 15 December 2009, or that the existing contact order would be detrimental to the child’s interests, such as her not having proper conditions to grow and develop. The court also relied on the fact that an appeal against the prosecutor’s decision to discontinue the criminal proceedings against the applicant and her co-accused had been pending (see paragraphs 23 and 24 above).
According to the report of 14 December 2009 of the Psychological Support and Counselling Centre (a public institution), the temporary guardian N.V. and the girl had attended the centre on 16 November 2009 and psychological support had been provided to the girl once a week. The employees of the centre noted that the girl and N.V. had established a relationship of trust. They proposed that psychological support be continued. In the report of the centre of 17 February 2010 it was noted that N.V. had taken part in a training programme for guardians.
In January and February 2011, both the applicant and N.V. had asked the Kėdainiai District Court to order a number of examinations. In particular, the applicant asked if the experts could ascertain whether her daughter could objectively understand her surroundings and objectively express her wishes as regards her place of living, whether she could be influenced by the fact that she lived with her temporary guardian and in her home, and whether she could objectively answer the question whether she wished to live with her mother. For her part, N.V. asked if the experts could ascertain how the child’s psychological state would be affected should she have to change her place of residence, leave N.V.’s home and be transferred to the applicant’s care.
By a ruling of 8 February 2011 the Kėdainiai District Court approved those questions and ordered the experts at the State Forensic Psychiatry Centre to conduct the examination.
In the meantime, on 18 August 2011 the Kėdainiai District Court granted a request by the applicant regarding the times when she could see her daughter. As per the applicant’s wishes, the court changed the time for the meetings to 3 to 5 p.m. on Mondays and Thursdays, to adapt to the girl’s school attendance times.
Having assessed the girl, in October 2011 the psychiatrists issued report no. 103MS-143. They found that because of her age, emotional development and state of mind the girl could not fully grasp her situation and could not form an independent opinion as to where she preferred to live. As a result, they recommended that the girl should not be questioned in court. Even though the girl had stated that she wished to live with her temporary guardian N.V., she could not explain why. Furthermore, the child’s view was predetermined by objective facts, namely that she could not remember the time when she had lived with her mother and that she was currently residing with N.V.’s family, who had a negative attitude towards the applicant.
The psychologists also pointed out that both her mother and the temporary guardian were emotionally important persons for the child; she therefore avoided talking not only about them but also about the matter of where she should reside. The psychologists observed  having noticed no difference in the child’s communication with her mother and N.V. – that she felt a strong connection and had a sense of security with both of them, who could both properly take care of the girl. Lastly, the psychologists noted that the natural and essential need of every child was to live with their parents –the mother in this case  and that the child’s transfer to her mother would not have negative impact on her psychological state. Mutual goodwill between the applicant and N.V. and the latter’s family members could ease the girl’s adaptation to a new place of residence.
On 16 December 2011, at a closed hearing in the presence of the applicant, her lawyer, N.V. and the childcare authorities, the Kėdainiai District Court held that the applicant could exercise her parental rights unrestrictedly. It ruled that the girl should reside with her mother. A counterclaim by N.V. that the girl should stay with her was dismissed. The court ruled out that there would be any danger for the girl if she was returned to her mother. Relying on the Court’s judgment in Schaal v. Luxembourg (no. 51773/99, §§ 48 and 49, 18 February 2003), the District Court emphasised that any criminal charges against the applicant had been dropped as unfounded by a final court ruling of 3 November 2010 (see paragraphs 24 and 25 above). It followed that it was necessary to reunite the applicant with her daughter as soon as possible. In that context the District Court also held that accusations which N.V. had flaunted against the applicant – that she had assisted in her daughter’s molestation – had been nothing more than a continuation of D.K.’s earlier efforts to have residence and to completely prohibit the mother from seeing her daughter.
The District Court relied on the Court’s case-law in Olsson v. Sweden (no. 1) (24 March 1988, § 72, Series A no. 130) and Eriksson v. Sweden (22 June 1989, § 58, Series A no. 156), to the effect that taking a child into care meant a very serious interference with the right to respect for family life. Separation of a biological family had to be supported by sufficiently sound and weighty considerations in the interests of the child. For the Lithuanian court, no such circumstances existed as concerned the continued separation of the girl and her mother.
Firstly, there was no proof that the applicant had failed to properly take care of her daughter while they had lived together in 2006, or after their separation in 2008, when they had had supervised contact. Similarly, although N.V. had relied on the settlement agreement of 19 March 2008 in which the applicant had agreed that her daughter would reside with D.K. (see paragraph 8 above), the District Court considered that such a settlement agreement could not be treated as the applicant’s refusal of the child. The court considered that the applicant had convincingly explained that she had signed that agreement envisaging that her daughter would only be living temporarily with the father, also because at that time she had been studying and could only see her daughter on weekends. It was only after concluding the agreement that she had realised that she had been deceived, and had therefore immediately appealed against it.
The court also pointed to the fact that the applicant had consistently fought for her right to live with her daughter. There were no circumstances in the case allowing for the conclusion that the applicant had ever failed to use her parental powers in respect of her daughter or that she had acted against the interests of her child.
Similarly, after J.F.’s and V.N.’s murder a search had been announced for D.K., the applicant had been placed under State protection and her right to communicate with her daughter had been restricted (see paragraphs 16 and 17 above). Separating them obviously affected their relationship, which became weaker. However, this fact could not be held against the applicant. In this connection the court relied on childcare specialists’ explanations and reports, according to which a negative attitude was being formed about the applicant at N.V.’s home, what had as a consequence that the applicant’s daughter had become introverted and had refrained from talking about her mother not only at home, but also with the kindergarten teachers or childcare authorities.
The court also took notice of the forensic experts’ explanations in report no. 103MS-143 that although the girl had stated that she wanted to live with N.V., she could not explain that choice (see paragraph 37 above). For the court, one could only conclude that, not having been able to freely communicate with her mother as of May 2008, when D.K. had taken her (see paragraph 8 above), and having been transferred to N.V.’s care in October 2009 (see paragraph 17 above), the girl had become attached to N.V. because the latter had been the only familiar and close person whom she could trust. It was also probable that the girl, having no other choice and not understanding her mother’s situation (where and how she had lived), had hidden her feelings towards her mother (as confirmed by the testimony of the psychologists and kindergarten teachers).
Accordingly, when assessing the girl’s emotional connection with her guardian, as explained by the experts, it was of paramount importance to understand that such feelings were not entirely natural, but based on a sense of “security”. Furthermore, the girl’s contact with her mother, in the present circumstances – twice a week and in the presence of others – could not be seen as free and uninterrupted. Such a lack of uninterrupted and regular communication could only lead to a further weakening of their relationship.
That being so, the District Court also took note that since January 2010 the applicant had received regular assistance from a psychologist before her meetings with her daughter, so that they would run easier, which had had a positive effect on their communication. The psychological experts confirmed (report No. 103MS-143, see paragraph 37 above) that the girl’s relationship with her mother was strong, emotionally adequate and a “safe haven”.
The court acknowledged N.V.’s arguments that a close connection had been established between her and the applicant’s daughter, and that she loved the child and had the complete ability to take care of her. Even so, that was not sufficient to limit the applicant’s parental rights towards the child. On this point the District Court relied on the Court’s case-law to the effect that in such cases the child’s best interests were of paramount concern. This had two aspects: on the one hand, it was necessary to ensure that the child grew in a safe environment, and that in no circumstances could a mother have recourse to measures which could harm the child’s health and development (the court relied on Johansen v. Norway, 7 August 1996, § 78, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1996III). On the other hand, it was also obvious that the best interests of the child were to grow with his family, unless it was proven that the family was inappropriate, because to do otherwise would mean separating the child from his roots. Moreover, even though the national authorities had wide discretion when deciding whether to give the child to his or her biological parents, the family connection could be restricted only in “particularly special circumstances” and everything had to be done in order to safeguard the personal connection and, if and when possible, “restore the family” (the court cited Amanalachioai v. Romania, no. 4023/04, § 81, 26 May 2009).
The District Court also highlighted that the instant case did not concern a dispute between persons who were competing for the right to have the child in their care, where the main principle was the best interests of the child. In contrast, this was a dispute between the child’s mother and a temporary guardian, in which completely different criteria, defining the relationship between the child and the mother, applied. Given that no grounds to limit the mother’s rights had been established, priority had to be given to the right, acquired by the child at birth, to live in a family with her mother.
In that context it was also noteworthy that N.V. had possibly failed to properly execute her duties as a guardian. In this respect, the Ombudsperson for the Protection of Children’s Rights’ report of 10 December 2010 criticised the actions of N.V., such as providing the media with information about the girl’s inner emotional state, thereby breaching the child’s interests. The Ombudsperson then recommended that the Kaunas childcare authorities guarantee the girl’s rights and pointed N.V.’s attention to the fact that information of a private nature should not be disseminated. The fact that N.V.’s negative attitude towards the applicant had affected the girl, as well as her failure to ensure that information related to the child would not be made public, had been noted also by the psychologists.
For the court, such circumstances had to be evaluated as being counter to the aims of temporary guardianship, which, as a concept, in any case had the purpose of returning the child to the family, whenever the circumstances allowed. The need to reunite natural parents and a child had also been emphasised by the Court (the District Court relied on Scozzari and Giunta v. Italy [GC], nos. 39221/98 and 41963/98, § 169, ECHR 2000VIII). For the District Court, the conclusions of the forensic experts and childcare services had completely ruled out the need to limit the applicant’s rights as a mother, as demanded by N.V.
The District Court further emphasised that the girl would suffer irreparable harm if she was left to reside with N.V.:
“The court considers that the girl’s interests would be seriously harmed if she stayed in the family of N.V., because that would mean that the girl’s inherent rights to family ties, to be brought up and live with her biological family, would be restricted without any lawful grounds. As it has been established by forensic experts, even without any particular influence, the girl has picked up the negative attitude of N.V. and her family towards [the applicant]. Therefore, if the girl continued living with N.V., and taking into account N.V.’s particularly negative attitude towards [the applicant], there is a big risk that [the applicant] and her daughter’s relationship will become weaker or will be completely disrupted. The court considers that N.V.’s negative influence would obstruct [the applicant] in preserving a relationship with her daughter, which would clearly and seriously breach the interests of the child.”
The District Court also referred to the Court’s case-law on the issue of prolonged access restriction. It quoted Dolhamre v. Sweden (no. 67/04, § 120, 8 June 2010) to the effect that following any removal into care, stricter scrutiny was called for in respect of any further limitations by the authorities, for example on parental rights or access, as such further restrictions entailed the danger that the family relations between the parents and a young child were effectively curtailed. The District Court emphasised that the applicant and her daughter had been separated for almost three years. During that time they could communicate only minimally, which had undoubtedly negatively affected their relationship. It was unlikely that continuous separation of the mother from her child would make their relationship stronger.
For the District Court, it was of paramount importance that decisions determining family relations were not adopted merely because of a lapse of time or by simply upholding de facto situations. Accordingly, considering that the passage of time in the instant case was unacceptable because it could have irreparable consequences for the relationship between the child and her mother, with whom the former did not live, the court considered that its decision to return the girl to her mother had to be executed swiftly (Article 283 § 1 (4) of the Code of Civil Procedure, see paragraph 83 below). Given that the two had lived apart for a long time, the court set a term of fourteen days for the child to be returned to the applicant. During those fourteen days the applicant was to meet with her daughter daily, in the presence of child psychologists, and the duration of those meetings was to be increased by one hour until the meetings lasted six hours. If the childcare authorities decided that the girl was ready to move in with her mother earlier, she was to be returned in advance of the set deadline.
The District Court ordered N.V. to transfer the girl to the applicant within fourteen days, that is, by 30 December 2011. It quashed the temporary protective measures (see paragraphs 12, 14 and 36 above). The part of the court decision regarding the girl’s place of residence, the obligation on N.V. to transfer the girl and the lifting of the temporary protective measures were to be executed immediately, in accordance with Article 283 §§ 1 (4) of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 83 below).
As later established by another court, on the date the decision of 16 December 2011 was adopted N.V. took the girl out of school and started home schooling (see also paragraph 58 below).
From that time onwards, crowds dissatisfied with the Kėdainiai District Court’s decision of 16 December 2011 would maintain a constant vigil around N.V.’s home in Garliava to “protect” the girl from being taken away.
Afterwards, N.V. lodged an appeal challenging the part of the Kėdainiai District Court’s decision ordering the girl to be returned to her mother within fourteen days. By a ruling of 28 December 2011 the Panevėžys Regional Court refused to accept the appeal for examination on the merits, on the grounds that N.V. had failed to follow the rules of civil procedure.
By rulings of 28 December 2011 and 3 and 6 January 2012 the Panevėžys Regional Court again refused, on procedural grounds, to accept N.V.’s appeals in respect of the decision ordering the applicant’s daughter to be returned to the applicant by 30 December 2011.
By a ruling of 18 April 2012 the Klaipėda Regional Court dismissed N.V.’s appeal against the Kėdainiai District Court’s decision of 16 December 2011 and left it unchanged.
The Government stated that the applicant had been provided with psychological consultations to strengthen her relationship with her daughter. She had attended a special training course for developing positive parental skills and received individual psychological consultations, as suggested and arranged by the Kaunas childcare authorities. The Government also submitted that, according to the childcare authorities, the applicant’s use of psychological support had been rather passive, and she had been encouraged to attend psychological consultations more than once.
Given that the Kėdainiai District Court’s decision had obliged the Kaunas childcare authorities to organise the meetings between the applicant and her daughter, they had initially drafted a schedule for the meetings in a neutral location for the period of execution of that decision and until 30 December 2011. The childcare authorities had obtained N.V.’s signature to comply with that schedule and had also arranged for a psychologist to be present during those meetings; they had also arranged psychological support for the applicant, her daughter and N.V. Both parties had been offered the possibility of mediation, however, they had both refused that option.
According to the Government, after the decision of 16 December 2011 N.V. refused to take the girl to the meetings with the applicant in a neutral location, on the pretext that the girl did not want to leave the house. With the efforts of the childcare authorities, the applicant could then see her daughter at N.V.’s house, and their meetings took place on 20, 23, 24 and 27 December 2011, and on 19 February 2012, the girl’s birthday.
The Government submitted that on 16 March 2012 the applicant had asked the childcare authorities to organise meetings with the girl in a neutral location. Since the authorities had been aware of the girl’s refusal to leave the house, those meetings had taken place on 19, 21, 22 and 23 March 2012 at N.V.’s house, with the participation of childcare specialists and a psychologist on the last two dates (22 and 23 March 2012).
The Government specified that following the unsuccessful handover of the girl on 23 March 2012 (see paragraph 62 below), the childcare authorities had taken steps to deal with the possible psychological consequences suffered by the child. Various means of psychological support had been proposed, including art therapy.
The Government also submitted that on 6 April 2012 an opinion concerning the emotional state of the girl had been received from a public institution, the Psychological Support and Counselling Centre. Accordingly, taking the girl’s state into account, a meeting with the mother, irrespective of location, would cause the child grave additional stress, and the relationship between the girl and the mother should be strengthened gradually. Therefore, the Kaunas childcare authorities suggested to the applicant that she should write letters to the girl, which they would read to her. The applicant actually wrote several such letters, and the girl responded.
On 16 December 2011 the Kėdainiai District Court also issued a writ of execution under which N.V. was obliged to transfer the child to the applicant. The bailiff instructed N.V., under signature, to return the child to the applicant on 30 December at the secondary school in Kaunas district, which the girl had attended. However, even though the bailiff as well as child psychologists and childcare specialists were present at the school on the specific date and time, N.V. did not show up and did not bring the girl. She did not answer her telephone either. The bailiff afterwards requested the childcare authorities to provide assistance with the execution of the court decision for the girl’s transfer, and they recommended that the transfer take place in a neutral environment.
The childcare specialists noted that although the meetings between the girl and the applicant had been aimed at making the eventual transfer easier, during those meetings it had been concluded that N.V. had not been preparing the girl for her return to her mother. The bailiff then attempted to have the girl returned to the applicant on 11 January 2012 at the premises of Kaunas police headquarters in the presence of childcare authorities and a psychologist, but on that day N.V. again failed to show up and bring the girl. The following day N.V. wrote to the bailiff, alleging that she had been executing the court decision, but that the girl did not wish to meet her mother and live with her.
On 5 January 2012 the applicant asked the bailiff to fine N.V. for failing to execute the court decision, and the bailiff in turn requested the Kėdainiai District Court to impose a fine of 1,000 Lithuanian litas (LTL) (approximately 390 euros (EUR)) for each day the court decision remained unexecuted, which was the maximum amount under Article 771 § 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 82 below). By a ruling of 29 March 2012 the court granted the bailiff’s request, but reduced the fine to LTL 200 (EUR 60) per day.
As specified by the Government, on that basis N.V. paid a sum of LTL 28,000 (EUR 8,100) to the applicant.
By a ruling of 8 June 2012 the Šiauliai Regional Court dismissed an appeal of N.V. against the court’s decision to impose a fine on her (see paragraph 57 above). The court noted that after the pronouncement of the Kėdainiai District Court decision of 16 December 2011 the girl had been immediately taken out of school and then home schooled at N.V.’s home. In doing so N.V. had not only failed to prepare the girl for the transfer to her mother, but had also isolated her from the environment which she had been familiar with, and, without objective grounds, had restricted her ability to communicate with other children of her age, as well as her mother. This was confirmed by the Kaunas childcare authorities’ reports to the effect that when asked about the girl, N.V. had stated that it had been in the best interests of the child to stay at her home.
According to those reports, N.V. had confirmed refusing to take the girl to the meetings with her mother. The appellate court also noted that on 11 January 2012 N.V. had not only not shown up, either alone or with the child, at the meeting which the authorities had set for the girl’s transfer (see paragraph 56 above), but had also not informed the other participants of that meeting about not coming, “in this manner obviously ignoring the execution of the court decision and efforts by several State authorities to execute that decision with as little trauma to the child as possible”.
The appellate court also noted that since the Kėdainiai District Court decision of 16 December 2011 “the girl was not being taken to the meetings with her mother in a neutral environment, and that in the environment in which the girl lived [D.K.’s] family members would constantly and publicly express negative views towards the applicant”. This allowed for the conclusion that the girl’s opinion as to communication and living with the mother was being shaped “exclusively” by N.V. and the persons close to her. For the appellate court, it was clear that N.V.’s actions and inaction were purposefully targeted at obstructing the execution of the court decision of 16 December 2011. Moreover, the sole fact that the girl was eight years old was not sufficient to claim that she could independently and publicly express her opinions about her place of residence or her connection with her mother, as suggested by N.V.
Lastly, the Šiauliai Regional Court pointed out that N.V., being obliged under Article 18 of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 81 below) to execute the court decision and because of her education clearly understanding the consequences of failure to execute the court decision, had the ability to choose whether to execute the court decision or to risk paying the fine.
On 16 January 2012 the bailiff applied to the Kėdainiai District Court, requesting permission to forcibly take the child from N.V. On 22 March 2012 the Kėdainiai District Court granted the bailiff’s request, however emphasising that force could only be used for removing the obstacles for execution of the court decision but not against the child herself.
In the meantime, the bailiff cooperated with the psychologists who had been working with the girl, and the childcare authorities. A number of opinions and recommendations from various institutions concerning the execution of the court decision were received. The bailiff also systematically organised meetings between the different authorities concerning the enforcement. As a result, a number of proposals were given to the applicant and N.V.; the latter was also warned a number of times of the obligation to act in the interests of the child.
On 23 March 2012, more than three months after the Kėdainiai District Court had ordered the transfer of the child to the applicant and one day after the same court gave its permission for the forcible taking of the girl, the bailiff issued a warrant requiring the child to be urgently handed over to the applicant. The bailiff arrived at the house of her grandparents, the parents of N.V., where the applicant’s meeting with the girl was taking place. However, because of the crowds surrounding N.V.’s house and “guarding” the applicant’s daughter against the enforcement of the Kėdainiai District Court’s decision of 16 December 2011 (see paragraph 46 above) and active physical resistance on the part of the girl’s grandparents, the bailiff’s attempt to enforce the court decision was unsuccessful and the girl was not taken.
Subsequently, the childcare authorities organised special training for their specialists in order to prepare adequately for the next attempt at execution of the court’s decision and handing over the child.
On 16 April 2012 the bailiff drafted two plans for enforcement of the decision and submitted them to the Lithuanian Association of Psychologists and a child and juvenile psychiatrist for assessment. After receiving their comments the bailiff made the relevant amendments and obtained the approval of the institutions participating in the transfer procedure.
According to the Government, on 18 April 2012 the bailiff issued N.V. with the warrant requiring her to execute the court decision and hand over the child in goodwill. She refused.
Between 24 April and 3 May 2012 the bailiff, having coordinated with the heads of all the institutions participating in the execution proceedings, including the Kaunas police headquarters, prepared a general plan for the girl’s transfer. The documents drafted by the bailiff set out the responsibilities of each of the institutions, and were given to all the participating parties (with the exception of N.V.), who signed them.
On 17 May 2012 the bailiff, the applicant, a childcare specialist and a psychologist arrived at N.V.’s house. They were accompanied by a police force of at least 100 officers, who removed any obstacles – the crowd which had gathered around N.V.’s home – hindering the execution of the court decision. The childcare specialist took the child from N.V. and handed her over to the applicant. The Government stated that afterwards competent specialists, including a psychologist, were monitoring the girl’s condition, and gave her the necessary support.
On 23 March 2012, after the unsuccessful attempt to enforce the Kėdainiai District Court’s decision (see paragraph 62 above), the Prosecutor General, on his own initiative, opened a pre-trial investigation with regard to the elements of a crime under Article 245 of the Criminal Code, namely failure to comply with a court decision not associated with a penalty (see paragraph 85 below).
The bailiff also applied to the prosecutor on 27 March 2012, requesting that a pre-trial investigation be opened under Article 231 of the Criminal Code, namely hindering the activities of a bailiff (see paragraph 85 below) with regard to the actions of N.V.’s relatives during the unsuccessful attempt to execute the court decision on 23 March 2012 (see paragraph 62 above). The prosecutor opened a pre-trial investigation of that charge and also likewise of the charge that a civil servant had been threatened (Article 287 § 1 of the Criminal Code).
On 23 May 2012 the Prosecutor General addressed the Seimas requesting to lift the immunity of N.V., who was a judge. The prosecutor considered that the material gathered allowed for the conclusion that N.V. could have committed several criminal acts. The Government also noted that N.V.’s actions had been subject to examination in disciplinary proceedings before the Judges’ Court of Honour.
In June 2012 N.V. resigned her judgeship after the Seimas voted to remove her legal immunity. N.V. then became the face of a new political party “The Way of Courage (Drąsos Kelias)”, which alluded to her brother D.K.’s name.
In October 2012 N.V. was elected to the Seimas.
In spring 2013 the Prosecutor General asked the Seimas to lift N.V.’s immunity on the grounds that she had been suspected of a number of crimes contained in the Criminal Code, namely, contempt of court (Article 232), failure to comply with a court decision not associated with a penalty (Article 245), resistance against a civil servant or a person performing the functions of public administration (Article 286), abuse of the rights or duties of a guardian (Article 163), hindering the activities of a bailiff (Article 231) and causing negligible bodily harm (Article 140).
On 9 April 2013, on the basis of a proposal by the Prosecutor General, the Seimas agreed that N.V.’s immunity, as that of a member of the Parliament, be lifted, so that she could be prosecuted and detained.
Afterwards, N.V. fled from Lithuania. She was impeached for having failed to attend the plenary meetings of the Seimas, and proceedings regarding her extradition from the United States of America are currently pending.
The Constitution reads:
“The family shall be the basis of society and the State.
Family, motherhood, fatherhood, and childhood shall be under the protection and care of the State.
...
In the family, the rights of spouses shall be equal ...”
“The State shall take care of families raising and bringing up children at home, and shall render them support according to the procedure established by law.
...
Under-age children shall be protected by law.”
The relevant parts of the Law on the Fundamentals of Protection of Children’s Rights (Vaiko teisių apsaugos pagrindų įstatymas) read as follows:
“Parents, other legal representatives of a child, State, municipal government and public institutions and other natural and legal persons must abide by the following provisions and principles:
(1) the legal interests of the child must always and everywhere be given priority consideration;
...
(4) every child shall be given the possibility to be healthy and develop normally, [both] physically and mentally, prior to his or her birth as much as afterwards, and upon birth, a child must also be guaranteed the opportunity to develop morally and to participate in life within society;
...
(7) parents and other legal representatives of a child must first [and foremost] safeguard the rights of the child.”
The Civil Code provides that parents (the father and mother) have equal rights and duties in respect of their children, irrespective of whether the child was born to a married or unmarried couple, after divorce or judicial nullity of the marriage or separation (Article 3.156).
Other provisions of the Civil Code relevant to this case read as follows:
“1.  In the Republic of Lithuania the legal regulation of family relations shall be based on the principles of monogamy, voluntary marriage, the equality of spouses, the priority of protecting and safeguarding the rights and interests of children, raising children in the family, the comprehensive protection of motherhood and [on the] general principles for the legal regulation of civil relations.
Family laws and their application must ensure the strengthening of the family and its significance in society, the mutual responsibility of family members for the preservation of the family and the education of children, the possibility for each member of the family to exercise his or her rights in an appropriate manner and protect children of a minor age from the undue influence of the other members of the family or other persons or any other such factor.”
“1. The court, having regard to the interests of the children of the spouses as well as the interests of one of the spouses, may make orders for temporary protective measures...
The court may make the following orders for temporary protective measures:
...
7) prohibit one of the spouses from having contact with his or her minor children or appearing in certain places.”
“1.  The father or mother not living with the child shall have a right to have contact with the child and be involved in the child’s upbringing.
A child whose parents are separated has the right to have regular and direct contact with both parents irrespective of where they live.
The father or mother living with the child shall not interfere with the other parent’s contact with the child or involvement in [his or her] upbringing.
If the parents cannot agree on the involvement of the separated father or mother in the upbringing of the child and contact, the separated parent’s contact and involvement in the child’s upbringing shall be determined by the court.
The separated father or mother has the right to receive information about the child from all institutions and authorities concerned with the child’s education, training, healthcare and protection ... Information may be refused only in cases where the child’s life or health is at risk from the mother or father and in the cases provided for by law. ...”
“1. Applications for the determination of a child’s residence may be filed by the child’s father or mother, as well as by the parents or guardians/caregivers of a child’s minor-aged parents who do not have full legal capacity.
The court shall resolve the dispute having regard to the interests of the child and the child’s wishes. The child’s wishes may be disregarded only if they are against [his or her] best interests....”
“1. A child deprived of parental care shall be placed in a public or non-governmental child guardianship institution where there is no possibility of placing the child under guardianship in a family or a social family...”
“1. Where a child is placed under temporary guardianship, the child’s guardian shall be appointed by the decision of the ... municipal administration ... on the recommendation of the childcare institution...”
“The place of guardianship of the child may be:
1) the guardian’s place of residence;
...
3) an institution of child guardianship.”
Other domestic law as to a child’s right to live with his or her natural parents, the grounds for restriction of parental authority and the institution of care and guardianship are reproduced in the judgment Z.J. v. Lithuania (no. 60092/12, §§ 68-70, 29 April 2014).
The Code of Civil Procedure at the relevant time provided:
“Effective court decisions, rulings, orders or decrees are binding on the State or municipal authorities, civil servants and officials, physical and legal persons and shall be enforced throughout the entire territory of the Republic of Lithuania.”
As to the court’s role in family law cases and the transfer of children by court order, the Code of Civil Procedure reads as follows:
“...
The court must take measures to reconcile the parties, as well as aim to protect the rights and interests of children. ...”
“1. If the [judgment] debtor does not within the time-limit set by the court or the bailiff comply with a court order concerning the transfer of a child, the bailiff, having assessed the recommendations of the childcare service, the police and the psychologist, shall take a decision regarding the way the court order should be enforced ... A copy of the bailiff’s decision shall be sent to all parties of the proceedings and other relevant persons.
In implementing the court decision concerning the transfer of a child, the bailiff must carry out its duties in the presence of the [applicant] and a representative of the childcare service. To guarantee the protection of the child’s rights, a psychologist may be invited, at the request of any party to the civil proceedings or the childcare service, or by a decision of the bailiff.
If the debtor does not comply with the bailiff’s order for the transfer of the child, the bailiff has the right to ask the court for permission to forcibly take the child.
Where forcibly transferring a child, the police must remove obstacles for the enforcement of the decision for transfer, and the representatives of the childcare service shall take the child and hand him or her to the [applicant].
If a court rejects the bailiff’s request for permission to forcibly take the child, the ruling must indicate how the child’s transfer will proceed from that point forward.
Where enforcing the decisions mentioned [herein], protection of the child’s rights must be guaranteed.”
“1. If the decision obliging the debtor to perform certain actions or stop performing them, where such actions are not related to transfer of property or funds, the bailiff shall note it in writing ...
...
When the decision obliging the debtor to perform certain actions or stop performing them, and those actions may only be performed by the debtor personally, is not executed within the set time-limit, the bailiff shall bring the aforementioned written statement to the district court of the place of execution. The issue of non-execution is decided in a court hearing. Both the debtor and the person in whose favour the court decision to be executed has been taken [the creditor] are informed of the time and place of the hearing ... Having established that the debtor has not executed the court decision, the court may impose a fine of up to one thousand litas [EUR 290] for each delayed day in favour of the creditor and set a new time-limit for execution of the court decision.
If the debtor one or more times again breaches the time-limit set for execution of the court decision, the court shall apply the sanction mentioned in paragraph 5 of this Article. Payment of the fine shall not release the debtor from the obligation to perform certain actions or stop performing them ...”
Article 283 § 1 (4) of the Code of Civil Procedure at the material time provided that the court could order that its decision be urgently executed in part or entirely, before deciding the appeal, if a delay in executing the court decision could cause serious harm to the party seeking the decision or could make the decision overall impossible to execute.
Articles 2 and 3 of the Law on Bailiffs (Antstolių įstatymas) states that a bailiff is someone authorised and empowered by the State to carry out the enforcement of writs of execution, make findings of fact, or carry out any other tasks provided for by law (see also Manic v. Lithuania, no. 46600/11, § 71, 13 January 2015). A bailiff’s actions or failure to act may be appealed against to the district courts (Article 510 of the Code of Civil Procedure).
The Criminal Code, in so far as relevant, reads:
“Anyone who abuses the rights of a father, mother, guardian or custodian or other lawful representative of a child by physically or mentally harassing a child, leaving him for long periods without care or by maltreating him in a similar cruel manner
shall be punished by a fine or by restriction of liberty or by arrest or by deprivation of liberty of up to five years.”
The Law on Administrative Proceedings, in so far as relevant, reads:
“1. Administrative courts shall examine cases concerning:
1) the lawfulness of legal acts adopted and actions performed by the entities of State administration, as well as the lawfulness and justification of refusals by those entities to perform the actions within their competence or delay in performing such actions;
2) the lawfulness of acts passed and actions performed by the entities of municipal administration, as well as the lawfulness and justification of refusals by those entities to perform the actions within their competence or delay in performing such actions;
3) redress for damage caused by the unlawful actions of the entities of public administration (Article 6.271 of the Civil Code); ...”
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, ratified by Lithuania on 3 July 1995, and published in the State Gazette (Valstybės žinios) on 21 July 1995, contains, inter alia, the following provisions:
“1.  In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.
States Parties undertake to ensure the child such protection and care as is necessary for his or her well-being, taking into account the rights and duties of his or her parents, legal guardians, or other individuals legally responsible for him or her, and, to this end, shall take all appropriate legislative and administrative measures.
States Parties shall ensure that the institutions, services and facilities responsible for the care or protection of children shall conform with the standards established by competent authorities, particularly in the areas of safety, health, in the number and suitability of their staff, as well as competent supervision.”
“1. States Parties shall ensure that a child shall not be separated from his or her parents against their will, except when competent authorities subject to judicial review determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures, that such separation is necessary for the best interests of the child. Such determination may be necessary in a particular case such as one involving abuse or neglect of the child by the parents, or one where the parents are living separately and a decision must be made as to the child’s place of residence.
In any proceedings pursuant to paragraph 1 of the present article, all interested parties shall be given an opportunity to participate in the proceedings and make their views known.
States Parties shall respect the right of the child who is separated from one or both parents to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, except if it is contrary to the child’s best interests. ...”
On 25 January 1996 the Council of Europe adopted the Convention on the Exercise of Children’s Rights, which entered into force on 1 July 2000. To date, the Convention has been signed by twenty-eight Council of Europe Member States and ratified by twenty. Lithuania is not a party to the Convention. As concerns the decision-making process and role of judicial authorities, the Convention reads as follows:
“A child considered by internal law as having sufficient understanding, in the case of proceedings before a judicial authority affecting him or her, shall be granted, and shall be entitled to request, the following rights:
to receive all relevant information;
to be consulted and express his or her views;
to be informed of the possible consequences of compliance with these views and the possible consequences of any decision.”
“In proceedings affecting a child, the judicial authority, before taking a decision, shall:
consider whether it has sufficient information at its disposal in order to take a decision in the best interests of the child and, where necessary, it shall obtain further information, in particular from the holders of parental responsibilities;
in a case where the child is considered by internal law as having sufficient understanding:
ensure that the child has received all relevant information;
consult the child in person in appropriate cases, if necessary privately, itself or through other persons or bodies, in a manner appropriate to his or her understanding, unless this would be manifestly contrary to the best interests of the child;
allow the child to express his or her views;
give due weight to the views expressed by the child.”
“In proceedings affecting a child the judicial authority shall act speedily to avoid any unnecessary delay and procedures shall be available to ensure that its decisions are rapidly enforced. In urgent cases the judicial authority shall have the power, where appropriate, to take decisions which are immediately enforceable.”
“In proceedings affecting a child the judicial authority shall have the power to act on its own motion in cases determined by internal law where the welfare of a child is in serious danger.”
On 17 November 2010 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Guidelines on Child Friendly Justice. One of the fundamental principles is that all children have a right to be consulted and heard in proceedings involving or affecting them. The best interests of the children are a primary consideration for the Member States. The Guidelines also provide that children should be treated with care and sensitivity throughout any procedure or case, with special attention for their personal situation, well-being and specific needs, and with full respect for their physical and psychological integrity. This treatment should be given to them, in whichever way they have come into contact with judicial or nonjudicial proceedings or other interventions, and regardless of their legal status and capacity in any procedure or case. Judges should respect the right of children to be heard in all matters that affect them or at least to be heard when they are deemed to have a sufficient understanding of the matters in question. Judgments and court rulings affecting children should be duly reasoned. In all proceedings involving children, the urgency principle should be applied to provide a speedy response and protect the best interests of the child, while respecting the rule of law. In family law cases (for example, custody), courts should exercise exceptional diligence to avoid any risk of adverse consequences on the family relations. When necessary, judicial authorities should consider the possibility of taking provisional decisions. Once the judicial proceedings are over, national authorities should take all necessary steps to facilitate the execution of court decisions involving and affecting children without delay. Lastly, after judgments in highly conflictual proceedings, guidance and support should be offered to children and their families by specialised services (see point nos. 44-48, 50-54, 76 and 79).