The application concerns an alleged infringement of the applicant’s right to respect for her family life, in so far as a court decision ordered her children’s return to France, where they used to live before moving to Romania and where their father still lived. The applicant alleged that those proceedings had not taken full account of the French court decisions establishing the children’s residence as being with her, nor of the grave risk to which the children would be exposed if returned to their father, who had been violent towards her in the past.
The applicant was born in 1982 and, according to the information available in the file, lives in Bucharest. She was represented by Ms D. Iovanovici-Șoșoacă, a lawyer practising in Bucharest.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms O.F. Ezer, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2009 the applicant started living together with a French national, Mr X. They had two sons together: Y, born in 2012, and Z, born in 2015. The family was living in France. According to the applicant, the children were raised bilingually (in Romanian and French), and regularly visited their maternal grandparents in Romania.
In April 2016 the couple separated and X moved out of the family home to start a new relationship. The applicant and the children remained together.
On 2 September 2016 the Bobigny tribunal de grande instance granted joint parental authority to the parents and established the children’s residence as being with their mother, who at that time was living in France. X was granted contact rights. In accordance with the scope of the rights conferred by law on the holders of parental authority, the court imposed an obligation on both parents to inform each other when they changed their residence, in order to allow for a proper organisation of the parental rights and responsibilities of both parents. It also ordered them to consult each other in any matter concerning the children’s welfare.
Both parents appealed. The Paris Court of Appeal heard the case (see paragraphs 32-35 below).
According to the applicant, X had subjected her to psychological pressure throughout their relationship. After their separation, he had also become verbally and physically abusive towards her.
She recounted one such episode which had taken place on 2 December 2016 when X had returned to the family home to take the children with him. Y had refused to leave with him and the applicant had tried to stop X from dragging Y away by force. X had then become violent towards the applicant and in the commotion had broken one of her fingers. Both children had been present during the incident.
On 25 December 2016 the Bobigny tribunal de grande instance put in place a restraining order. By a decision of 14 February 2017 the same court convicted X of domestic violence, fined him 1,000 euros (EUR) in relation to the incident of 2 December 2016 and suspended the sentence. X appealed. It appears that in a final decision of 21 February 2019 the Paris Court of Appeal quashed the conviction. The applicant claimed that she had not been informed about the progress of those proceedings and had been unable to participate in them.
In March 2017 the applicant sought support from a French organisation specialised in protecting victims of domestic violence, which provided her with assistance, psychological counselling and advice on how to deal with X.
In June 2017 the applicant’s French employer offered her a threeyear contract in Romania, starting on 1 September 2017. According to the applicant, on 3 July 2017 she informed X of her intention to leave France and take the children with her, but he did not respond.
In the meantime she moved to Romania with the children and on 19 August 2017 communicated their new address to X.
The applicant enrolled the children in a French school in Bucharest.
In the proceedings before the Paris Court of Appeal concerning the appeals against the decision of 2 September 2016 (see paragraphs 8 above and 32-35 below), X lodged an interim request for the return of the children to France. The applicant asked the court to approve the change of residence to Romania and to grant her exclusive parental authority over the children.
On 21 November 2017 the Paris Court of Appeal dismissed these requests. With regard to the request for return, the court noted that X had not sought to have the children placed with him, and had not started proceedings under the provisions of the Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (“the Hague Convention”, see paragraph 39 below). The court also dismissed the applicant’s request, arguing that the change of residence to Romania did not justify a change in the attribution of parental authority. It therefore maintained the custody arrangements established by the decision of 2 September 2016 (see paragraph 7 above).
On 6 February 2018 X contacted the French Central Authority for the application of the Hague Convention with a request for the return of Y and Z to France. On 27 March 2018, while the administrative proceedings between the two Central Authorities were pending, X lodged an action with the Bucharest County Court (“the County Court”) requesting the children’s return under the Hague Convention.
On 30 April 2018 the County Court examined the case under the requirements of the Hague Convention and ordered the children’s return to France. The court found that at the time when the children had been taken to Romania, their habitual residence had been in France and the parents had exercised parental authority jointly. Under French law, that meant that the children’s residence could only be changed if both parents agreed or, in the absence of such agreement, if a court authorised the move. On the facts of the case, the court found that the applicant had taken the children to Romania without the father’s consent and before the French courts had had an opportunity to determine by means of a final decision her request to take the children to Romania. The County Court examined both the decision of 2 September 2016 by the Bobigny tribunal de grande instance (see paragraph 7 above) and the decision of 21 November 2017 by the Paris Court of Appeal (see paragraph 17 above).
The court considered that X’s alleged abusive behaviour did not constitute the exception of “grave risk” preventing the children’s return in accordance with the provisions of Article 13 § (b) of the Hague Convention (see paragraph 39 below). The court examined the evidence adduced by the applicant concerning the incident of 2 December 2016 (see paragraph 10 above). However, based on that evidence and on the witness testimonies available to it, the court considered that it had not been established that X had been in any way violent, abusive or neglectful towards the children, either while they had been living together or after the parents’ separation. It thus concluded that his behaviour would not put them at “grave risk” for the purpose of Article 13 of the Hague Convention. The court further considered that, in any case, a risk to the children’s physical or psychological integrity would not lead the court to reject the request for return. In the court’s view, such a risk would simply require it to seek international cooperation to ensure the children’s protection by the French authorities after their return (Article 60 (e) of the Brussels II bis Regulation – see paragraph 41 below).
The court decided not to interview the children. In that regard it considered that they were still too young to give evidence.
Lastly, the court observed that the children had become fully integrated in their new environment in Romania. However, it considered that legalising their stay in Romanian would not serve their best interests, in so far as their situation had been unjustly and unilaterally altered by their mother, in violation of the custody arrangements.
The applicant appealed, but in a final decision of 9 August 2018 the Bucharest Court of Appeal upheld the above decision for the same reasons as those given by the County Court.
According to the applicant, in July 2018 X took the children to France for two weeks during their school holidays. He returned them to Romania at the end of that period. The applicant was not allowed any contact with the children during that time. She further claimed that on 21 August 2018 she had gone to France with the children. She stated that she had contacted X to let him know where they were, but that X had not visited them.
On 26 October 2018 X visited the applicant in Romania and sought to take the children away with him. According to the applicant, he verbally abused her and her parents in the children’s presence. The applicant called the police. Y and Z refused to accompany their father and the police advised him that he would not be allowed to take them by force.
On 1 December 2018 X again attempted to visit the children, but the applicant refused to let him in as the children were asleep at that hour. X allegedly slashed the applicant’s car tyres on his way out.
According to the applicant the verbal abuse and threats continued.
As the children continued to live with their mother in Romania, X started enforcement proceedings. On 7 and 23 January 2019 the applicant brought Y and Z to the bailiff’s office, where they met their father. The children refused to return to France with him. The bailiff noted the children’s opposition and submitted a request for them to be included in a counselling programme, in accordance with the requirements of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 37 below).
On 4 January 2019 the applicant lodged an objection to enforcement of the final decision of 9 August 2018 (see paragraph 23 above).
On 5 April 2019 the Bucharest District Court ordered psychological counselling for the children under Article 913 of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 37 below).
On 28 October 2019 the District Court dismissed the objection to enforcement and ordered the resumption of the enforcement proceedings. The court noted that the applicant had been unable to produce evidence that she had actually visited France and contacted X in August 2018. Moreover, she had opposed all attempts by X and by the bailiff to enforce the decision of 30 April 2018 (see paragraphs 19 to 22 above). On the other hand, X’s efforts to contact the children had been uncontested. The court therefore considered that the applicant had failed to comply with the obligation to return the children to France.
On 22 October 2019 the Paris Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal lodged by the applicant against the decision of 2 September 2016 (see paragraphs 7 and 8 above).
The court upheld the joint exercise of parental authority by the two parents. It dismissed as unsubstantiated the applicant’s allegations that X had been verbally and physically abusive towards her.
The court examined the applicant’s request to allow the children to continue living with her in Romania. It did not accept that the mother was better placed than X to take care of the children, in so far as she had unilaterally changed their residence to Romania and hindered X’s contact with the children ever since. The court considered that maintaining the children’s residence with her would only consolidate an illegal situation that she had created unilaterally.
The court concluded that the applicant, through her attitude, had infringed the children’s right to maintain personal relations with their father. Consequently, the court established the children’s residence as being with their father in France and granted the applicant contact rights only in France. The parents were required to obtain each other’s approval before taking the children outside France.
The relevant provisions of Law no. 369/2004 on the enforcement of the Hague Convention are set out in Ferrari v. Romania (no. 1714/10, § 25, 28 April 2015) and Blaga v. Romania (no. 54443/10, § 50, 1 July 2014).
The special enforcement procedure for the enforcement of court orders concerning children, as regulated by the Code of Civil Procedure, is described in Niţă v. Romania ([Committee], no. 30305/16, §§ 28 and 29, 3 July 2018). In particular, at the time of the facts of the present case, under Article 913 of that Code, if the bailiff observed that the children refused in absolute terms contact with their estranged parent, a psychological counselling programme was to be put in place by court order for the benefit of the children, for a period not exceeding three months. The enforcement proceedings were to be stayed during that time.
The relevant provisions of the international instruments applicable in the present case are set out in X v. Latvia ([GC] no. 27853/09, §§ 34-42, ECHR 2013).
The Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (“the Hague Convention”) was ratified by Romania by means of Law no. 100/1992. The relevant parts of that Convention read as follows:
“...Firmly convinced that the interests of children are of paramount importance in matters relating to their custody,
Desiring to protect children internationally from the harmful effects of their wrongful removal or retention and to establish procedures to ensure their prompt return to the State of their habitual residence, as well as to secure protection for rights of access,
...”
Article 1
“The objects of the present Convention are –
(a) to secure the prompt return of children wrongfully removed to or retained in any Contracting State; and
(b) to ensure that rights of custody and of access under the law of one Contracting State are effectively respected in the other Contracting States.
...”
Article 3
“The removal or the retention of a child is to be considered wrongful where –
(a) it is in breach of rights of custody attributed to a person, an institution or any other body, either jointly or alone, under the law of the State in which the child was habitually resident immediately before the removal or retention; and
(b) at the time of removal or retention those rights were actually exercised, either jointly or alone, or would have been so exercised but for the removal or retention.
The rights of custody mentioned in sub-paragraph a) above, may arise in particular by operation of law or by reason of a judicial or administrative decision, or by reason of an agreement having legal effect under the law of that State.”
Article 4
“The Convention shall apply to any child who was habitually resident in a Contracting State immediately before any breach of custody or access rights. The Convention shall cease to apply when the child attains the age of 16 years.”
Article 5
“For the purposes of this Convention –
(a) ‘rights of custody’ shall include rights relating to the care of the person of the child and, in particular, the right to determine the child’s place of residence;
(b) ‘rights of access’ shall include the right to take a child for a limited period of time to a place other than the child’s habitual residence.
...”
Article 12
“Where a child has been wrongfully removed or retained in terms of Article 3 and, at the date of the commencement of the proceedings before the judicial or administrative authority of the Contracting State where the child is, a period of less than one year has elapsed from the date of the wrongful removal or retention, the authority concerned shall order the return of the child forthwith.
The judicial or administrative authority, even where the proceedings have been commenced after the expiration of the period of one year referred to in the preceding paragraph, shall also order the return of the child, unless it is demonstrated that the child is now settled in its new environment.
Where the judicial or administrative authority in the requested State has reason to believe that the child has been taken to another State, it may stay the proceedings or dismiss the application for the return of the child.”
Article 13
“Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding Article, the judicial or administrative authority of the requested State is not bound to order the return of the child if the person, institution or other body which opposes its return establishes that –
(a) the person, institution or other body having the care of the person of the child was not actually exercising the custody rights at the time of removal or retention, or had consented to or subsequently acquiesced in the removal or retention; or
(b) there is a grave risk that his or her return would expose the child to physical or psychological harm or otherwise place the child in an intolerable situation.
The judicial or administrative authority may also refuse to order the return of the child if it finds that the child objects to being returned and has attained an age and degree of maturity at which it is appropriate to take account of its views.
In considering the circumstances referred to in this Article, the judicial and administrative authorities shall take into account the information relating to the social background of the child provided by the Central Authority or other competent authority of the child’s habitual residence.
...”
Article 21
“An application to make arrangements for organising or securing the effective exercise of rights of access may be presented to the Central Authorities of the Contracting States in the same way as an application for the return of a child.
The Central Authorities are bound by the obligations of co-operation which are set forth in Article 7 to promote the peaceful enjoyment of access rights and the fulfilment of any conditions to which the exercise of those rights may be subject. The Central Authorities shall take steps to remove, as far as possible, all obstacles to the exercise of such rights.
The Central Authorities, either directly or through intermediaries, may initiate or assist in the institution of proceedings with a view to organising or protecting these rights and securing respect for the conditions to which the exercise of these rights may be subject.”
The Explanatory Report on the Hague Convention, prepared by Elisa Pérez-Vera (“the Explanatory Report”), defines as follows the notion of “the best interests of the child”:
“21.  ... the legal standard ‘the best interests of the child’ is at first view of such vagueness that it seems to resemble more closely a sociological paradigm than a concrete juridical standard.
... [the philosophy of the Hague Convention] can be defined as follows: the struggle against the great increase in international child abductions must always be inspired by the desire to protect children and should be based upon an interpretation of their true interests. ... the right not to be removed or retained in the name of more or less arguable rights concerning its person is one of the most objective examples of what constitutes the interests of the child.
... the true victim of the ’childnapping’ is the child himself, who suffers from the sudden upsetting of his stability, the traumatic loss of contact with the parent who has been in charge of his upbringing, the uncertainty and frustration which come with the necessity to adapt to a strange language, unfamiliar cultural conditions and unknown teachers and relatives.
It is thus legitimate to assert that the two objects of the Convention – the one preventive, the other designed to secure the immediate reintegration of the child into its habitual environment – both correspond to a specific idea of what constitutes the ’best interests of the child’. However ... it has to be admitted that the removal of the child can sometimes be justified by objective reasons which have to do either with its person, or with the environment with which it is most closely connected. Therefore the Convention recognizes the need for certain exceptions to the general obligations assumed by States to secure the prompt return of children who have been unlawfully removed or retained.”
Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 of 27 November 2003 concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility (known as “the Brussels II bis Regulation”) reads, in particular, as follows:
Article 3 General jurisdiction
“1. In matters relating to divorce, legal separation or marriage annulment, jurisdiction shall lie with the courts of the Member State
(a) in whose territory:
- the spouses are habitually resident, or
- the spouses were last habitually resident, insofar as one of them still resides there, or
- the respondent is habitually resident, or
- in the event of a joint application, either of the spouses is habitually resident, or
- the applicant is habitually resident if he or she resided there for at least a year immediately before the application was made, or
- the applicant is habitually resident if he or she resided there for at least six months immediately before the application was made and is either a national of the Member State in question or, in the case of the United Kingdom and Ireland, has his or her ‘domicile’ there;
(b) of the nationality of both spouses or, in the case of the United Kingdom and Ireland, of the ‘domicile’ of both spouses.”
Article 10 Jurisdiction in cases of child abduction
“In case of wrongful removal or retention of the child, the courts of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention shall retain their jurisdiction until the child has acquired a habitual residence in another Member State and:
(a) each person, institution or other body having rights of custody has acquiesced in the removal or retention;
or
(b) the child has resided in that other Member State for a period of at least one year after the person, institution or other body having rights of custody has had or should have had knowledge of the whereabouts of the child and the child is settled in his or her new environment and at least one of the following conditions is met:
(i) within one year after the holder of rights of custody has had or should have had knowledge of the whereabouts of the child, no request for return has been lodged before the competent authorities of the Member State where the child has been removed or is being retained;
(ii) a request for return lodged by the holder of rights of custody has been withdrawn and no new request has been lodged within the time limit set in paragraph (i);
(iii) a case before the court in the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention has been closed pursuant to Article 11(7);
(iv) a judgment on custody that does not entail the return of the child has been issued by the courts of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention.”
Article 11 Return of the child
“1. Where a person, institution or other body having rights of custody applies to the competent authorities in a Member State to deliver a judgment on the basis of the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (hereinafter ‘the 1980 Hague Convention’), in order to obtain the return of a child that has been wrongfully removed or retained in a Member State other than the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention, paragraphs 2 to 8 shall apply.
When applying Articles 12 and 13 of the 1980 Hague Convention, it shall be ensured that the child is given the opportunity to be heard during the proceedings unless this appears inappropriate having regard to his or her age or degree of maturity.
A court to which an application for return of a child is made as mentioned in paragraph 1 shall act expeditiously in proceedings on the application, using the most expeditious procedures available in national law.
Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, the court shall, except where exceptional circumstances make this impossible, issue its judgment no later than six weeks after the application is lodged.
A court cannot refuse to return a child on the basis of Article 13b of the 1980 Hague Convention if it is established that adequate arrangements have been made to secure the protection of the child after his or her return.
A court cannot refuse to return a child unless the person who requested the return of the child has been given an opportunity to be heard.
If a court has issued an order on non-return pursuant to Article 13 of the 1980 Hague Convention, the court must immediately either directly or through its central authority, transmit a copy of the court order on non-return and of the relevant documents, in particular a transcript of the hearings before the court, to the court with jurisdiction or central authority in the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention, as determined by national law. The court shall receive all the mentioned documents within one month of the date of the non-return order.
Unless the courts in the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention have already been seised by one of the parties, the court or central authority that receives the information mentioned in paragraph 6 must notify it to the parties and invite them to make submissions to the court, in accordance with national law, within three months of the date of notification so that the court can examine the question of custody of the child.
Without prejudice to the rules on jurisdiction contained in this Regulation, the court shall close the case if no submissions have been received by the court within the time limit.
Notwithstanding a judgment of non-return pursuant to Article 13 of the 1980 Hague Convention, any subsequent judgment which requires the return of the child issued by a court having jurisdiction under this Regulation shall be enforceable in accordance with Section 4 of Chapter III below in order to secure the return of the child.”