The case originated in an application (no. 38590/10) against the Kingdom of Denmark lodged on 12 July 2010 with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Ousmane Ghanian Biao (the first applicant), a Danish national, and his wife Mrs Asia Adamo Biao (the second applicant), a Ghanaian national.
The applicants are represented by Mr Steen Petersen, a lawyer practising in Copenhagen. The Danish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Thomas Winkler, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and their Co-agent, Mrs Nina Holst-Christensen, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that the refusal by the Danish authorities to grant them family reunion in Denmark was in breach of Article 8, alone and in conjunction with Article 14.
On 11 May 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1971 and 1979. They live in Malmö, Sweden.
The first applicant was born in Togo, where he lived until the age of 6 and again briefly from the age of 21 to 22. From the age of 6 to 21 he lived in Ghana with his uncle. He attended school there for ten years and speaks the local language. On 18 July 1993, when he was 22 years old, he entered Denmark and requested asylum, which was refused by a final decision of 8 March 1995.
In the meantime, on 7 November 1994 he had married a Danish national. Having regard thereto, on 1 March 1996, by virtue of the former section 9, subsection 1(ii), of the Aliens Act (Udlændingeloven) he was granted a residence permit, which became permanent on 23 September 1997.
On 25 September 1998, the first applicant and his Danish wife divorced.
On 22 April 2002 the first applicant acquired Danish citizenship. Thus, at the relevant time he met the requirement relating to the length of his period of residence, age, general conduct, arrears owed to public funding and language proficiency.
On 22 February 2003 in Ghana, the first applicant married the second applicant, whom he had met during one of four visits to Ghana made in the five years prior to their marriage. The second applicant was born in Ghana.
On 28 February 2003, at the Danish Embassy in Accra in Ghana, the second applicant requested a residence permit for Denmark with reference to her marriage to the first applicant. At that time she was 24 years old. She stated that she had not visited Denmark. Her parents lived in Ghana. In the application form, the first applicant submitted that he had not received any education in Denmark, but had participated in various language courses and short-term courses concerning service, customer care, industrial cleaning, hygiene and working methods. He had been working in a slaughterhouse since 15 February 1999. He had no close family in Denmark. He spoke and wrote Danish. The spouses had come to know each other in Ghana and they communicated in the Hausa and Twi languages.
At the relevant time, under section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act family reunion could only be granted if both spouses were over 24 years old and their aggregate ties to Denmark were stronger than the spouses’ attachment to any other country.
On 1 July 2003, the Aliens Authority (Udlændingestyrelsen) refused the request because it found that it could not be established that the spouses’ aggregate ties with Denmark were stronger than their aggregate ties to Ghana.
In July or August 2003 the second applicant entered Denmark on a tourist visa.
On 28 August 2003 she appealed against the Aliens Authority’ decision of 1 July 2003, to the then Ministry of Refugee, Immigration and Integration Affairs (Ministeriet for Flygtninge, Indvandrere og Integration).The appeal did not have suspensive effect.
On 15 November 2003 the applicants moved to Sweden.
By Act no. 1204 of 27 December 2003, section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act was amended so that the attachment requirement was lifted for persons who had held Danish citizenship for at least 28 years (the so-called 28-year rule, 28-års reglen). Furthermore, persons born or having arrived in Denmark as small children could be exempted from the attachment requirement, provided they had resided lawfully there for 28 years.
On 6 May 2004 the applicants had a son. He was born in Sweden but is a Danish national due to his father’s nationality.
On 27 August 2004 the Ministry of Refugee, Immigration and Integration Affairs upheld the decision by the Aliens Authority of 1 July 2003 to refuse to grant the second applicant a residence permit. It noted in particular that the second applicant had always lived in Ghana and had family there, and that the first applicant had ties with Ghana and had, among other things, attended school there for ten years. Finally, it found that the family could settle in Ghana, as that would only require that the first applicant obtain employment there.
On 18 July 2006, before the High Court of Eastern Denmark (Østre Landsret), the applicants instituted proceedings against the Ministry of Refugee, Immigration and Integration Affairs and relied on Article 8 of the Convention, alone and in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention, as well as Article 5 (2) of the European Convention on Nationality. They submitted, among other things, that it amounted to indirect discrimination against them when applying for family reunion, that persons who were born Danish citizens were exempt from the attachment requirement altogether, whereas persons who had acquired Danish citizenship at a later point in life had to comply with the 28-year rule before being exempted from the attachment requirement. In the present case that would entail that the first applicant could not be exempted from the attachment requirement until 2030, thus after 28 years of Danish citizenship, and after having reached the age of 59.
By a judgment of 25 September 2007 the High Court of Eastern Denmark unanimously found that the refusal to grant the applicants family reunion with reference to the 28-year rule and the attachment requirement did not contravene the Articles of the Convention or the European Convention on Nationality relied on. It stated as follows:
“...the facts given in the decisions of the immigration authorities in the case are found not to be disputed.
Hence, [the second applicant] who is a Ghanaian national, was thus 24 years old when she applied for a residence permit on 28 February 2003, and she had no other ties with Denmark than her recent marriage to [the first applicant]. [The second applicant] had always lived in Ghana and had family there. [The first applicant] had some ties with Ghana, where he had lived with his uncle while attending school in Ghana for ten years. He entered Denmark in 1993 at the age of 22 and became a Danish national on 22 April 2002. [The applicants] married in Ghana on 22 February 2003 and have lived in Sweden since 15 November 2003 with their child, born on 6 May 2004. [The first applicant] has told the High Court that the family can settle lawfully in Ghana if he obtains paid employment in Ghana.
It appears from a Supreme Court judgment of 13 April 2005, reproduced on page 2086 in the Danish Weekly Law Reports (Ugeskrift for Retsvæsen) for 2005, that Article 8 of the Convention does not impose on the Contracting States any general obligation to respect immigrants’ choice of the country of their residence in connection with marriage, or otherwise to authorise family reunion.
In view of the information on [the applicants’] situation and their ties with Ghana, the High Court accordingly finds no basis for setting aside the Defendant’s decision establishing that [the applicants’] aggregate ties with Ghana were stronger than their aggregate ties with Denmark and that [the applicants] therefore did not meet the attachment requirement set out in section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act. In this connection, the High Court finds that the refusal did not bar [the applicants] from exercising their right to family life in Ghana or in a country other than Denmark. The fact that [the first applicant] is only able to reside in Ghana if he obtains paid employment there is found not to lead to any other assessment. Accordingly, the High Court holds that the decision of the Ministry did not constitute a breach of Article 8 of the Convention.
Although the High Court has held that Article 8 of the Convention has not been breached in this case, the High Court has to consider [the applicants’] claim that, within the substantive area otherwise protected by Article 8, the decision of the Ministry constituted a breach of Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 8 of the Convention.
The High Court initially observes that [the first applicant] had been residing in Denmark for 11 years when the Ministry made its decision. Although he acquired Danish nationality in 2002, nine years after his entry to Denmark, he did not meet the 28-year nationality requirement applicable to all Danish nationals pursuant to section 9, subsection 7 of the Aliens Act, irrespective of whether they are of foreign or Danish extraction. Nor did he have the comparable attachment to Denmark throughout 28 years which will generally lead to an exemption from the attachment requirement according to the preparatory works to the 2003 statutory amendment.
The 28-year rule is a generally worded relaxation of the attachment requirement based on an objective criterion. In practice, however, the rule may imply that a Danish national of foreign extraction will only meet the 28-year rule later in life than would be the case for a Danish national of Danish extraction. When applied, the rule may therefore imply an indirect discrimination.
According to the relevant explanatory report, Article 5 of the European Convention on Nationality must be taken to mean that Article 5 § 1 concerns the conditions for acquiring nationality while Article 5 § 2 concerns the principle of non-discrimination. According to the report, it is not a mandatory rule that the Contracting States are obliged to observe in all situations. Against that background, Article 5 is considered to offer protection against discrimination to an extent that goes no further than the protection against discrimination offered by Article 14 of the Convention.
The assessment of whether the refusal of the Ministry implied discrimination amounting to a breach of Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 8 of the Convention is accordingly considered to depend on whether the difference in treatment which occurred as a consequence of the attachment requirement despite the nationality can be considered objectively justified and proportionate.
According to the preparatory works to the Act, the overall aim of the attachment requirement, which is a requirement of lasting and strong links to Denmark, is to regulate spousal reunion in Denmark in such manner as best to ensure the integration of immigrants in Denmark, which aim must in itself be considered objective. In the view of the High Court, difference in treatment between Danish nationals of Danish extraction and Danish nationals of foreign extraction can therefore be justified by this aim relative to the right to spousal reunion if a Danish national of foreign extraction has no such lasting and strong attachment to Denmark.
The balancing of this overall consideration relative to the specific circumstances in the case requires a detailed assessment. The High Court finds that the assessment and decision of the Ministry were made in accordance with section 9(7) of the Aliens Act and the preparatory works describing the application of the provision. Accordingly, and in view of the specific information on [the first applicant’s] situation, the High Court finds no sufficient basis for holding that the refusal by the Ministry to grant a residence permit to [the second applicant] with reference to the attachment requirement of the Aliens Act implies a disproportionate infringement of [the first applicant’s] rights as a Danish national and his right to family life. The High Court therefore finds that the decision of the Ministry was not invalid, and that it was not contrary to Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 8 of the Convention.”
The applicants appealed against the judgment to the Supreme Court (Højesteret), which passed its judgment on 13 January 2010 confirming the High Court judgment.
The Supreme Court found, unanimously, that it was not in breach of Article 8 of the Convention to refuse the second applicant a residence permit in Denmark. It stated as follows:
“By its decision of 27 August 2004, the Ministry of Integration refused the application from [the second applicant] for a residence permit on the grounds that the aggregate ties of herself and her spouse [the first applicant] with Denmark were not stronger than their aggregate ties with Ghana, see section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act.
[The applicants] first submitted that the refusal was unlawful because it was contrary to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. If the refusal was not contrary to Article 8, they submitted as their alternative claim that it was contrary to the prohibition against discrimination enshrined in Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 8, for which reason they were eligible for family reunion in Denmark without satisfying the attachment requirement set out in section 9(7) of the Act.
For the reasons given by the High Court, the Supreme Court upholds the decision made by the Ministry of Integration that it is not contrary to Article 8 to refuse [the second applicant’s] application for a residence permit.”
Moreover, the majority of the Supreme Court (four judges) found that the 28-year rule was in compliance with Article 8 of the Convention in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention. They stated as follows:
A minority of three judges was of the view that the 28-year rule implied an indirect discrimination between persons who were born Danish citizens and persons who had acquired Danish citizenship later in their life. Since persons who were born Danish citizens would usually be of Danish ethnic origin whereas persons who acquired Danish citizenship at a later point in their life would generally be of foreign ethnic origin, the 28-year rule also entailed an indirect discrimination between ethnic Danish citizens and Danish citizens with a foreign ethnic background. More specifically, they stated:
“As stated by the majority, the requirement of section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act that the spouses’ or cohabitants’ aggregate ties with Denmark must be stronger than their aggregate ties with another country (the attachment requirement) does not apply when the resident person has been a Danish national for 28 years (the 28-year rule).
The 28-year rule applies both to persons born Danish nationals and to persons acquiring Danish nationality later in life, but in reality the significance of the rule differs greatly for the two groups of Danish nationals. For persons born Danish nationals, the rule only implies that the attachment requirement applies until they are 28 years old. For persons not raised in Denmark who acquire Danish nationality later in life, the rule implies that the attachment requirement applies until 28 years have passed after the date when any such person became a Danish national. As an example, [the first applicant] who became a Danish national at the age of 31, will be subject to the attachment requirement until he is 59 years old. The 28-year rule therefore implies that the major restriction of the right to spousal reunion resulting from the attachment requirement will affect persons who only acquire Danish nationality later in life far more often and with a far greater impact than persons born with Danish nationality. Hence, the 28-year rule results in obvious indirect difference in treatment between the two groups of Danish nationals.
The vast majority of persons born Danish nationals will be of Danish ethnic origin, while persons acquiring Danish nationality later in life will generally be of other ethnic origin. At the same time, the 28-year rule therefore implies obvious indirect difference in treatment between Danish nationals of Danish ethnic origin and Danish nationals of other ethnic origin regarding the right to spousal reunion.
Pursuant to section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act, the attachment requirement may be disregarded if exceptional reasons make it appropriate. According to the preparatory works to the 2003 Act, this possibility of exemption is to be administered in such a manner that aliens who were born and raised in Denmark or who came to Denmark as small children and were raised here must be treated comparably to Danish nationals, which means that they will be exempt from the attachment requirement when they have lawfully resided in Denmark for 28 years. However, relative to persons who were not raised in Denmark, but acquire Danish nationality later in life, this does not alter the situation described above concerning the indirect difference in treatment implied by the 28-year rule.
When the attachment requirement was introduced by Act No. 424 of 31 May 2000, all Danish nationals were exempt from the requirement. Act No. 365 of 6 June 2002 made the attachment requirement generally applicable also to Danish nationals. Concerning the reason for this, the preparatory works to the Act state, inter alia: “With resident aliens and Danish nationals of foreign extraction it is a widespread marriage pattern to marry a person from their countries of origin, among other reasons due to parental pressure [...]. The Government finds that the attachment requirement, as it is worded today, does not take sufficient account of the existence of this marriage pattern among both resident foreigners and resident Danish nationals of foreign extraction. There are thus also Danish nationals who are not well-integrated in Danish society and where integration of a spouse newly arrived in Denmark may therefore entail major problems.” By Act No. 1204 of 27 December 2003, the application of the attachment requirement to Danish nationals was restricted through the 28-year rule, and the preparatory works to the Act stated that the purpose was, inter alia, “to ensure that Danish expatriates with strong and lasting ties to Denmark in the form of at least 28 years of Danish nationality will be able to obtain spousal reunion in Denmark”. In the light of these notes, it is considered a fact that the indirect difference in treatment between Danish nationals of Danish ethnic extraction and Danish nationals of other ethnic extraction following from the 28-year rule is an intended consequence.
Under Article 14 of the Convention, the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms recognised by the Convention, including the individual’s right under Article 8 to respect for his or her family life, must be “secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other status.” As mentioned above, the 28-year rule implies both indirect difference in treatment between persons born Danish nationals and persons only acquiring Danish nationality later in life and, in the same connection, indirect difference in treatment between Danish nationals of Danish ethnic extraction and Danish nationals of other ethnic extraction. Both these types of indirect difference in treatment must be considered to fall within Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 8 of the Convention. The two types of indirect difference in treatment implied by the 28-year rule are therefore contrary to Article 14 unless the difference in treatment can be considered objectively justified and proportionate.
The European Convention on Nationality of 6 November 1997, which has been ratified by Denmark, provides in Article 5 § 2: “Each State Party shall be guided by the principle of non-discrimination between its nationals, whether they are nationals by birth or have acquired its nationality subsequently.” The memorandum of 14 January 2005 made by the Ministry of Integration and the memorandum of November 2006 made by the working group composed of representatives of the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Integration state that the provision solely concerns issues on the revocation and loss of nationality. In our opinion it is dubious whether there is any basis for such restrictive interpretation as the provision, according to its wording, comprises any difference in treatment exercised as a consequence of how and when nationality was acquired. As appears from the explanatory report, the provision is not a prohibition from which no derogation may be made, and the provision must be taken to mean that it may be derogated from if the difference in treatment is objectively justified and proportionate. However, when assessing the 28-year rule relative to Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 8 of the Convention, we consider it necessary to include the fact that, at least according to its wording, Article 5 § 2 of the European Convention on Nationality comprises a general provision stating that any difference in treatment between different groups of a State Party’s own nationals is basically prohibited.
In an assessment made under Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 8 of the Convention, another factor to be taken into consideration is the crucial importance of being entitled to settle with one’s spouse in the country of one’s nationality.
As mentioned, Danish nationals were originally generally exempt from the attachment requirement. The Supreme Court established in a judgment reproduced on p. 2086 in the Danish Weekly Law Reports for 2005 that discrimination relative to the right to spousal reunion based on whether the resident spouse is a Danish or foreign national is not contrary to the prohibition of discrimination laid down in Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 8 of the Convention. In this respect, the Supreme Court referred to paragraphs 84 to 86 of the judgment delivered by the European Court of Human Rights on 28 May 1985 in Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v. the United Kingdom. Difference in treatment based on nationality must be seen, inter alia, in the light of the right of Danish nationals to settle in Denmark, and no significance can be attributed to the fact that such discrimination is not considered contrary to Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 8 when assessing whether it is permissible to implement a scheme implying difference in treatment between different groups of Danish nationals. In our opinion, no crucial significance can be attributed to paragraphs 87 to 89 of the Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali judgment either in this assessment, among others because difference in treatment based on the length of a person’s period of nationality is not comparable to difference in treatment based on place of birth.
In the cases in which the attachment requirement applies, some of the factors emphasised are whether the resident spouse has strong links to Denmark by virtue of his or her childhood and schooling in Denmark. Such strong attachment to Denmark will exist in most cases in which a person has held Danish nationality for 28 years. However, when assessing whether the difference in treatment implied by the 28-year rule can be considered objectively justified, it is not sufficient to compare persons not raised in Denmark who acquire Danish nationality later in life with the large group of persons who were born Danish nationals and were also raised in Denmark. If exemption from the attachment requirement was justified only by regard for the latter group of Danish nationals, the exemption should have been delimited differently. The crucial element must therefore be a comparison with persons who were born Danish nationals and have been Danish nationals for 28 years, but who were not raised in Denmark and may perhaps not at any time have had their residence in Denmark. In our opinion, it cannot be considered a fact that, from a general perspective, this group of Danish nationals has stronger ties with Denmark than persons who have acquired Danish nationality after entering and residing in Denmark for a number of years. It should be taken into consideration in that connection that one of the general conditions for acquiring Danish nationality by naturalisation is that the relevant person has resided in Denmark for at least nine years, has proved his or her proficiency in the Danish language and knowledge of Danish society and meets the requirement of self-support.
Against that background, it is our opinion that the indirect difference in treatment implied by the 28-year rule cannot be considered objectively justified, and that it is therefore contrary to Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 8 of the Convention.
The consequence of this must be that, when applying section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act to Danish nationals, the authorities must limit the 28-year rule to being solely an age requirement, meaning that the attachment requirement does not apply in cases in which the resident spouse is a Danish national and is at least 28 years old.
Accordingly, we vote for ruling in favour of the [applicants’] claim to the effect that the Ministry of Integration must declare invalid the decision of 27 August 2004, thereby remitting the case for renewed consideration.
In view of the outcome of the voting on this claim we see no reason to consider the claim for compensation.”
The basic provisions concerning the right of aliens to enter and to remain in Denmark, including the criteria for obtaining family reunion, are laid down in the Aliens Act (Udlændingeloven).
Act no. 424 of 31 May 2000, which entered into force on 3 June 2000 introduced the so-called “attachment requirement” into section 9, subsection 10, of the Aliens Act as one of the conditions for granting family reunion with persons residing in Denmark who were not Danish nationals. As a result of the attachment requirement, a couple applying for family reunion must not have stronger ties with another country than with Denmark. The aim of the attachment requirement is to improve the integration of aliens applying for spousal reunion in Denmark, which appears from the general explanatory notes of the preparatory works:
“The current rules for reunion of spouses have turned out in some cases to result in reunion of foreign spouses with resident persons who are not well integrated in Danish society. The result is that such spouses, more than others, experience problems of isolation and maladjustment in relation to Danish society.
The Danish Government finds this situation a matter of concern. Moreover, there is no objective reason why the spouses or cohabitants should be reunited in Denmark if the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with another country are stronger.
Against that background it is proposed that as a point of departure it is made a condition for reunion of spouses with a resident person who is not a Danish national that the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with Denmark correspond at least to the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with another country.
The aim of the proposed provision is to grant permission for reunion of spouses only when the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with Denmark are so strong that the spouses should be reunited in Denmark, thereby achieving better integration of the relevant persons.”
Act no. 365 of 6 June 2002, which entered into force on 1 July 2002, extended the attachment requirement to apply also to resident persons of Danish nationality. Following the statutory amendment, the spouses’ aggregate ties with Denmark must be stronger than the spouses’ aggregate ties with another country. By the amendment (applicable in the applicants’ case) the provision was moved to section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act and read as follows:
“Unless exceptional reasons make it inappropriate, a residence permit under subsection (l)(i) can only be issued if the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with Denmark are stronger than the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with another country.”
The general explanatory notes of the preparatory works to Act no. 365 read as follows:
“...The current attachment requirement prescribed in section 9, subsection 10, of the Aliens Act was introduced by Act no. 424 of 31 May 2000, one reason being that the current rules for reunion of spouses had turned out in some cases to result in reunion of foreign spouses with resident persons who were not well integrated in Danish society.
In 2000 the Danish Immigration Service refused reunion of spouses under the current section 9, subsection 10, of the Aliens Act in 27 cases. Provisional figures from the Danish Immigration Service show that in 2001 the Danish Immigration Service refused reunion of spouses under this provision in 256 cases.
As stated in paragraph 7.1, it appears from a report from the Governments’ Think Tank on challenges for the integration efforts in Denmark that 47 per cent of the immigrants and descendants from third countries who married in 1999 married persons who resided abroad.
Experience has shown that integration is particularly difficult in families where generation upon generation fetch their spouses to Denmark from their own or their parents’ country of origin. With resident aliens and Danish nationals of foreign extraction it is a widespread marriage pattern to marry a person from their country of origin, among other reasons due to parental pressure. This pattern contributes to retention of these persons in a situation where they, more than others, experience problems of isolation and maladjustment in relation to Danish society. The pattern thus contributes to hampering integration of aliens newly arrived in Denmark.
The Government finds that the attachment requirement, as it is worded today, does not take sufficient account of the existence of this marriage pattern among both resident foreigners and resident Danish nationals of foreign extraction. There are thus also Danish nationals who are not well-integrated in Danish society and where integration of a spouse newly arrived in Denmark may therefore entail major problems.
The Government therefore finds it inexpedient that the existing attachment requirement does not apply to Danish nationals. Moreover, there is no objective reason why reunion of spouses with Danish nationals should be allowed in Denmark if the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with another country are just as strong or stronger.
Against this background the Government proposes that, in all future cases, reunion of spouses can only be granted when the spouses’ aggregate ties with Denmark are stronger than the spouses’ aggregate ties with another country.
The aim of the proposed provision is to ensure the best possible starting point for a successful integration of the family member wanting to be reunited with his or her family in Denmark ....
The extended attachment requirement will apply to all Danish nationals whether or not the Dane is of foreign extraction.”
Act no. 365 of 6 June 2002 also included section 9c, subsection 1, first sentence, of the Aliens Act, which reads as follows:
“Upon application, a residence permit may be issued to an alien if exceptional reasons make it appropriate.”
According to the specific explanatory notes in the preparatory works to the provision a residence permit will be issued under this provision in cases where an alien would be unable to obtain a residence permit under the other provisions of the Aliens Act, provided that Denmark has undertaken to grant such permit according to its treaty obligations. The notes read:
“Under the proposed section 9 c, subsection 1, first sentence, a residence permit may be issued to an alien upon application, if exceptional reasons make it appropriate ... These cases are those, in particular, where family reunion is not possible under the current section 9, subsection,1 of the Aliens Act, but where it is necessary to grant family reunion as a consequence of Denmark’s treaty obligations - including particularly Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. Under current practice, family reunion may also be granted upon a very specific assessment in other exceptional cases where family reunion is not possible under the current section 9, subsection 1, of the Aliens Act.”
Act no. 1204 of 27 December 2003, which entered into force on 1 January 2004, amended section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act so that the attachment requirement does not apply in cases in which the resident person who wants to bring his or her spouse to Denmark has been a Danish national for 28 years. Thereafter the relevant provisions were worded as follows:
“(1) Upon application, a residence permit may be issued to:
(i) an alien over the age of 24 who cohabits at a shared residence, either in marriage or in regular cohabitation of prolonged duration, with a person permanently resident in Denmark over the age of 24 who:
(a) is a Danish national;
...
 (7) Unless exceptional reasons make it inappropriate, a residence permit under subsection 1(i)(a), when the resident person has not been a Danish national for 28 years, and under subsection 1(i)(b) to (d) can only be issued if the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with Denmark are stronger than the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with another country. Resident Danish nationals who were adopted from abroad before their sixth birthday and who acquired Danish nationality not later than at their adoption are considered to have been Danish nationals from birth.”
In order to comply with Denmark’s treaty obligations, 28 years of legal residence since early childhood would constitute “exceptional reasons” as set out in section 9, subsection 7, for non-Danish nationals (see the preparatory works under paragraph 33). Accordingly, persons who were not Danish nationals, but who were born and raised in Denmark, or came to Denmark as small children and were raised in Denmark, were also exempted from the attachment requirement, as long as they had resided lawfully in Denmark for 28 years.
As regards the reason for the introduction of the 28-year rule, the general explanatory notes in the preparatory works stated:
“If a Danish national travels abroad and starts a family, staying with his or her foreign spouse or cohabitant and any children in the country of origin of the spouse or cohabitant for a longer period, it will often be difficult to prove that their aggregate ties with Denmark are stronger than their aggregate ties with another country. The Danes who opt to settle abroad for a longer period and start a family during their stay abroad may therefore find it difficult to meet the attachment requirement.
Against that background, the Government proposes that the attachment requirement need not be met in future cases where the person who wants to bring his or her spouse or regular cohabitant to Denmark has been a Danish national for 28 years.
The aim of the proposed provision is to ensure that Danish expatriates with strong and lasting ties with Denmark in the form of at least 28 years of Danish nationality will be able to obtain spousal reunion in Denmark. Hence, the proposed provision is intended to help a group of persons who do not, under the current section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act, have the same opportunities as resident Danish and foreign nationals for obtaining spousal reunion in Denmark. The proposed adjustment of the attachment requirement will give Danish expatriates a real possibility of returning to Denmark with a foreign spouse or cohabitant, and likewise young Danes can go abroad and stay there for a period with the certainty of not being barred from returning to Denmark with a foreign spouse or cohabitant as a consequence of the attachment requirement.
The Government finds that the fundamental aim of amending the attachment requirement by Act No. 365 of 6 June 2002 is not forfeited by refraining from demanding that the attachment requirement be met in cases where the resident person has been a Danish national for 28 years. It is observed in this connection that Danish expatriates planning to return to Denmark one day with their families will often have maintained strong ties with Denmark, which are also communicated to their spouse or cohabitant and any children. This is so when they speak Danish at home, take holidays in Denmark, read Danish newspapers regularly, and so on, which normally gives a basis for a successful integration of Danish expatriates’ family members into Danish society.”
The specific explanatory notes in the preparatory works to section 9, subsection 7, of the act stated as follows regarding the introduction of the 28-year rule:
“Under the current provision set out in section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act, a residence permit under section 9, subsection 1(i) of the Aliens Act (spousal reunion) can only, unless exceptional reasons make it inappropriate, be issued if the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with Denmark are stronger than the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with another country.
Under the proposed wording of section 9, subsection 7, a residence permit under section 9, subsection 1(i)(a), when the resident person has not been a Danish national for 28 years, and under section 9, subsection 1(i)(b) to (d) can only, unless exceptional reasons make it inappropriate, be issued if the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with Denmark are stronger than the spouses’ or the cohabitants’ aggregate ties with another country.
The proposed provision implies that the attachment requirement of section 9, subsection 7, will not apply to spousal reunion with resident persons who have been Danish nationals for 28 years. This applies whether the person acquired his or her Danish nationality by birth or by subsequent naturalisation, and whether the person has another nationality in addition to his or her Danish nationality. If the person has been a Danish national for several periods interrupted by the nationality of another country, the aggregate periods of the person’s Danish nationality will be used as a basis for calculating whether the person has been a Danish national for 28 years.
In all other cases than where the resident person has been a Danish national for 28 years, the attachment requirement still applies unless exceptional reasons make it inappropriate. In such other cases, it is presupposed that the attachment requirement is applied in accordance with current administrative practice, but see below.
It follows from Denmark’s treaty obligations that in certain respects, including in respect of the right to family reunion, it is necessary to place a resident alien who was born and raised in Denmark, or came to Denmark as a small child and was raised in Denmark, in the same position as a Danish national.
Therefore, when persons who have not been Danish nationals for 28 years, but were born and raised in Denmark or came to Denmark as small children and were raised there, have resided lawfully in Denmark for 28 years, these persons must also be placed in the same position as persons who have been Danish nationals for 28 years for the purpose of application of section 9, subsection 7, of the Aliens Act.
In practice, this means that the circumstance that a resident spouse or cohabitant who has not been a Danish national for 28 years, but was born and raised in Denmark, or came to Denmark as a small child and was raised in this country, and has further resided lawfully in Denmark for, in all essentials, a continuous period of at least 28 years, constitutes an exceptional reason making it inappropriate to demand that the attachment requirement be met in order for spousal reunion to be granted. Persons who were born and raised in Denmark, or came to Denmark as small children and were raised in this country, and have further resided lawfully in Denmark for 28 years are therefore exempt from the attachment requirement.”
An amendment of the Aliens Act, which entered into force on 15 May 2012, changed the 28-year rule in section 9, subsection 7 to a 26year rule.
The Council of Europe’s Convention on Nationality was adopted on 6 November 1997 and entered into force on 1 March 2000. It has been ratified by 20 Member States of the Council of Europe, including Denmark (on 24 July 2002 with entry into force on 1 November 2002). The relevant provisions read as follows:
“This Convention establishes principles and rules relating to the nationality of natural persons and rules regulating military obligations in cases of multiple nationality, to which the internal law of States Parties shall conform.”
“The rules on nationality of each State Party shall be based on the following principles:
everyone has the right to a nationality;
statelessness shall be avoided;
no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his or her nationality;
neither marriage nor the dissolution of a marriage between a national of a State Party and an alien, nor the change of nationality by one of the spouses during marriage, shall automatically affect the nationality of the other spouse.”
“1. The rules of a State Party on nationality shall not contain distinctions or include any practice which amount to discrimination on the grounds of sex, religion, race, colour or national or ethnic origin.
Each State Party shall be guided by the principle of non-discrimination between its nationals, whether they are nationals by birth or have acquired its nationality subsequently.”
...
The Explanatory Report to the European Convention on Nationality states, inter alia, about the above articles:
“Chapter I - General matters
Article 1 - Object of the Convention
...
Article 4 - Principles
The heading and introductory sentence of Article 4 recognise that there are certain general principles concerning nationality on which the more detailed rules on the acquisition, retention, loss, recovery or certification of nationality should be based. The words “shall be based” were chosen to indicate an obligation to regard the following international principles as the basis for national rules on nationality.
Article 5 - Non-discrimination
Paragraph 1
This provision takes account of Article 14 of the ECHR which uses the term “discrimination” and Article 2 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which uses the term “distinction”.
However, the very nature of the attribution of nationality requires States to fix certain criteria to determine their own nationals. These criteria could result, in given cases, in more preferential treatment in the field of nationality. Common examples of justified grounds for differentiation or preferential treatment are the requirement of knowledge of the national language in order to be naturalised and the facilitated acquisition of nationality due to descent or place of birth. The Convention itself, under Article 6, paragraph 4, provides for the facilitation of the acquisition of nationality in certain cases.
States Parties can give more favourable treatment to nationals of certain other States. For example, a member State of the European Union can require a shorter period of habitual residence for naturalisation of nationals of other European Union States than is required as a general rule. This would constitute preferential treatment on the basis of nationality and not discrimination on the ground of national origin.
It has therefore been necessary to consider differently distinctions in treatment which do not amount to discrimination and distinctions which would amount to a prohibited discrimination in the field of nationality.
The terms “national or ethnic origin” are based on Article 1 of the 1966 International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and part of Article 14 of the ECHR. They are also intended to cover religious origin. The ground of “social origin” was not included because the meaning was considered to be too imprecise. As some of the different grounds of discrimination listed in Article 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights were considered as not amounting to discrimination in the field of nationality, they were therefore excluded from the grounds of discrimination in paragraph 1 of Article 5. In addition, it was noted that, as the ECHR was not intended to apply to issues of nationality, the totality of the grounds of discrimination contained in Article 14 were appropriate only for the rights and freedoms under that Convention.
The list in paragraph 1 therefore contains the core elements of prohibited discrimination in nationality matters and aims to ensure equality before the law. Furthermore, the Convention contains many provisions designed to prevent an arbitrary exercise of powers (for example Articles 4.c, 11 and 12) which may also result in discrimination.
Paragraph 2
The words “shall be guided by” in this paragraph indicate a declaration of intent and not a mandatory rule to be followed in all cases.
This paragraph is aimed at eliminating the discriminatory application of rules in matters of nationality between nationals at birth and other nationals, including naturalised persons. Article 7, paragraph 1.b, of the Convention provides for an exception to this guiding principle in the case of naturalised persons having acquired nationality by means of improper conduct.”
In his report of 8 July 2004, Mr Alvaro Gil-Robles, Commissioner for Human Rights, suggested as one of his recommendations to Denmark:
 “1. Reconsider some of the provisions of the 2002 Aliens Act relating to family reunion, in particular
- the minimum age requirement of 24 years for both spouses for family reunion and the 28 year citizenship requirement for the exemption from the condition of both spouses’ aggregate ties to Denmark; ...”
He also stated (paragraph 10):
 “The requirement that the spouses’ aggregate ties with Denmark are stronger than those with another country, hits immigrants and second-generation immigrants particularly hard, including those who have lived in Denmark for most of their lives and have become well integrated in society. [...] I am also concerned that in this respect, the legislation treats in a different manner Danish citizens depending on the period during which the person has held citizenship. If a person obtained the citizenship at birth, the aggregate ties requirement will not be considered if the person is at least 28 years old. However, it continues to be applied in relation to a person who was later naturalised, until the 28 years of citizenship is achieved, unless he or she was born in Denmark or arrived as a child, in which case the length of citizenship requirement is substituted by an equally long residence requirement. These provisions do not in my view guarantee the principle of equality before the law.”
In its memorandum of 22 September 2004 on the report, the Danish Government observed in section 5.2 that the Commissioner seemed not to be aware that the 28-year rule is not a requirement in connection with family reunion, but an exception to the attachment requirement. Hence the provision does not stipulate that the resident spouse must have been a Danish national for 28 years to acquire family reunion, but only that the attachment requirement will be derogated from in such cases, if relevant. In a letter of 15 October 2004 to the Danish Government the Commissioner added the following clarification of his views:
“My concern is that this requirement places undue restrictions on naturalised Danish citizens and places them at considerable disadvantage in comparison to Danish citizens born in Denmark. It is of course true that the 28-years rule applies equally to all citizens. It follows, however, that whilst the exemption from the aggregate ties condition will apply to a 28 year old citizen born in Denmark, it will do so, for instance, only, allowing for the current 9 years residence requirement for naturalization, at the age of 57 for a citizen who first settled in Denmark at the age of 20. The dispensation from the aggregate ties conditions for a naturalised citizen, for whom the condition will, inevitably, be harder to meet in virtue of his or her own foreign origin, at so late an age constitutes, in my view, an excessive restriction to the right to family life and clearly discriminates between Danish citizens on the basis of their origin in the enjoyment of this fundamental right.”
Following the follow-up assessment conducted by the Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr Thomas Hammarberg, on 5 to 7 December 2006, the Commissioner stated that:
“The Commissioner cannot see how one can dispute that the requirement in question does introduce a different treatment of Danes who have held citizenship as of birth and those who have obtained it later on in their life and normally have to wait another 28 years before they can live in Denmark with their foreign partner. He notes that, in a meeting of his delegation with the Legal Affairs Committee of the Danish Parliament, it was conceded that there was indeed a discriminatory effect of such legislation and that this corresponded to a political decision. The Commissioner recommends that the Government reduce the very high threshold of 28 years.”
“2. reduce the requirement of 28 years of citizenship of the person living in Denmark for an exemption from the condition of both spouses having aggregate ties to Denmark that are stronger than with another country for granting a residence permit to his or her foreign partner.”
The general conditions for granting family reunion within a large number of Member States seems to be that the persons seeking family reunion should fall into one of the categories of beneficiaries and be in possession of valid personal documents and of certificates proving family ties with the nationals. They should normally have sufficient means of subsistence, adequate housing, health insurance and the national spouse should often have a registered place of residence in the country. Some countries require that spouses should have reached either 18 or 21 years of age. The requirement that candidates should have basic knowledge of the national language is also common. Furthermore, there should be no other grounds for the refusal of a permit, such as marriages of convenience, giving false identity and/or documents, concerns of public order or security and public health, a criminal record and being a burden on the welfare system. Some countries specify that candidates should not have links with extremist or terrorist structures or with organised crime. A number of countries condemn in particular giving false identity and statements in the proceedings. In a number of countries, the unlawful entry/stay of an alien is an impediment to the acquisition of the residence permit. However, some countries specify that it is not. Some countries may provide for special conditions, for instance in view of the prevention of polygamy or human trafficking. The requirements for family reunion usually vary depending on the type of permit sought. For long-stay permits and the acquisition of nationality, the duration of the marriage, the existence of genuine life community and residence in the country are relevant factors.