The case originated in an application (no. 27413/09) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Ms Maria Ciocodeică (“the applicant”), on 30 April 2009.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Pintilie, a lawyer practising in Timişoara. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant, relying on Articles 6 § 1 and 13 of the Convention as well as on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, alleged that the State had failed to effectively assist her in enforcing the final judgment awarding her salary entitlements and that she did not have an effective remedy at her disposal by which to obtain the impugned enforcement.
On 18 November 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Timişoara.
In 2004 the applicant lodged a civil action against her employer, a private company, C.G.H.T. (“the company”), seeking the revocation of its decision of 17 October 2003 to dismiss her, and claiming various salary entitlements.
On 29 April 2004 the Timiș County Court dismissed her action as illfounded. The applicant appealed.
In a final judgment of 29 September 2004 (“the judgment”), the Timișoara Court of Appeal allowed the applicant’s appeal. It ordered the company to revoke its dismissal decision and to pay the applicant pecuniary damages in the form of all her salary entitlements from 17 October 2003 until the pronouncement of the final judgment, updated and index-linked. The domestic court also awarded the applicant the costs and expenses incurred in the proceedings.
On 15 November 2004 the Timiș County Court validated the judgment (învestire cu formulă executorie), pursuant to Article 374 of the Romanian Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter “the RCCP”), as in force at the time (see paragraph 37 below).
The applicant instituted enforcement proceedings on 21 January 2005, requesting the bailiffs’ office M.S.R. & S.A.I. (“the bailiff”) to enforce the judgment.
On 26 January 2005 the bailiff issued a notice of payment (somație) and served it on the company.
According to a report of 11 February 2005 issued by the bailiff, the bailiff and the applicant’s lawyer visited the company’s premises. As the company’s legal representative was not present, the bailiff granted the company a further five days in which to execute the final judgment of their own accord.
However, the company refused to fulfil its obligations. Moreover, it lodged a complaint seeking to have the enforcement proceedings annulled, pursuant to Article 399 of the RCCP, as in force at the time (see paragraph 39 below). During those proceedings and at the company’s request, on 24 February 2005 the Timișoara District Court ordered the suspension of the enforcement proceedings until a final judgment was given; the suspension was made subject to payment of a deposit of 4,000,000 Romanian lei (ROL), namely approximately 90 euros (EUR).
In response, on 16 May 2005 the applicant brought urgent proceedings seeking to have the impugned suspension lifted. She argued that the matter was urgent because she needed to obtain the salary entitlements that would allow her to provide for herself and her infant.
In a judgment of 18 May 2005 the Timișoara District Court dismissed the applicant’s request, holding that she had not proved the existence of any imminent damage, so as to justify the urgency of the request.
On 2 June 2005 the Timișoara District Court allowed the company’s complaint against the enforcement proceedings. The court held that the procedural requirements had not been thoroughly complied with in so far as the bailiff had failed to serve the company with a copy of the enforceable judgment.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the court’s judgment. On 6 October 2005 the Timiș County Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law as ungrounded. The first-instance judgment thus became final.
The company lodged another request seeking to obtain the annulment of the restriction order (anularea măsurii de poprire) issued by the bailiff in respect of its bank accounts. On 21 April 2005 the Timișoara District Court allowed the request, in so far as the restriction order had been issued subsequent to the suspension of the enforcement proceedings ordered by the court (see paragraph 13 above).
In the meantime, on 29 June 2005, the bailiff issued another notice of payment. On 4 July 2005 it was posted, together with the enforceable judgment, at the company’s main entrance.
On 2 November 2005 the bailiff received a letter from the applicant, in which she enquired whether the company had complied with the outstanding judgment. The bailiff replied in the negative on 4 November 2005.
In so far as this was the last exchange of information between the applicant and the bailiff concerning the impugned enforcement procedure, and in view of the obligations imposed by law on the creditor, who was required to play a constantly active role throughout the enforcement procedure, on 28 May 2007 the bailiff issued an official report, noting that, under Article 389 of the RCCP as in force at the time, the procedure had become time-barred (“perimarea executării”; see paragraph 38 below). It is not clear whether that report was communicated to the applicant or not.
On 5 May 2005 the applicant lodged a complaint before the Timișoara District Court seeking to obtain a court order for immediate enforcement of the judgment, pursuant to Article 5803 of the RCCP as in force at the time (see paragraph 40 below).
In a decision of 18 August 2005 the Timișoara District Court allowed the applicant’s complaint and ordered the company to pay a coercive fine of ROL 500,000 per day until it fulfilled its obligations.
An appeal by the company against that decision was allowed on 16 December 2005 by the Timiş County Court. The court held that the coercive fine had the nature of a civil penalty aimed at securing the enforcement of a personal obligation which could not be otherwise executed, as provided for by Article 5803. However, the payment of the company’s debt could be enforced with the assistance of a bailiff; therefore the applicant’s complaint was ill-founded.
On 12 July 2005 the applicant complained to the Minister of Justice about the outcome of the judgment of 2 June 2005 (see paragraph 16 above). The complaint was lodged under the provisions of Law no. 303/2004, defining the framework for judges’ disciplinary and criminal responsibility and the specific authorities empowered to initiate such proceedings.
On 24 August 2005 the applicant’s complaint was forwarded to the Timișoara Court of Appeal. On 5 September 2005 the Timișoara Court of Appeal noted that the impugned proceedings had been terminated by a judgment that was final and therefore not subject to appeal.
In 2005 the applicant complained to different State authorities that the company’s representatives had failed to execute the judgment. She relied on Articles 277, 278 and 280 of the Labour Code and Article 83 of Law no. 168/1999 regarding the resolution of labour disputes (see paragraphs 43-44 below).
On 5 December 2006 a criminal investigation was initiated against M.D., the company’s administrator, for refusal to execute the judgment.
On 4 February 2008 the prosecutor’s office at the Timișoara District Court decided to discontinue the proceedings against M.D. and fined him RON 1,000, namely approximately EUR 250. The prosecutor investigating the case found that M.D.’s actions could not be classified as an offence.
A complaint lodged by the applicant against that decision was dismissed on 8 April 2008 by the senior prosecutor at the Timişoara District Court.
On 2 June 2008 both the applicant and M.D. appealed against the prosecutors’ decisions before the Timişoara District Court. The court dismissed both appeals on 17 October 2008. It held that the applicant’s appeal had been lodged outside the time-limit. With regard to M.D.’s appeal, it reiterated that even though he had not executed the judgment, his actions could not be classified as an offence and, therefore, the administrative fine had been fair.
In a final judgment of 28 January 2009 the Timiş County Court dismissed appeals on points of law lodged by the applicant and M.D.
On 5 August 2014 the company’s two shareholders decided that the company should be liquidated (dizolvare), in accordance with the provisions of Law no. 31/1990 on trading companies. At their request, the Companies Registration Office (Oficiul Registrului Comerţului) decided on 7 August 2014 to publish the shareholders’ decision in the Romanian Official Journal. The decision was published on 26 August 2014, in accordance with the provisions of Emergency Government Ordinance no. 116/2009 regulating the registration of specific acts in the companies register (see paragraph 48 below).
It was noted in an accounting report drawn up on 30 August 2014 that the company’s only creditors were the two shareholders.
On 10 October 2014 one of the shareholders asked the Companies Registration Office to strike the company off the register. The request was granted on the same day, and the Companies Registration Office decided that the decision would be published in the Romanian Official Journal.
No appeal was lodged against the decisions taken by the Companies Registration Office in respect of the company.
Relevant excerpts from the domestic law on the enforcement of final judgments, namely the old and new versions of the RCCP, are to be found in the case of Foundation Hostel for Students of the Reformed Church and Stanomirescu v. Romania (nos. 2699/03 and 43597/07, §§ 38-40, 7 January 2014).
Article 374 of the RCCP, as in force at the relevant time, set out the procedure for the execution of outstanding judgments and the validation of enforceable title deeds (“învestire cu formulă executorie “) by the courts. Under the new RCCP, in force since 15 February 2013, this procedure is mandatory only for title deeds, and no longer for court judgments (Article 6401 of the Code, as amended on 19 October 2014).
Article 389 of the RCCP, as in force at the relevant time, stated in relation to the time-limit for enforcement:
“If a period of six months has passed since the time of the last act of enforcement and the creditor has remained passive, the enforcement becomes time-barred (se perimă) and any interested party may ask for its annulment ...”.
The corresponding articles in the current version of the RCCP read as follows:
“If the creditor has deliberately let more than six months pass without complying with the bailiff’s written request asking him or her to take certain steps necessary for the enforcement procedure, the enforcement becomes time-barred (se perimă) ...”
“At the request of the bailiff or the interested party, the judge shall acknowledge in a decision given following the urgent summoning of the parties that the enforcement has become time-barred ...”
Under Article 388 of the old version of the RCCP, the bailiff had to note in an official report the fact that the enforcement had become time-barred and the report was sent to the interested parties. Like any act of enforcement carried out by the bailiff, the official report could be challenged by lodging an objection (see below).
In the event that the bailiff fails or refuses to act diligently in order to assist a creditor in the enforcement of the outstanding judgment, the creditor is entitled to lodge a complaint concerning enforcement.
The time-limits prescribed for such a procedure are shorter than for regular procedures, in view of its urgent character. Only one appeal lies against a judgment given under such a procedure.
If the courts find that the bailiff refused to act without justification, they may fine the bailiff as well as award damages, if so requested by the aggrieved party.
Article 399 of the RCCP concerning the objection procedure, as in force at the time, stated as follows:
“(1) Parties with an interest in or having suffered harm as a result of enforcement proceedings or any act of enforcement may lodge an objection. Similarly ... a complaint may be lodged when it is necessary to clarify the meaning, scope or terms of implementation of the writ of enforcement, or where the authority responsible for enforcement refuses to commence the enforcement or to perform an act of enforcement as provided for by law.
(2) Failure to comply with the legal provisions regulating the enforcement itself or the acts of enforcement shall lead to the annulment of the unlawful act”.
The corresponding articles of the new RCCP read in their relevant parts as follows:
“(1) As soon as the bailiff receives an enforcement request, he or she must decide whether to register the request and open an enforcement file, or to refuse the request in a reasoned decision.
(2) The bailiff’s decision shall be notified immediately to the creditor. If the bailiff refuses to commence the enforcement procedure, the creditor may appeal before a court against the respective decision within fifteen days of the date of notification.”
“(1) Parties with an interest in, or having suffered harm as a result of, enforcement proceedings may lodge an objection against it, against any official report drawn up by the bailiff, or against any act of enforcement. Likewise, a complaint may be lodged if the bailiff refuses to carry out the enforcement or to perform any act of enforcement as prescribed by law.”
“... (3) If the objection is dismissed, upon request, the claimant may be liable to pay damages for the delay caused to the proceedings, and if the objection was lodged in bad faith, the claimant shall be liable additionally to a judicial fine of between 1,000 and 7,000 Romanian lei (RON) ...
(7) If [by allowing the objection to enforcement] the court finds that there was an unjustified refusal by the bailiff either to receive or to register the request to enforce, or to perform an enforcement act, or to take any other measure prescribed by law, the bailiff may be liable to a judicial fine of between RON 1,000 and RON 7,000, as well as, if so requested by the interested party, to pay compensation for the damage caused.”
Articles 5802-5803 of the old version of the RCCP entitled a creditor to seek before the courts authorisation to enforce the obligation provided for in the writ of enforcement himself or herself, or to have it enforced by a third party, if the debtor refused to comply and the “obligation to act” did not require his or her personal intervention. For the latter situation, the law provided that the debtor could be compelled to comply with the enforcement writ by the imposition of a civil-law “coercive fine”:
“Should a debtor refuse to comply with the obligation to act provided for in the writ of enforcement within ten days of receiving the order to do so, the court, by a final interlocutory decision, after summoning the parties, may authorise the creditor to enforce the obligation himself or to have it enforced by third parties at the debtor’s expense.”
“Should the obligation ‘to act’ require the debtor’s personal intervention, he may be compelled to comply with the obligation by means of a civil-law coercive fine. Following an application by the creditor and after summoning the parties, the court may order the debtor, in a final interlocutory decision, to pay the State a fine of between 200,000 and 500,000 Romanian lei (ROL) for each day until the obligation provided for in the writ of enforcement has been fulfilled.
The creditor may request the court to award him damages against the debtor in order to make good the loss incurred by the failure to fulfil the obligation ...”
Articles 904-906 of the current Code reiterate, essentially, the same principles as those stipulated in the corresponding Articles 5802 and 5803 of the previous Code, except that the civil fine was replaced by penalties, payable directly to the creditor by order of the judge, if more than ten days have passed since the debtor was instructed to execute the outstanding judgment.
Articles 187-191 of the current Code reiterate and refine the principles set out in the previous Code (Articles 1081-1085) concerning the sanctions applied by the court at the request of the bailiff or the aggrieved party to another party or an authority for submitting a request in bad faith, for not providing the information requested by the court or for failing to comply with the provisions regulating the enforcement procedure. The fine thus imposed on the responsible party or authority may be supplemented by an obligation to pay damages to the party aggrieved by the delay in the enforcement procedure caused thereby.
Article 660 of the Code provides for the general framework of cooperation between the enforcement authority and the domestic authorities, whether State or private entities, responsible for assisting the bailiff and the creditor in the enforcement of an outstanding judgment (see also paragraph 69 below).
The relevant parts of the Labour Code, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“Failure to comply with a final judgment concerning the payment of salary entitlements within fifteen days of the date when the interested party requested his or her employer to execute it shall constitute an offence punishable by a term of imprisonment of three to six months or by a fine.”
The relevant part of Law no. 168/1999 regarding the resolution of labour disputes, as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“Failure to comply with a final judgment concerning the payment of salary entitlements within fifteen days of the date when the interested party requested the company to execute it shall constitute an offence punishable by a term of imprisonment of three to six months or by a fine.”
The relevant parts on the general tort liability conditions from the new Civil Code, in force since 1 October 2011, reiterate generally the text of Articles 998-99 of the previous Civil Code; they now read as follows:
“(1) Anyone who causes damage to another as a result of an unlawful deed committed negligently shall be liable to make reparation for it.
(2) The person who causes the damage shall be held liable [in any event] for very slight negligence (culpa levissima – “cea mai ușoară culpă”).
The relevant parts of Law no. 188/2000 regulating the activities of bailiffs read as follows:
“(1) A bailiff is liable under civil law if his/her failure to fulfil his or her professional obligations have caused prejudice.
(2) Civil liability insurance for the bailiff’s activity is provided by an insurance fund for the bailiff profession ...”
“The bailiff’s disciplinary liability may arise in the following circumstances: ...
e) systematic delay and negligence in accomplishing professional tasks ...”
“(1) The disciplinary procedure is initiated against a bailiff either by the Ministry of Justice or by the Board of the Regional Chamber of Bailiffs. The matter is examined by the Disciplinary Board of that Chamber; the Disciplinary Board is made up of three members, elected for a three-year mandate by the General Assembly of the Chamber.
(2) A preliminary investigation conducted by general inspectors from the Ministry of Justice or from the Board of the Regional Chamber of Bailiffs is mandatory if suspension from office or exclusion from office is envisaged ...
(5) The parties may appeal against the decision taken by the Disciplinary Board within fifteen days of notification of the decision. The Superior Disciplinary Board of the National Union of Bailiffs shall examine the appeal in a panel of five members, its decision being final. This decision is amenable to appeal before the Court of Appeal.”
 “The disciplinary sanctions that may be applied depending on the seriousness of the offence committed are:
a) a reprimand (mustrare);
b) a warning (avertisment);
c) a fine of between 500 and 3,000 Romanian lei (RON), payable to the Regional Chamber of Bailiffs. Failure to pay the fine within thirty days of the decision becoming final will result in the bailiff’s ex officio suspension from office until the fine is paid ...
d) the bailiff’s suspension from office for between one and six months;
e) exclusion from office.
“(1) If the parties express a wish to continue with the enforcement proceedings, reasons must be given for any refusal by the bailiff to perform his or her duties ... not later than five days from the date of the refusal.
(2) In the event of an unjustified refusal to perform the duties described under paragraph (1), the interested party may lodge a complaint within five days of the time he or she was made aware of the refusal, before the court with jurisdiction over the area in which the bailiff’s office is located.
(3) All parties shall be summoned for the hearing of the complaint.
(4) The court’s judgment is amenable to a single appeal.
(5) The bailiff shall comply with the final judgment ...”
“(1) All acts performed by the bailiff shall be subject to judicial review before the courts, in accordance with the law.
(2) The bailiff’s professional activity shall be subject to professional supervision in accordance with the provisions of this law.”
“Parties with an interest in, or having suffered harm as a result of, enforcement proceedings may lodge a complaint in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.”
“(1) Professional supervision shall be carried out by the Ministry of Justice, through the general inspectors, and by the National Union of Bailiffs through its 
Board ....”
The relevant parts of Article 271 of the former Criminal Code read as follows:
“(1) Obstructing the enforcement of a court judgment by issuing threats towards the enforcement authority is punishable by six months to three years’ imprisonment, and if acts of violence have been committed the punishment is from one to five years ...”
Article 287 of the new Criminal Code, in force since 1 February 2014, provides as follows:
“(1) Non-compliance with a court judgment committed by:
(a) obstruction of enforcement by opposing the enforcement authority;
(b) refusal by the bailiff to enforce a court judgment compelling him or her to perform a specific act;
(c) refusal to assist the enforcement authorities by the persons that have such an obligation under the law...
is punishable by three months to two years’ imprisonment or by a fine ...”
Law no. 31/1990 on trading companies, as well as Emergency Government Ordinance no. 116/2009, which regulates the registration of specific acts in the companies register, set out, inter alia, the procedures for liquidation of a private company and its striking off the register. They state that the creditors and any other interested party may oppose the decisions taken by the shareholders and by the Companies Registration Office before the courts, in accordance with the law.
The Government submitted a significant number of domestic judgments proving, in their view, that at present the system of legal remedies in Romania, in cases concerning non-compliance with an enforcement order against private parties, is efficient and accompanied by sufficient safeguards, especially since the entry into force of the new RCCP in 2013. The Government mentioned that the case-law based on that new piece of legislation – applicable exclusively to enforcement proceedings started after 15 February 2013 under the transitionary provisions of the Code – was developing in the right direction.
The Government referred to numerous and various circumstances in which the domestic courts had found, based on the provisions of the RCCP (the previous version as well as the current one) regulating complaints concerning enforcement (see paragraph 39 above), as well as on Article 56 § 2 of Law no. 188/2000 (see paragraph 46 above), that the bailiff’s refusal to act lacked justification. They submitted more than thirty judgments delivered by various courts across the country, mainly between 2009 and 2014, holding the bailiff responsible for initiating or pursuing the enforcement procedure. In some cases, the courts indicated to the bailiffs the concrete acts they should perform in order to secure the enforcement of the outstanding judgment.
On the question whether complaints concerning belated acts of enforcement by the bailiffs or delays in enforcement were allowed by the domestic courts, or whether any pecuniary sanctions were imposed by the domestic courts on the bailiff on account of his or her failure to act in due time, the Government submitted several legal opinions formulated by various domestic courts across the country. They all expressed the view that if given the opportunity by the creditor to examine such a request, the courts would be entitled to apply Articles 712 and 720 § 7 of the RCCP, as well as Articles 45 and 56 of Law no. 188/2000 (see paragraphs 39 and 46 above). They considered such an approach to be not only reasonable, but also salutary, particularly since the adoption by the Court of the judgment in the case of Flaviu and Dalia Şerban v. Romania (no. 36446/04, 14 September 2010). In that judgment, the Court concluded that a complaint concerning enforcement was not an effective remedy, in so far as the Government had not provided examples from domestic practice in respect of complaints about belated acts of enforcement by the bailiff being declared admissible. The only relevant examples provided showed that the domestic courts considered such complaints ill-founded or even incompatible ratione materiae (see §§ 40-44 and 60 of the judgment).
With reference to the application of Articles 998-999 of the former Civil Code, Articles 1349 and 1357 of the current Civil Code respectively (see paragraph 45 above), the opinion expressed by the courts in situations where the bailiff’s failure to carry out an enforcement act had caused damage to the creditor, was that those provisions may become relevant if all the conditions for tort liability are substantiated by the creditor.
The case-law submitted by the Government in this respect consisted of three judgments delivered in 2012, in which the courts had obliged the bailiff to pay damages to the creditor for the harm suffered.
The Government also provided several judgments given by various domestic courts across the country in respect of disciplinary actions brought against bailiffs. The examples proved, in the Government’s view, that the disciplinary system was capable of putting sufficient pressure on the bailiff to ensure that the enforcement procedure was initiated and/or continued. The data provided revealed that between 2003 and 2011, the Ministry of Justice had brought ninety-five disciplinary actions against certain bailiffs, four of which sought the bailiffs’ exclusion from office. Sixteen disciplinary actions were lodged in 2012, thirty-two in 2013 and forty-five in 2014. The majority of those actions were finalised with one of the four disciplinary sanctions prescribed by the law being applied by the courts.
Concerning the criminal liability of bailiffs, the Government contended that by a court decision of 2012, one bailiff had been convicted for abuse of office and hence excluded from office. The Government further informed the Court that the domestic courts had not yet been confronted with a case in which a bailiff had been charged, under Article 287 § 1 (b) of the New Criminal Code, in force since 1 February 2014 (see paragraph 47 above), with non-compliance with a domestic judgment.
The Government further submitted several judgments delivered between 2014 and 2015, in which, based on Article 660 § 2 of the RCCP (see paragraph 42 above), the courts had fined various public institutions on account of their failure to properly assist the bailiff in his or her attempts to enforce outstanding judgments.
In connection with existing remedies for obliging debtors to comply with outstanding judgments, the Government provided consistent domestic case-law, proving that the courts across the country generally allowed creditors’ requests submitted pursuant to Articles 5803 of the former RCCP (Article 906 of the current RCCP), imposing on the debtor financial penalties per day of delay, whether payable to the State as a fine (under the old Code), or to the creditor directly (under the new Code; see paragraph 40 above). The relevant case-law dates mainly from 2010-15.
In certain situations and as provided for by the former RCCP, the domestic courts have obliged the debtor to pay both a civil fine to the State per day of delay in executing the judgment, as well as damages to the creditor, if damage has been substantiated. The five decisions submitted by the Government are from 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012.
Concerning the application of Article 271 of the former Criminal Code (see paragraph 47 above), the Government submitted a dozen judgments given between 2008 and 2012, in which the domestic courts convicted debtors who had failed to comply with their obligation to execute outstanding judgments, and sentenced them either to a criminal fine or to a term of imprisonment. In a few cases, the courts also obliged the debtors to pay the creditor compensation for pecuniary damage.
In Resolution 1787(2011) adopted on 26 January 2011, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe noted the continuing existence in several States of major structural problems which were causing large numbers of repetitive findings of violations of the Convention and represented a serious danger to the rule of law in the States concerned. The Assembly listed among those deficiencies some major shortcomings in judicial organisation and procedures in Romania, including the chronic nonenforcement of domestic judicial decisions in general (see paragraph 7.6 of the Resolution).
Nevertheless, concerning the specific group of Romanian nonenforcement cases dealing with the State’s failure to assist the creditor to enforce his or her outstanding judgment given against a private debtor, on 22 November 2017 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Resolution CM/ResDH(2017)392 in which, after having examined in particular the action report provided by the Romanian Government indicating the general measures adopted in order to give effect to the judgments, decided to close the examination thereof, having satisfied itself that all the measures required by Article 46, paragraph 1, have been adopted.