The case originated in an application (no. 63849/09) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 30 November 2009 by two Bulgarian nationals, Mr Krum Yordanov Kulinski and Mr Asen Todorov Sabev (“the applicants”), who were born in 1970 and 1977 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr K. Kanev, from the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms R. Nikolova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that they were prevented from voting while serving prison sentences of different lengths.
On 4 June 2015 the complaints concerning the applicants’ inability to vote while serving their prison sentences were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
Mr Yonko Grozev, the judge elected in respect of Bulgaria, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28 § 3 of the Rules of Court). Accordingly, the President of the Fifth Section appointed Ms Pavlina Panova to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1 of the Rules of Court).
The first applicant, Mr Kulinski, was convicted of hooliganism on 16 May 2008 in a final judgment of the Sofia City Court. He served his sentence in Sofia Prison between 6 November 2008 and 30 December 2009. Having served the entirety of his sentence, he was released on the latter date.
The second applicant, Mr Sabev, was convicted of robbery and murder and sentenced to whole-life imprisonment on 17 December 2003 in a final judgment of the Supreme Court of Cassation. The applicant is serving his sentence in Sofia Prison. On 3 September 2014 the VicePresident of Bulgaria, exercising the constitutional prerogative to grant clemency, commuted the applicant’s whole-life sentence to a “simple-life” sentence (see paragraph 16 below).
In 2009, while both applicants were serving their sentences, the following elections took place: elections to the European Parliament on 7 June 2009 and to the Bulgarian Parliament on 5 July 2009. No polling station was set up in the prison where the applicants were detained, as the relevant legislation excluded sentenced individuals from voting.
Subsequently, the second applicant was not allowed to vote in the elections to the Bulgarian Parliament on 12 May 2013 and 5 October 2014, nor in the European Parliament election on 25 May 2014.
Article 42 § 1 provides that citizens of legal age (18 years), except those deprived of legal capacity and those serving prison sentences, have the right to elect State and municipal bodies and to take part in referenda.
According to Article 149 § 1 (1)(2) the Constitutional Court provides binding interpretations of the Constitution and rules on the constitutionality of the laws and other acts passed by Parliament or acts passed by the President. Decisions of the Constitutional Court have effect only for the future (ex nunc).
Section 3(1) of the Act reproduced the essential content of Article 42 of the Constitution as regards the election of Members of Parliament.
Bulgarian citizens who are of legal age, have continuously resided in Bulgaria or another EU State during at least the last three months, and have neither been deprived of legal capacity nor are serving a prison sentence, can vote in elections to the European Parliament (Section 4(1)). Other European Union nationals can also elect members of the European Parliament if the former are of legal age, have resided in Bulgaria or another EU member State for at least three months prior to the election, have not been deprived of their right to elect in the State whose citizens they are and have requested in writing participation in the election (Section 4(2)). Those eligible can only vote once in every election to the European Parliament.
Article 3 §§ 1 and 2 of this Code stipulated that Bulgarian citizens who have not been deprived of legal capacity and are not serving a prison sentence could elect members of Parliament, the President and the VicePresident of the Republic of Bulgaria.
Article 243 provides that Bulgarian citizens who meet the requirements of Article 42 § 1 of the Constitution 1991 (see paragraph 10 above) can vote in elections to the Bulgarian Parliament. Article 29 § 1 of this Code provides that, in the context of elections to the Bulgarian or European Parliaments, the prison authorities make arrangements for voting in the prisons and manage electoral lists concerning individuals who have been detained but who have not been convicted.
Since the abolition of the death penalty with effect from 27 December 1998, the Code has provided for three types of custodial penalty: imprisonment for a fixed period of up to thirty years, simple-life imprisonment with the possibility of commutation, and whole-life imprisonment without the possibility of commutation.
Under Article 70 § 1 of the Criminal Code, release on parole is only applicable to fixed-term prison sentences. Offenders sentenced to whole-life or simple-life imprisonment are not eligible for release on parole.
Prisoners can have their sentences reduced under Article 41 § 3 of the Criminal Code, which provides that two days of work effectively carried out counts as three days of imprisonment. When prisoners systematically avoid working or breach prison rules, the court can wholly or partially cancel the reduction of the sentence accrued during the previous two years (Article 41 § 4 of the Criminal Code).
Article 84 (13) of the Constitution provides that amnesty is granted by Parliament.
Under Article 98 (11) of the Constitution, granting a pardon is a presidential prerogative. It is a discretionary power which the President of the Republic has delegated to the Vice-President, who may decide to exercise it in any form and at any time while the sentence is being served. His or her decision is unconditional and irrevocable and is not subject to judicial or administrative review (for more detail, see Harakchiev and Tolumov v. Bulgaria, nos. 15018/11 and 61199/12, §§ 72-107, ECHR 2014 (extracts).
Since 1 January 2004 the Ombudsman can ask the bodies enumerated in Article 150 of the Constitution, namely the President of the Republic, the Council of Ministers, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Prosecutor General or at least one-fifth of the members of parliament, to apply to the Constitutional Court with a request for interpretation of the Constitution. From 2006, the Ombudsman can himself or herself ask the Constitutional Court to rule on the compatibility of ordinary laws with the Constitution (Article 150 § 3 of the Constitution).
The Criminal Code of 1968 (Article 38a § 3) provides that a simplelife sentence can be commuted to a fixed-term prison sentence of thirty years, provided that the prisoner has served a minimum of twenty years. This is done by the regional court at the request of the regional public prosecutor (Articles 449 and 450 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 2005). The regional court rules by means of a reasoned decision; a negative decision may be challenged before the higher courts. If the public prosecutor’s proposal is rejected, no further commutation request may be submitted for two years. The legislation makes no provision for the public prosecutor to seek an adjustment of the sentence of offenders sentenced to whole life imprisonment.
The relevant provisions on prisoners’ voting rights, found in international legal instruments and laws of other member States of the Convention, have been summarised in the case of Anchugov and Gladkov v. Russia, nos. 11157/04 and 15162/05, §§ 36-46, 4 July 2013.
To the extent that the present case concerns not only Bulgarian parliamentary elections but also the right to vote in elections to the European Parliament, the following is of relevance. The Court of Justice of the European Union has examined, in the case of Thierry Delvigne v. Commune de Lesparre-Médoc and Préfet de la Gironde (C-650/13, EU:C:2015:648) the compatibility with Article 39 (2) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union of the exclusion, by operation of French law, from those entitled to vote in elections to the European Parliament persons who were convicted of a serious crime. In Delvigne, the Court of Justice held that the French limitation of prisoners’ voting rights did not call into question the essence of those rights since it had the effect of excluding certain persons, under specific conditions and on account of their conduct, from those entitled to vote in elections to the Parliament, as long as those conditions are fulfilled. In addition, it considered the French limitation was proportionate in so far as it takes into account the nature and the gravity of the criminal offence committed and the duration of the penalty (see Delvigne, cited above, paragraphs 48-49).
A comparative law study was carried out in the context of the proceedings before the Grand Chamber of the Court in another case concerning prisoners’ voting rights (see Scoppola v. Italy (no. 3) [GC], no. , §§ 45-48, 22 May 2012). It showed that, at that time, seven Convention States – Armenia, Bulgaria, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Russia and the United Kingdom – automatically deprived all convicted prisoners serving prison sentences of the right to vote, while nineteen of the fortythree States examined placed no restrictions on that right and seventeen followed an intermediate approach whereby disenfranchisement of prisoners depended on the type of offence and/or the length of the custodial sentence.