The case originated in two applications (nos. 8675/15 and 8697/15) against the Kingdom of Spain. The applications were lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Malian national, N.D., the applicant in application no. 8675/15 (“the first applicant”), and a national of Côte d’Ivoire, N.T., the applicant in application no. 8697/15 (“the second applicant”), on 12 February 2015.
The applicants were represented by Mr C. Gericke and Mr G. Boye, lawyers practising in Hamburg and Madrid respectively. The Spanish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr R.-A. León Cavero, State Counsel and head of the Human RigM.A. v. lihts Legal Department, Ministry of Justice.
In their applications the applicants alleged, in particular, a violation of Article 3 and Article 13 of the Convention, of those two Articles taken together, of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention, and, lastly, of Article 13 taken together with Article 4 of Protocol No. 4. They complained of their immediate return to Morocco, which amounted in their view to a collective expulsion, of the lack of an effective remedy in that regard and of the risk of ill-treatment which they allegedly faced in Morocco. They submitted that they had had no opportunity to be identified, to explain their individual circumstances or to challenge their return by means of a remedy with suspensive effect.
The applications were allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). By a decision of 7 July 2015 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 and Article 13 of the Convention, and under both those Articles taken together. The Court decided to join the applications and found the remaining complaints inadmissible (Rule 54 § 3).
Mr Nils Muižnieks, Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe (“the Commissioner for Human Rights”) exercised his right to participate in the proceedings and submitted written comments (Article 36 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2).
The Court also received written observations from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the Spanish Commission for Assistance to Refugees (CEAR) and, acting collectively, the Centre for Advice on Individual Rights in Europe (the AIRE Centre), Amnesty International, the European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE) and the International Commission of Jurists, all of which had been given leave by the President to intervene under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3.
The parties replied to those observations. They also submitted observations following the delivery on 15 December 2016 of the Court’s judgment in Khlaifia and Others v. Italy [GC] (no. 16483/12).
In a judgment of 3 October 2017 a Chamber of the Third Section of the Court unanimously declared the remaining parts of the applications admissible and held that there had been a violation of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 and of Article 13 of the Convention read in conjunction with Article 4 of Protocol No. 4. The Chamber was composed of Branko Lubarda, President, Luis López Guerra, Helen Keller, Dmitry Dedov, Pere Pastor Vilanova, Alena Poláčková, Georgios A. Serghides, judges, and Fatoş Aracı, Deputy Section Registrar. Judge Dedov expressed a partly dissenting opinion concerning the award of just satisfaction.
On 14 December 2017 the Government requested the referral of the case to the Grand Chamber under Article 43 of the Convention and Rule 73. On 29 January 2018 the panel of the Grand Chamber granted that request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined in accordance with Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicants and the Government each filed written observations on the admissibility and merits of the case.
The Belgian, French and Italian Governments, which had been given leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3) submitted third-party observations. Observations were also received from the Commissioner of Human Rights of the Council of Europe and from UNHCR, the CEAR and, acting collectively, the AIRE Centre, Amnesty International, ECRE and the International Commission of Jurists, joined by the Dutch Council for Refugees. The OHCHR’s written observations in the Chamber proceedings were also included in the file. The parties replied to these observations in the course of their oral submissions at the hearing (Rule 44 § 6).
Ms. Dunja Mijatović, Commissioner for Human Rights since 1st April 2018, spoke at the hearing, in accordance with Article 36 § 3 of the Convention. UNHCR, which had been given leave by the President to participate in the oral proceedings before the Grand Chamber in accordance with Article 36 § 2, also took part in the hearing.
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 26 September 2018.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr León Cavero, Mr Gericke, Mr Boye, Ms Mijatović and Ms O’Hara, and the replies by Mr León Cavero, Mr Gericke, Mr Boye and Ms O’Hara to questions put by the judges.
The autonomous city of Melilla is a Spanish enclave of 12 sq. km located on the north coast of Africa and surrounded by Moroccan territory. It lies on the migration route from North and sub-Saharan Africa which is also used by Syrian migrants. The border between Melilla and Morocco is an external border of the Schengen area and thus provides access to the European Union. As a result, it is subject to particularly intense migratory pressure.
The Spanish authorities have built a barrier along the 13 km border separating Melilla from Morocco, which since 2014 has comprised three parallel fences. The aim is to prevent irregular migrants from accessing Spanish territory. The barrier consists of a six-metre-high, slightly concave, fence (“the outer fence”); a three-dimensional network of cables followed by a second, three-metre-high fence; and, on the opposite side of a patrol road, another six-metre-high fence (“the inner fence”). Gates have been built into the fences at regular intervals to provide access between them. A sophisticated CCTV system (including infrared cameras), combined with movement sensors, has been installed and most of the fences are also equipped with anti-climbing grids.
There are four land border crossing points between Morocco and Spain, located along the triple fence. Between these crossings, on the Spanish side, the Guardia Civil has the task of patrolling the land border and the coast to prevent illegal entry. Mass attempts to breach the border fences are organised on a regular basis. Groups generally comprising several hundred aliens, many of them from sub-Saharan Africa, attempt to enter Spanish territory by storming the fences described above. They frequently operate at night in order to produce a surprise effect and increase their chances of success.
Those migrants who do not manage to evade the Guardia Civil, and whom the officials succeed in persuading to come down of their own accord using ladders, are taken back immediately to Morocco and handed over to the Moroccan authorities, unless they are in need of medical treatment (see paragraph 58 below).
At the time of the events this modus operandi was provided for only by the Guardia Civil “Border control operations protocol” of 26 February 2014 and by service order no. 6/2014 of 11 April 2014 (see paragraph 37 below).
On 1 April 2015 the tenth additional provision of Institutional Law 4/2000 of 11 January 2000 on the rights and freedoms of aliens in Spain and their social integration (“the LOEX”) came into force. The additional provision was inserted by means of Institutional Law 4/2015 of 30 March 2015 laying down special rules for the interception and removal of migrants in Ceuta and Melilla (see paragraphs 32 and 33 below).
The first applicant was born in 1986 and the second applicant in 1985.
The first applicant left his village in Mali on account of the 2012 armed conflict. After spending a few months in a refugee camp in Mauritania and then in Algeria, he arrived in Morocco in March 2013 and reportedly lived in the “informal” migrants’ camp on Mount Gurugu, close to the Melilla border. He stated that there had been several raids by the Moroccan security forces and that he had broken his leg during the summer of 2014 while fleeing from them.
The second applicant arrived in Morocco in late 2012 after travelling through Mali. He also stayed in the Mount Gurugu migrants’ camp.
On 13 August 2014 two attempted crossings took place, organised by smuggling networks: one at 4.42 a.m. involving 600 people, and another at 6.25 a.m. involving 30 people. The applicants stated that they had taken part in the first of these. They had left the Mount Gurugu camp that day and tried to enter Spain together with their group, scaling the outer fence together with other migrants. According to the Government, the Moroccan police prevented around 500 migrants from scaling the outer fence, but around a hundred migrants nevertheless succeeded. Approximately seventyfive migrants managed to reach the top of the inner fence, but only a few came down the other side and landed on Spanish soil, where they were met by the members of the Guardia Civil. The others remained sitting on top of the inner fence. The Guardia Civil officials helped them to climb down with the aid of ladders, before escorting them back to Moroccan territory on the other side of the border through the gates between the fences.
The first applicant stated that he had managed to reach the top of the inner fence and had remained there until the afternoon. The second applicant said that he had been struck by a stone while he was climbing the outer fence and had fallen, but had subsequently managed to get to the top of the inner fence, where he had remained for eight hours. At around 3 p.m. and 2 p.m. respectively the first and second applicants reportedly climbed down from the fence with the help of Spanish law-enforcement officials who provided them with ladders. As soon as they reached the ground they were allegedly apprehended by Guardia Civil officials who handcuffed them, took them back to Morocco and handed them over to the Moroccan authorities. The applicants alleged that they had not undergone any identification procedure and had had no opportunity to explain their personal circumstances or to be assisted by lawyers or interpreters.
The applicants were then reportedly transferred to Nador police station, where they requested medical assistance. Their request was refused. They were allegedly taken subsequently, together with other migrants who had been returned in similar circumstances, to Fez, some 300 km from Nador, where they were left to fend for themselves. The applicants stated that between 75 and 80 migrants from sub-Saharan Africa had been returned to Morocco on 13 August 2014.
Journalists and other witnesses were at the scene of the attempt to storm the border fences and the subsequent events. They provided video footage which the applicants submitted to the Court.
On 2 December and 23 October 2014 respectively, in the context of further attempts to storm the fences, the first and second applicants succeeded in climbing over the fences and entering Melilla. Two sets of proceedings were instituted against them. The applicants were subsequently issued with expulsion orders.
An order for the first applicant’s expulsion was issued on 26 January 2015. He was accommodated in the temporary detention centre for aliens (CETI) in Melilla before being transferred to the Barcelona CETI in March 2015.
He lodged an administrative appeal (recurso de alzada) against the expulsion order.
On 17 March 2015, while this appeal was still pending, the first applicant lodged an application for international protection. His application was rejected on 23 March 2015 on the grounds that it was unfounded and that the applicant was not at risk, as the UNHCR office had issued an opinion on 20 March 2015 finding that the first applicant’s circumstances did not justify granting him international protection. A request for review lodged by the applicant was rejected by a decision of the Interior Ministry’s Asylum and Refugees Office on 26 March 2015, following a further negative UNHCR opinion issued on the same day.
The stay of the administrative expulsion proceedings was therefore lifted and the first applicant was sent back to Mali by airplane on 31 March 2015.
The previous day an appeal against the decision refusing international protection had been lodged with the administrative courts, but was withdrawn by the applicant’s representative on 15 September 2015.
The first applicant’s administrative appeal against the order for his expulsion was declared inadmissible by a decision of 19 May 2015. As no appeal against that decision was lodged with the administrative courts, the order became final on 26 September 2015.
According to the first applicant’s account, he has been living in very precarious circumstances since his return to Mali and has no fixed address.
An order for the second applicant’s expulsion was issued on 7 November 2014 and was upheld on 23 February 2015 following the dismissal of his administrative appeal (de alzada). He was accommodated in the Melilla CETI and in November 2014 was transferred to the Spanish mainland. The order for his expulsion became final on 11 July 2015. The second applicant did not apply for international protection. On expiry of the maximum period of 60 days’ immigration detention he was released. Since then he has apparently been staying unlawfully in Spain, probably in Andalusia and without any fixed address, according to the statements made by his lawyers at the hearing before the Court.
Both applicants were represented by lawyers during these proceedings.
The relevant provisions of the LOEX as in force at the material time read as follows:
“1.  Aliens seeking to enter Spain must do so at the authorised border crossing points. They must be in possession of a passport or travel document that provides proof of their identity and is accepted for that purpose under the international conventions to which Spain is a party, and must not be subject to an explicit entry ban. They must also present the documents required by the implementing regulations [of the present Law] explaining the purpose and conditions of their stay, and must provide proof that they have sufficient funds for the expected duration of their stay in Spain or have the means of obtaining them lawfully.
...
The preceding paragraphs shall not apply to aliens claiming the right of asylum on entering Spain. Such claims shall be dealt with under the specific legislation on asylum.”
“1.  Visas shall be requested and issued in the Spanish diplomatic missions and consulates, save in the exceptional circumstances laid down in the regulations or in those cases where the Spanish State, in accordance with the Community legislation in this sphere, has entered into a representation agreement with another European Union Member State concerning transit or residence visas.
...”
“...
The creation of an expulsion file is not required for the removal of aliens who
...
(b)  attempt to enter the country illegally;
...”
“...
In all cases, where the alien concerned is not in Spain, he or she may submit the relevant administrative or judicial appeals through the diplomatic or consular representations, which shall forward them to the competent authorities.”
Institutional Law 4/2015 of 30 March 2015 on the protection of citizens’ safety introduced the tenth additional provision into the LOEX. The provision has been in force since 1 April 2015 (after the events in the present case). It lays down special rules for the interception and removal of migrants in Ceuta and Melilla. The provision in question reads as follows:
“1.  Aliens attempting to penetrate the border containment structures in order to cross the border in an unauthorised manner, and whose presence is detected within the territorial demarcation lines of Ceuta or Melilla, may be returned in order to prevent their illegal entry into Spain.
Their return shall in all cases be carried out in compliance with the international rules on human rights and international protection recognised by Spain.
Applications for international protection shall be submitted in the places provided for that purpose at the border crossing points; the procedure shall conform to the standards laid down concerning international protection.”
The relevant provisions of the Law on asylum read as follows:
“1.  Where a person not satisfying the conditions for entry into Spain applies for international protection at a border crossing point, the Minister of the Interior may declare the application inadmissible by a reasoned decision where it falls into one of the categories referred to in section 20(1). In any event the decision shall be served on the person concerned within a maximum period of four days from submission of the application.
...”
 “In order to examine applications made outside the country, and provided that the applicant is not a national of the State in which the diplomatic representation is located and that there is a risk to his or her physical integrity, the ambassadors of Spain may facilitate the transfer of the asylum-seeker or asylum-seekers to Spain for the purposes of submitting an asylum claim in accordance with the procedure laid down by this Law.
The implementing rules for this Law shall lay down expressly the conditions of access to the embassies and consulates for persons seeking international protection, and the procedure for assessing the need to transfer them to Spain.”
The relevant provisions of Royal Decree 203/1995 read as follows:
“1.  Aliens seeking asylum in Spain shall lodge their application with one of the following entities:
(a)  the Asylum and Refugees Office;
(b)  the border posts for entry into Spanish territory;
(c)  Aliens Offices;
(d)  the provincial or district police stations designated by ministerial order;
(e)  Spain’s diplomatic missions or consulates abroad.
Where the UNHCR’s representative in Spain makes a request to the Spanish Government for the urgent admission of one or more refugees under UNHCR’s mandate who are at high risk in a third country, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, via the diplomatic mission or consulate of Spain or of another country ... shall issue visas ... to facilitate the transfer of the persons concerned to Spain in conformity with Articles 16 and 29 (4) of this decree.”
“Where the person concerned is at risk and has submitted his or her application from a third country through a diplomatic mission or a consulate or in the circumstances provided for in Article 4 (2), the Asylum and Refugees Office may submit the case to the Inter-ministerial Committee on Asylum and Refugees with a view to authorising the person’s transfer to Spain pending examination of the file, after the issuance of the corresponding visa, laissez-passer or entry authorisation, which shall be processed as a matter of urgency.
The Asylum and Refugees Office shall communicate the approval of the Interministerial Committee to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and to the Directorate-General of Police, which shall inform the relevant border post.
An asylum-seeker whose transfer to Spain has been authorised on account of the risks he or she faces shall be informed of his or her rights under Part 2 of Chapter I of this decree. He or she shall have a maximum period of one month from his or her entry into Spanish territory in which to exercise those rights.
The competent body of the Ministry of Social Affairs shall adopt the appropriate measures for reception of the asylum-seeker by the designated public or private institution.”
“1.  The interested party may submit such documentation and additional information as he or she considers appropriate, and formulate such allegations as he or she deems necessary in support of his or her application, at any time during the processing of the file by the Asylum and Refugees Office. These actions must be verified prior to the hearing preceding the sending of the file to the Inter-ministerial Committee on Asylum and Refugees, in accordance with section 6 of Law 5/1984, which governs the right to asylum and refugee status.
The Asylum and Refugees Office may request such reports as it deems appropriate from the organs of the State administration or from any other public entity.
Likewise, the reports of UNHCR and of the legally recognised associations providing advice and assistance to refugees shall be included in the file where appropriate.
The maximum period for processing the file shall be six months. If no decision has been taken on the asylum application on expiry of this period, the application may be considered to have been rejected, without prejudice to the obligation of the administrative authorities to take an express decision. In cases where the application is processed by a diplomatic or consular mission, the six-month period shall begin to run from the date of receipt of the application by the Asylum and Refugees Office.
Where the procedure is halted for reasons attributable to the asylum-seeker, the Asylum and Refugees Office shall inform him or her that the procedure will expire after three months. If this period expires without the individual in question carrying out the necessary actions to revive the procedure, the procedure shall be discontinued and the interested party shall be notified at his or her last known address.”
“...
Where the applicant has presented his or her application at a Spanish diplomatic or consular mission, these entities shall issue the visa or entry authorisation necessary for his or her travel to Spain, together with a travel document if necessary, as provided for by Article 16.”
The relevant provisions of Royal Decree 557/2011 read as follows:
“1.  Without prejudice to the provisions of the international conventions to which Spain is a party, aliens seeking to enter Spanish territory must do so via the authorised border crossing points. They must be in possession of a valid passport or travel document that provides proof of their identity and is accepted for that purpose, and, where required, of a valid visa. They must not be subject to an explicit entry ban. They must also present the documents required by these regulations explaining the purpose and conditions of their entry and stay, and must provide proof that they have sufficient funds for the expected duration of their stay in Spain or, where applicable, that they have the means of obtaining them lawfully.
...”
“1.  The entry of foreign nationals into Spanish territory shall be subject to compliance with the following conditions.
(a)  They must be in possession of the passport or travel documents referred to in the next Article.
(b)  They must be in possession of the relevant visa in accordance with Article 7.
(c)  [They must present] supporting documents concerning the purpose and conditions of their entry and stay, in accordance with Article 8.
(d)  [They must provide] a guarantee, where applicable, that they have sufficient funds to live on for the expected duration of their stay in Spain, or that they have the means of obtaining those funds, and sufficient funds for travel to another country or return to the country from which they arrived, in accordance with Article 9.
(e)  They must present, where applicable, the health certificates referred to in Article 10.
(f)  They must not be subject to an entry ban for the purposes of Article 11.
(g)  They must not present a danger to public health, public order, national security or Spain’s international relations or those of other States to which Spain is linked by a convention for this purpose.
The Office of the Commissioner-General for Aliens and Borders (Comisaría General de Extranjería y Fronteras) may grant permission to enter Spain to aliens not satisfying the conditions set forth in the previous paragraph, where this is justified on exceptional humanitarian or public-interest grounds or in order to comply with the undertakings entered into by Spain.”
“1.  In accordance with section 58(3) of the LOEX, the creation of an expulsion file is not necessary ... for the removal of aliens in the following circumstances.
...
(b)  Persons attempting to enter the country illegally. Aliens intercepted at the border or in the vicinity will be considered to fall into this category.
In the cases covered by sub-paragraph (b) above, members of the coastal and border security forces who apprehend an alien attempting to enter Spain in an unauthorised manner shall take him or her to the police station immediately with a view to his or her identification and, where applicable, removal.
In all cases covered by paragraph 1, aliens in respect of whom steps are being taken with a view to the adoption of a removal order shall have the right to be assisted by a lawyer, and by an interpreter if they do not understand or speak the official languages used. Such assistance shall be free of charge where the person concerned lacks the necessary financial resources ...”
The parts of the border control operations protocol of relevance to the present case read as follows:
“With this system of fences, there is an objective need to determine when illegal entry has failed and when it has taken place. This requires defining the line which delimits the national territory, for the sole purpose of the rules governing aliens, a line which takes the physical form of the fence in question. Hence, where attempts by migrants to cross this line illegally are contained and repelled by the lawenforcement agencies responsible for controlling the border, no actual illegal entry is deemed to have taken place. Entry is deemed to have been effected only where a migrant has penetrated beyond the above-mentioned internal fence, thereby entering the national territory and coming within the scope of the rules governing aliens ...”
The relevant parts of this circular read as follows:
“Law 12/2009 of 30 October 2009 on asylum and subsidiary protection, published in the Official Gazette on Saturday 31 October 2009 ...
[Section 38 of this Law concerns ‘persons applying for international protection in embassies and consulates’]
...
The key elements of this section are as follows.
(1)  This section is not applicable if the person concerned is a national of the country where the diplomatic representation is located.
(2)  In addition, his or her physical integrity must be at risk from causes linked to the scope of application of the Law (asylum or subsidiary protection).
(3)  It is the task of Spanish ambassadors (but under no circumstances of consuls) to ‘facilitate [where appropriate] the transfer of the asylum-seeker or asylum-seekers to Spain’ for the sole purpose of ‘submitting the asylum claim in accordance with the procedure laid down by this Law’, that is to say, in Spain. This authority lies with the ambassadors alone.
At all events neither ambassadors nor consuls are authorised by law to take a decision on applications for asylum or protection, still less to inform Spain thereof. This is crucial. If such a decision were to be taken, the Spanish State would be obliged to provide [the asylum-seeker with] legal assistance and protection [including against refoulement from the country] and to meet his or her needs (in terms of food and housing), including healthcare needs; section 38 makes no provision for this.
Consequently, the fact that someone seeks to lodge an asylum application with an embassy or consulate does not in any circumstances entail the start of a procedure for possible admission.
This does not prevent the ambassador, if he or she has determined that the conditions set out above are satisfied in a given case, from confirming the actual nationality [of the person concerned] and verifying whether his or her physical safety is at risk in the manner described above. Every effort must be made to obtain as much information as possible and to compile full records of the case and the allegations made by the potential applicant for asylum or protection. These are to be sent to the Directorate of Consular Affairs and Migration so that the supervisory authority can take cognisance of them, assess them and take a decision.
In sum, if in the exercise of his or her duties the ambassador considers that ‘there is a risk to [the asylum-seeker’s] physical integrity’, he or she may secure the person’s transfer to Spain (this may entail issuing a visa and a one-way airline ticket to Spain, subject to prior approval by the Ministry).
The second sub-section of section 38 provides for the adoption of implementing regulations, to be drawn up jointly by the Ministries of the Interior, Justice and Foreign Affairs. These regulations will lay down the procedure enabling ambassadors to assess the issue of possible transfer to Spain.
With regard to proceedings already in progress, the first transitional provision provides, where relevant, for application of the rules in force prior to the entry into force of the new Law (which will apply as of today, 20 November 2009).
For new cases, and until such time as the implementing rules for the Law, referred to in the second sub-section of section 38, enter into force, you should follow the instructions set out in this circular.
...
Madrid, 20 November 2009”.
In his 2005 annual report, the Spanish Ombudsperson wrote as follows:
“As regards the issue whether the border zone should be regarded as Spanish territory and, accordingly, which rules are applicable to it, [it can be asserted, in] the light of the various conventions signed during the nineteenth century between Spain and Morocco defining the jurisdictional limits of the autonomous city of Melilla, that the zone is constructed ... on Spanish territory, that Spain has full ownership [of the area in question] and that it is controlled by the Spanish law-enforcement agencies. It is therefore not for the Spanish administrative authorities to determine where our country’s legislation should start to apply. That territorial application is governed by international treaties or, where applicable, by international custom, which define the borders with neighbouring States.”
In presenting her 2013 annual report to the Senate on 9 April 2014 the Spanish Ombudsperson “deplored the heart-rending images of people who had climbed to the top of the fences and stressed that once a person was on Spanish territory – as we believe to be the case [when he or she is on the fences of the Melilla border] – he or she should be dealt with in accordance with the law in force”. The Ombudsperson therefore condemned the practice of immediate removals (devoluciones en caliente), which, she reiterated, were not provided for under the LOEX.
The relevant Articles of the Treaty on European Union provide as follows:
“The Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities ...”
“1.  The Union recognises the rights, freedoms and principles set out in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union of 7 December 2000, as adapted at Strasbourg, on 12 December 2007, which shall have the same legal value as the Treaties.
...
Fundamental rights, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and as they result from the constitutional traditions common to the Member States, shall constitute general principles of the Union’s law.”
The relevant provisions of the Charter read as follows:
“No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
“The right to asylum shall be guaranteed with due respect for the rules of the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 and the Protocol of 31 January 1967 relating to the status of refugees and in accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community.”
“1.  Collective expulsions are prohibited.
No one may be removed, expelled or extradited to a State where there is a serious risk that he or she would be subjected to the death penalty, torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
“Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the law of the Union are violated has the right to an effective remedy before a tribunal in compliance with the conditions laid down in this Article.
Everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal previously established by law. Everyone is to have the possibility of being advised, defended and represented.
Legal aid shall be made available to those who lack sufficient resources in so far as such aid is necessary to ensure effective access to justice.”
The relevant provisions of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) provide:
“1.  The Union shall constitute an area of freedom, security and justice with respect for fundamental rights and the different legal systems and traditions of the Member States.
It ... shall frame a common policy on asylum, immigration and external border control, based on solidarity between Member States, which is fair towards thirdcountry nationals ...”
“This Title shall not affect the exercise of the responsibilities incumbent upon Member States with regard to the maintenance of law and order and the safeguarding of internal security.”
“1.  The Union shall develop a policy with a view to:
(a)  ensuring the absence of any controls on persons, whatever their nationality, when crossing internal borders;
(b)  carrying out checks on persons and efficient monitoring of the crossing of external borders;
(c)  the gradual introduction of an integrated management system for external borders.
For the purposes of paragraph 1, the European Parliament and the Council, acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure, shall adopt measures concerning:
(a)  the common policy on visas and other short-stay residence permits;
(b)  the checks to which persons crossing external borders are subject;
(c)  the conditions under which nationals of third countries shall have the freedom to travel within the Union for a short period;
(d)  any measure necessary for the gradual establishment of an integrated management system for external borders;
(e)  the absence of any controls on persons, whatever their nationality, when crossing internal borders.
If action by the Union should prove necessary to facilitate the exercise of the right referred to in Article 20(2)(a), and if the Treaties have not provided the necessary powers, the Council, acting in accordance with a special legislative procedure, may adopt provisions concerning passports, identity cards, residence permits or any other such document. The Council shall act unanimously after consulting the European Parliament.
This Article shall not affect the competence of the Member States concerning the geographical demarcation of their borders, in accordance with international law.”
“1.  The Union shall develop a common policy on asylum, subsidiary protection and temporary protection with a view to offering appropriate status to any third-country national requiring international protection and ensuring compliance with the principle of non-refoulement. This policy must be in accordance with the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 and the Protocol of 31 January 1967 relating to the status of refugees, and other relevant treaties.”
“1.  The Union shall develop a common immigration policy aimed at ensuring, at all stages, the efficient management of migration flows, fair treatment of third-country nationals residing legally in Member States, and the prevention of, and enhanced measures to combat, illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings.
For the purposes of paragraph 1, the European Parliament and the Council, acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure, shall adopt measures in the following areas:
(a)  the conditions of entry and residence, and standards on the issue by Member States of long-term visas and residence permits, including those for the purpose of family reunification;
...
(c)  illegal immigration and unauthorised residence, including removal and repatriation of persons residing without authorisation;
...”
The relevant parts of this Agreement read as follows:
“...
The Contracting Parties take note of the following declarations by the Kingdom of Spain:
Declaration concerning the cities of Ceuta and Melilla;
(a)  The current controls on goods and travellers coming from the cities of Ceuta and Melilla prior to their introduction into the customs territory of the European Economic Community shall continue to be applied by Spain in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 2 of the Act of Accession of Spain to the European Communities.
(b)  The specific visa exemption regime for small border traffic between Ceuta and Melilla and the Moroccan provinces of Tetuan and Nador will also continue to apply.
(c)  Moroccan nationals not residents in the provinces of Tetuan and Nador and wishing to enter exclusively the cities of Ceuta and Melilla shall remain subject to a visa requirement. The validity of this visa will be limited to the two above-mentioned cities and will allow multiple entries and exits ("visado limitado múltiple"), in accordance with the provisions of Articles 10(3) and 11(1)(a) of the 1990 Convention.
(d)  In applying this regime the interests of the other Contracting Parties shall be taken into account.
(e)  In application of its national legislation and in order to verify whether passengers continue to comply with the conditions listed in Article 5 of the 1990 Convention, by virtue of which they were authorised to enter national territory upon passport control at the external border, Spain will maintain controls (identity and document controls) on sea and air connections from Ceuta and Melilla having as their sole destination any other place on Spanish territory.
To this same end, Spain shall maintain checks on domestic flights and on regular ferry connections departing from the cities of Ceuta and Melilla to a destination in another State party to the Convention.”
The relevant provisions of the Schengen Borders Code read as follows:
“THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,
...
Whereas:
...
(6)  Border control is in the interest not only of the Member State at whose external borders it is carried out but of all Member States which have abolished internal border control. Border control should help to combat illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings and to prevent any threat to the Member States’ internal security, public policy, public health and international relations.
...”
“This Regulation provides for the absence of border control of persons crossing the internal borders between the Member States of the Union.
It lays down rules governing border control of persons crossing the external borders of the Member States of the Union.”
“1.  External borders may be crossed only at border crossing points and during the fixed opening hours. The opening hours shall be clearly indicated at border crossing points which are not open 24 hours a day.
...
Without prejudice to the exceptions provided for in paragraph 2 or to their international protection obligations, Member States shall introduce penalties, in accordance with their national law, for the unauthorised crossing of external borders at places other than border crossing points or at times other than the fixed opening hours. These penalties shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.”
“1.  Border guards shall, in the performance of their duties, fully respect human dignity.
Any measures taken in the performance of their duties shall be proportionate to the objectives pursued by such measures.
While carrying out border checks, border guards shall not discriminate against persons on grounds of sex, racial or ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation.”
“1.  Cross-border movement at external borders shall be subject to checks by border guards. Checks shall be carried out in accordance with this chapter.
...
All persons shall undergo a minimum check in order to establish their identities on the basis of the production or presentation of their travel documents. Such a minimum check shall consist of a rapid and straightforward verification, where appropriate by using technical devices and by consulting, in the relevant databases, information exclusively on stolen, misappropriated, lost and invalidated documents, of the validity of the document authorising the legitimate holder to cross the border ...
On entry and exit, third-country nationals shall be subject to thorough checks. ...”
“1.  The main purpose of border surveillance shall be to prevent unauthorised border crossings, to counter cross-border criminality and to take measures against persons who have crossed the border illegally.
...”
“1.  A third-country national who does not fulfil all the entry conditions laid down in Article 5(1) and does not belong to the categories of persons referred to in Article 5(4) shall be refused entry to the territories of the Member States. This shall be without prejudice to the application of special provisions concerning the right of asylum and to international protection or the issue of long-stay visas.
...”
“Member States shall deploy appropriate staff and resources in sufficient numbers to carry out border control at the external borders, in accordance with Articles 6 to 13, in such a way as to ensure an efficient, high and uniform level of control at their external borders.”
The codified version of Articles 14 and 15 of the Schengen Borders Code corresponds to former Articles 13 and 14.
The relevant provisions of the Return Directive read as follows:
“This Directive sets out common standards and procedures to be applied in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals, in accordance with fundamental rights as general principles of Community law as well as international law, including refugee protection and human rights obligations.”
“1.  This Directive applies to third-country nationals staying illegally on the territory of a Member State.
Member States may decide not to apply this Directive to third-country nationals who:
(a)  are subject to a refusal of entry in accordance with Article 13 of the Schengen Borders Code, or who are apprehended or intercepted by the competent authorities in connection with the irregular crossing by land, sea or air of the external border of a Member State and who have not subsequently obtained an authorisation or a right to stay in that Member State;
...”
“...
This Directive shall be without prejudice to the right of the Member States to adopt or maintain provisions that are more favourable to persons to whom it applies provided that such provisions are compatible with this Directive.
With regard to third-country nationals excluded from the scope of this Directive in accordance with Article 2(2)(a), Member States shall:
(a)  ensure that their treatment and level of protection are no less favourable than as set out in Article 8(4) and (5) (limitations on use of coercive measures), Article 9(2)(a) (postponement of removal), Article 14(1) (b) and (d) (emergency health care and taking into account needs of vulnerable persons), and Articles 16 and 17 (detention conditions) and
(b)  respect the principle of non-refoulement.”
“When implementing this Directive, Member States shall take due account of:
(a)  the best interests of the child;
(b)  family life;
(c)  the state of health of the third-country national concerned,
and respect the principle of non-refoulement.”
“1.  Member States shall take all necessary measures to enforce the return decision if no period for voluntary departure has been granted in accordance with Article 7(4) or if the obligation to return has not been complied with within the period for voluntary departure granted in accordance with Article 7.
...”
“1.  Return decisions and, if issued, entry-ban decisions and decisions on removal shall be issued in writing and give reasons in fact and in law as well as information about available legal remedies.
The information on reasons in fact may be limited where national law allows for the right to information to be restricted, in particular in order to safeguard national security, defence, public security and for the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences.
...”
“1.  The third-country national concerned shall be afforded an effective remedy to appeal against or seek review of decisions related to return, as referred to in Article 12(1), before a competent judicial or administrative authority or a competent body composed of members who are impartial and who enjoy safeguards of independence.
The authority or body mentioned in paragraph 1 shall have the power to review decisions related to return, as referred to in Article 12(1), including the possibility of temporarily suspending their enforcement, unless a temporary suspension is already applicable under national legislation.
The third-country national concerned shall have the possibility to obtain legal advice, representation and, where necessary, linguistic assistance.
Member States shall ensure that the necessary legal assistance and/or representation is granted on request free of charge in accordance with relevant national legislation or rules regarding legal aid, and may provide that such free legal assistance and/or representation is subject to conditions as set out in Article 15(3) to (6) of Directive 2005/85/EC.”
The principles established by the case-law of the CJEU concerning the right to be heard under the Return Directive are set out in detail in the judgment in Khlaifia and Others (cited above, §§ 42-45).
In a recent ruling (judgment of 7 June 2016, Affum, C-47/15), the CJEU clarified the interpretation to be given to Article 2(2)(a) of that directive, stating that it concerned third-country nationals who had been apprehended or intercepted by the competent authorities at the very time of the irregular crossing of the border or near that border after it had been so crossed.
The relevant paragraphs of the judgment read as follows:
“72.  Finally, still in relation to that second situation, Article 2(2)(a) of Directive 2008/115 specifies that the apprehension or interception of the third-country nationals concerned must take place ‘in connection with the irregular crossing’ of an external border, which, as Ms Affum, the Greek Government and the Commission submit in essence, and as the Advocate General has observed in point 41 of his Opinion, implies a direct temporal and spatial link with that crossing of the border. That situation therefore concerns third-country nationals who have been apprehended or intercepted by the competent authorities at the very time of the irregular crossing of the border or near that border after it has been so crossed.
In the second place, it is to be noted that the exception provided for in Article 2(2)(a) of Directive 2008/115, unlike the exception provided for in Article 2(2)(b), is coupled with certain obligations which are set out in Article 4(4) of the directive.
The fact that Article 4(4) of Directive 2008/115 thus regulates in detail the exercise by the Member States of the power provided for in Article 2(2)(a) of the directive can be explained, as the Commission set out at the hearing, by the purpose of Article 2(2)(a), as apparent from the directive’s history, of permitting the Member States to continue to apply simplified national return procedures at their external borders, without having to follow all the procedural stages prescribed by the directive, in order to be able to remove more swiftly third-country nationals intercepted when crossing those borders. Article 4(4) of Directive 2008/115 is intended in that context to ensure that those simplified national procedures observe the minimum guarantees prescribed by the directive, which include, in particular, the detention conditions laid down in Articles 16 and 17.”
The CJEU has also defined the expression “irregular crossing of a border” as a crossing that does not fulfil “the conditions imposed by the legislation applicable in the Member State in question” and which must necessarily be considered “irregular” within the meaning of Article 13(1) of the Dublin III Regulation (judgment of 26 July 2017, Jafari, C-646/16, §§ 74 et seq.). The CJEU’s judgment of 19 March 2019 in Arib (C-444/17) is also interesting in this regard as it reiterates that, according to the CJEU’s case-law, the two situations covered by Article 2(2)(a) of Directive 2008/115 relate exclusively to the crossing of a member State’s external border, as defined in Article 2 of the Schengen Borders Code, and do not concern the crossing of a common border of member States forming part of the Schengen area (see Affum, cited above, § 69).
The relevant provisions of Directive 2005/85/EC read as follows:
“1.  Member States may require that applications for asylum be made in person and/or at a designated place.
Member States shall ensure that each adult having legal capacity has the right to make an application for asylum on his/her own behalf.
Member States may provide that an application may be made by an applicant on behalf of his/her dependants. In such cases Member States shall ensure that dependant adults consent to the lodging of the application on their behalf, failing which they shall have an opportunity to make an application on their own behalf.
Consent shall be requested at the time the application is lodged or, at the latest, when the personal interview with the dependant adult is conducted.
...
Member States shall ensure that authorities likely to be addressed by someone who wishes to make an application for asylum are able to advise that person how and where he/she may make such an application and/or may require these authorities to forward the application to the competent authority.”
“1.  Applicants shall be allowed to remain in the Member State, for the sole purpose of the procedure, until the determining authority has made a decision in accordance with the procedures at first instance set out in Chapter III. This right to remain shall not constitute an entitlement to a residence permit.
...”
“1.  Without prejudice to Article 23(4)(i), Member States shall ensure that applications for asylum are neither rejected nor excluded from examination on the sole ground that they have not been made as soon as possible.
Member States shall ensure that decisions by the determining authority on applications for asylum are taken after an appropriate examination. To that end, Member States shall ensure that:
(a)  applications are examined and decisions are taken individually, objectively and impartially;
(b)  precise and up-to-date information is obtained from various sources, such as the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), as to the general situation prevailing in the countries of origin of applicants for asylum and, where necessary, in countries through which they have transited, and that such information is made available to the personnel responsible for examining applications and taking decisions;
(c)  the personnel examining applications and taking decisions have the knowledge with respect to relevant standards applicable in the field of asylum and refugee law.
The authorities referred to in Chapter V shall, through the determining authority or the applicant or otherwise, have access to the general information referred to in paragraph 2(b), necessary for the fulfilment of their task.
Member States may provide for rules concerning the translation of documents relevant for the examination of applications.”
“1.  Member States shall ensure that decisions on applications for asylum are given in writing.
Member States shall also ensure that, where an application is rejected, the reasons in fact and in law are stated in the decision and information on how to challenge a negative decision is given in writing.
Member States need not state the reasons for not granting refugee status in a decision where the applicant is granted a status which offers the same rights and benefits under national and Community law as the refugee status by virtue of Directive 2004/83/EC. In these cases, Member States shall ensure that the reasons for not granting refugee status are stated in the applicant’s file and that the applicant has, upon request, access to his/her file.
Moreover, Member States need not provide information on how to challenge a negative decision in writing in conjunction with a decision where the applicant has been provided with this information at an earlier stage either in writing or by electronic means accessible to the applicant.
For the purposes of Article 6(3), and whenever the application is based on the same grounds, Member States may take one single decision, covering all dependants.”
“1.  With respect to the procedures provided for in Chapter III, Member States shall ensure that all applicants for asylum enjoy the following guarantees:
(a)  they shall be informed in a language which they may reasonably be supposed to understand of the procedure to be followed and of their rights and obligations during the procedure and the possible consequences of not complying with their obligations and not cooperating with the authorities. They shall be informed of the time-frame, as well as the means at their disposal for fulfilling the obligation to submit the elements as referred to in Article 4 of Directive 2004/83/EC. This information shall be given in time to enable them to exercise the rights guaranteed in this Directive and to comply with the obligations described in Article 11;
(b)  they shall receive the services of an interpreter for submitting their case to the competent authorities whenever necessary. Member States shall consider it necessary to give these services at least when the determining authority calls upon the applicant to be interviewed as referred to in Articles 12 and 13 and appropriate communication cannot be ensured without such services. In this case and in other cases where the competent authorities call upon the applicant, these services shall be paid for out of public funds;
(c)  they shall not be denied the opportunity to communicate with the UNHCR or with any other organisation working on behalf of the UNHCR in the territory of the Member State pursuant to an agreement with that Member State;
(d)  they shall be given notice in reasonable time of the decision by the determining authority on their application for asylum. If a legal adviser or other counsellor is legally representing the applicant, Member States may choose to give notice of the decision to him/her instead of to the applicant for asylum;
(e)  they shall be informed of the result of the decision by the determining authority in a language that they may reasonably be supposed to understand when they are not assisted or represented by a legal adviser or other counsellor and when free legal assistance is not available. The information provided shall include information on how to challenge a negative decision in accordance with the provisions of Article 9(2).
With respect to the procedures provided for in Chapter V, Member States shall ensure that all applicants for asylum enjoy equivalent guarantees to the ones referred to in paragraph 1(b), (c) and (d) of this Article.”
“...
Member States may revoke, end or refuse to renew the status granted to a refugee by a governmental, administrative, judicial or quasi-judicial body, when:
(a)  there are reasonable grounds for regarding him or her as a danger to the security of the Member State in which he or she is present;
(b)  he or she, having been convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that Member State.
In situations described in paragraph 4, Member States may decide not to grant status to a refugee, where such a decision has not yet been taken.
...”
In its judgment of 14 May 2019 (C-391/16, C-77/17 and C-78/17, M. v. Ministerstvo vnitra and Others), the CJEU clarified the interpretation of the terms “refugee” and “refugee status” for the purposes of Article 2(d) and Article 2(e) respectively of this directive and also, among other points, the material conditions required in order for a third-country national or stateless person to be regarded as a refugee.
The relevant paragraphs of the CJEU judgment read as follows:
“84.  ... it should be noted that, regarding the term ‘refugee’, Article 2(d) of that directive reproduces, in essence, the definition set out in Article 1(A)(2) of the Geneva Convention. In that regard, the provisions of Chapter III of Directive 2011/95, entitled ‘Qualification for being a refugee’ provide clarification regarding the material conditions necessary to enable a third-country national or a stateless person to be considered a refugee for the purposes of Article 2(d) of that directive.
For its part, Article 2(e) of Directive 2011/95 defines ‘refugee status’ as ‘the recognition by a Member State of a third-country national or a stateless person as a refugee’. As can be seen from recital 21 of that directive, that recognition is declaratory and not constitutive of being a refugee.
...
The fact that being a ‘refugee’ for the purposes of Article 2(d) of Directive 2011/95 and Article 1(A) of the Geneva Convention is not dependent on formal recognition thereof through the granting of ‘refugee status’ as defined in Article 2(e) of that directive is, moreover, borne out by the wording of Article 21(2) of that directive, which states that a ‘refugee’ may, in accordance with the condition laid down in that provision, be refouled ‘whether formally recognised or not’.
...
Thus, where the refoulement of a refugee covered by one of the scenarios referred to in Article 14(4) and (5) and Article 21(2) of Directive 2011/95 would expose that refugee to the risk of his fundamental rights, as enshrined in Article 4 and Article 19(2) of the Charter, being infringed, the Member State concerned may not derogate from the principle of non-refoulement under Article 33(2) of the Geneva Convention.
...
It must therefore be held that Member States, when implementing Article 14(4) or (5) of that directive, are, in principle, required to grant refugees who are present in their respective territories only the rights expressly referred to in Article 14(6) of that directive and the rights set out in the Geneva Convention that are guaranteed for any refugee who is present in the territory of a Contracting State and do not require a lawful stay.”
The relevant parts of this resolution read as follows:
“The European Parliament,
...
Recalls that, since the establishment of the Schengen Area, the Union is an area without internal borders, that the Schengen Member States have developed a stepbystep common policy towards the Schengen external borders, and that the inherent logic of such a system has always been that the abolition of internal border controls has to go hand in hand with compensatory measures strengthening the external borders of the Schengen Area and the sharing of information through the Schengen Information System (‘SIS’);
Acknowledges that the integrity of the Schengen Area and the abolition of internal border controls are dependent on having effective management of external borders, with high common standards applied by all Member States at the external borders and an effective exchange of information between them;
Accepts that the Union needs to strengthen its external border protection and further develop the CEAS, and that measures are necessary to enhance the capacity of the Schengen Area to address the new challenges facing Europe and preserve the fundamental principles of security and free movement of persons;
Points out that access to the territory of the Schengen Area is generally controlled at the external border under the Schengen Borders Code and that, in addition, citizens of many third countries require a visa to enter the Schengen Area;
Reiterates the UNHCR’s call that respect for fundamental rights and international obligations can only be ensured if operating procedures and plans reflect those obligations in practical, clear guidance to border personnel, including those at land, sea and air borders; points out to the need to further strengthen the Union Civil Protection Mechanism in order to respond to events with wide-ranging impacts which affect a significant number of Member States;
Emphasises again that, as for legislation specifically in the area of asylum and migration, in order for legislation on internal and external borders to be effective, it is essential that measures agreed at Union level are implemented properly by the Member States; underlines that better implementation of measures by Member States at the external borders, following increased pressure, is essential and will go some way towards allaying the security fears of citizens;
...
Considers that the Schengen Area is one of the major achievements of European integration; notes that the conflict in Syria and other conflicts elsewhere in the region have triggered record numbers of refugees and migrants arriving in the Union, which in turn has revealed deficiencies at parts of the Union’s external borders; is concerned at the fact that, in response, some Member States have felt the need to close their internal borders or introduce temporary border controls, thus calling into question the proper functioning of the Schengen Area;
...”
The relevant parts of this document provide as follows:
“... member states have the right, as a matter of well-established international law and subject to their treaty obligations, to control the entry and residence of aliens on their territory;
... in exercising this right, member states may find it necessary to forcibly return illegal residents within their territory; ...”
“Removal orders shall only be issued in pursuance of a decision reached in accordance with the law.
A removal order shall only be issued where the authorities of the host state have considered all relevant information that is readily available to them, and are satisfied, as far as can reasonably be expected, that compliance with, or enforcement of, the order, will not expose the person facing return to:
a real risk of being executed, or exposed to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
a real risk of being killed or subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment by nonstate actors, if the authorities of the state of return, parties or organisations controlling the state or a substantial part of the territory of the state, including international organisations, are unable or unwilling to provide appropriate and effective protection; or
other situations which would, under international law or national legislation, justify the granting of international protection.
...”
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe took note of the comments on these Guidelines drafted by the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts on the Legal Aspects of Territorial Asylum, Refugees and Stateless Persons (CAHAR). The relevant parts concerning the scope of application of the guidelines read as follows:
“... The Guidelines apply to procedures leading to the expulsion of non-nationals from the territory of members states of the Council of Europe. Refusals to enter the national territory at the border are not included in their scope of application, although certain norms restated in the Guidelines are applicable to such decisions ...”
From 14 to 18 July 2014 a delegation from the CPT visited Spain. One objective of the visit was to examine certain aspects of the treatment of irregular migrants intercepted along the border with Morocco, in the Melilla enclave.
In its report published on 9 April 2015 the CPT found as follows:
“...
The CPT acknowledges that a number of European States have to cope with frequent influxes of irregular migrants. It is notably the case for those countries situated at the external frontiers of the European Union which act as the gateway to the rest of Europe. Spain is one of these countries facing such pressures.
The autonomous municipality of Melilla is a Spanish exclave of 12 km² located on the northern coast of Africa, surrounded by Moroccan territory. The autonomous municipality lies on the migration route from North and Sub-Saharan Africa towards Europe; it is also used by Syrian migrants. The delegation was informed that the number of foreign nationals trying to cross Melilla’s border irregularly has increased drastically over the last year and a half.
The Guardia Civil is responsible for patrolling the land border and the coast to prevent clandestine entry. The delegation was informed in Melilla that the Guardia Civil has institutionalised co-operation with the Moroccan Gendarmerie but no formal co-operation with the Moroccan Auxiliary Forces (‘MAF’), which have the prime responsibility for border surveillance.
The Spanish authorities have built a multi-fence barrier along the 13 km land border separating Melilla from Morocco to prevent irregular migrants from accessing Spanish territory. The CPT notes that it was built within Spanish territory and is therefore, on both sides, under the full jurisdiction of Spain.
The barrier consists of a six meter high fence, slightly tilted towards Morocco, a three dimensional tow-line followed by a second three meter high fence and, on the other side of a patrol road, another six meter high fence. At regular intervals, gates have been inserted into the fences to enable access through the barrier from both sides. In addition, a sophisticated CCTV system (including infrared cameras) combined with movement sensors has been installed. Most of the fences are also equipped with anti-climbing grids.
On 13 February 1992, Spain concluded a Bilateral Agreement with the Kingdom of Morocco on the movement of persons, transit and readmission of foreign nationals who entered illegally (‘the Readmission Agreement’). According to the Readmission Agreement, ‘following the formal request of the border authorities of the requesting State, border authorities of the requested State shall readmit in its territory the third-country nationals who have illegally entered the territory of the requesting State from the requested State.’ The application for readmission shall be submitted within ten days after the illegal entry into the territory of the requesting State.
...
Groups of foreign nationals of varying sizes – from a few persons to a thousand – attempt, on a regular basis, to access Spanish territory. Regarding the attempts to access Spanish territory by sea, the CPT was informed about an incident that took place on 6 February 2014, which was widely reported in the media. Members of the Guardia Civil fired rubber bullets from the beach at persons who were attempting to swim from Moroccan territory to Melilla and forced them to head back to Morocco. However, not all the persons were able to swim back and it was reported that 15 foreign nationals drowned.
As regards attempts to access Spanish territory by climbing the border fences, the delegation received consistent allegations, confirmed by video footage, that irregular migrants were stopped within or right after the border by members of the Guardia Civil, occasionally handcuffed, before being immediately forcibly returned to Morocco without being identified. Several foreign nationals also stated to the delegation that they had been returned to Morocco after being apprehended by the Guardia Civil several hundred meters from the border. It seems that the duty of the Guardia Civil was seen as encompassing apprehending irregular migrants on their way to the CETI in Melilla and forcibly returning them to Morocco. Further, foreign nationals were allegedly sometimes returned to Morocco despite the fact that they were injured and could hardly walk (see also paragraph 51).
The CPT considers that such practices of immediately and forcibly returning irregular migrants, without any prior identification or screening of their needs, would be clearly contrary to the principles and standards mentioned above.
...
... the CPT recommends that:
-  clear instructions be given to Spanish law enforcement officials to ensure that irregular migrants who have entered Spanish territory will not be forcibly returned to Morocco prior to an individualised screening with a view to identifying persons in need of protection, assessing those needs and taking appropriate action;
-  adequate guarantees in this respect be provided in national legislation.”
The parts of the report of relevance to the present case read as follows:
“1.2.  Visits
Visit to Spain
The Commissioner visited Melilla and Madrid from 13 to 16 January 2015 in order to discuss issues pertaining to the human rights of migrants, refugees and asylumseekers in Ceuta and Melilla, Spain’s territories in Northern Africa.
In Melilla, the Commissioner held meetings with the Government’s Delegate, Mr Abdelmalik El Barkani and the President of the city, Mr Juan José Imbroda Ortiz. He also met with the Head of the Guardia Civil in Melilla, Colonel Ambrosio Martín Villaseñor; the Head of the National Police, Mr José Angel González Jiménez; and representatives of civil society organisations. He visited the border check-point of Beni Ansar, where an office to register asylum claims started operating in November 2014. He also visited the triple-fence surrounding Melilla and the Centre for Temporary Stay of Migrants (CETI), where he met with Centre’s Director, Mr Carlos Montero Díaz, other staff members and with persons accommodated in it.
In Madrid, the Commissioner met with the Secretary of State for Security, Mr Francisco Martínez Vázquez. He also met with the Ombudsperson, Ms Soledad Becerril Bustamante, UNHCR’s Representative in Spain and civil society representatives. Additionally, the Commissioner held, on 27 January 2015, an exchange of views with members of the Spanish delegation to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on issues raised during the visit.
The main issue of the visit was the draft amendment to the Aliens Act aimed at establishing a special regime for Ceuta and Melilla and allowing the immediate return of migrants who did not enter Ceuta and Melilla through a regular border post. While recognising that Spain has the right to establish its own immigration and border management policies, the Commissioner stressed that it must also uphold its human rights obligations. Therefore, he urged the Spanish authorities to ensure that any future legislation fully comply with these obligations, which include ensuring full access to an effective asylum procedure, providing protection against refoulement and refraining from collective expulsions. He also underscored Spain’s obligation to ensure that no push-backs of migrants occur in practice and to effectively investigate all allegations of excessive use of force against migrants by law enforcement officials at the border.
The Commissioner welcomed the opening of an asylum office at one of Melilla’s border check-points and the effective co-operation of the police with UNHCR. At the same time, he highlighted the need to strengthen the asylum system in Melilla so as to allow all persons in need of protection, irrespective of their country of origin, to access the territory safely, to have their situation assessed on an individual basis and to submit international protection claims. Additionally, he urged the authorities to take urgent steps to improve existing arrangements for the reception of migrants in Melilla and clarify rules governing transfers to the mainland.
The press release issued at the end of the visit (16 January) is available on the Commissioner’s website. The visit also served as a basis for the written comments the Commissioner submitted to the Court as third party in November on two cases against Spain (N.D. and N.T., Applications No 8675/15 and No. 8697/15). These cases related to alleged pushbacks of migrants from the Spanish city of Melilla to Morocco (see below, European Court of Human Rights).
...
Thematic activities
...
3.  Human rights of immigrants, refugees and asylum seekers
Human rights of immigrants, refugees and asylum seekers featured prominently in the Commissioner’s work in 2015. He took an active part in various debates on these issues, reminding Council of Europe member states of their human rights obligations towards immigrants, asylum-seekers and refugees. Issues pertaining to migration were addressed in the Commissioner’s ... ad hoc visits to ... Spain, as well as through third party interventions before the Court.
...
European Court of Human Rights
In 2015, the Commissioner made extensive use of his right to submit written comments in cases before the European Court of Human Rights, pursuant to Article 36, paragraph 3 of the ECHR. He did so in ... two cases against Spain, relating to alleged push-backs of migrants from the Spanish city of Melilla to Morocco. ...
On 12 November 2015, the Commissioner published the written comments he submitted to the Court on two cases against Spain (N.D. and N.T., Applications No. 8675/15 and No. 8697/15) relating to alleged pushbacks of migrants from the Spanish city of Melilla to Morocco. Based inter alia on his visit to Melilla and Madrid from 13 to 16 January 2015 ..., the Commissioner points to the existence of a practice whereby migrants who attempt to enter Melilla in groups by climbing the fence surrounding the city are summarily returned by Spain’s border guards to Morocco. The Commissioner underlines that these returns take place outside of any formal procedure and without identification of the persons concerned or assessment of their individual situation, a circumstance which prevents them from effectively exercising their right to seek international protection in Spain. Additionally, he stresses that migrants summarily returned from Melilla have no access to an effective remedy which would enable them to challenge their removal or seek redress for any illtreatment they may have been subjected to during such operations.”
The relevant parts of this report read as follows:
“3.  THE SITUATION IN MELILLA AND CEUTA
1.  Preventing access to the territory
Asylum-seekers and migrants in an irregular situation enter into the autonomous cities of Melilla and Ceuta both through the land and sea borders. As regards land borders, Melilla is surrounded by a 12 km triple fence – the external and internal fences are six metres high and the middle one is a lower three dimensional barrier which is a structure of steel cables tied to stakes. The fence is equipped with sensors to detect movements towards its external part. When such movements are detected the Guardia Civil notifies the Moroccan authorities, which in turn often prevent people in the Moroccan territory from jumping the fence. ...
On previous occasions, I have drawn attention to practices involving information sharing by the border police with the relevant authorities of a neighbouring country regarding suspected unauthorised border crossings and the subsequent action of the authorities in the neighbouring country to intercept migrants and refugees before they cross the border. I have underlined the questions that these practices raise with regard to the right to seek asylum and the respect for the principle of non-refoulement. It is legitimate that Council of Europe member states, in the exercise of their right to prevent unauthorised border crossings as well as to prevent and combat cross-border criminal activities co-operate with neighbouring countries including through the sharing of relevant information. However, as a matter of principle, member states should exercise human rights due diligence in the context of such co-operation. They should take into account the situation in their neighbouring countries and refrain from sharing information with or requesting the latter to intercept people before they reach member states’ borders when they know, or should have known, that the intercepted persons would as a result be exposed to a real risk of torture or inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment and that they would not be given protection in the neighbouring countries. ...
2.  Summary returns
According to the Spanish Law 4/2000 on the rights and freedoms of aliens in Spain and their social integration (the Law on Aliens), foreigners who attempt to cross the border irregularly, including persons intercepted at and near the border, may be denied entry or may be rejected at the border in order to prevent their illegal entry into Spain. In accordance with the Law on Aliens, their return shall in all cases be carried out in compliance with the international human rights standards; applications for international protection shall be submitted in dedicated placed provided for that purpose at the border crossings. The Guardia Civil explained to us that attempts by foreigners to jump the fences happened on a daily basis, although not by massive groups of people as it had been frequently the case in 2016 and 2017. When foreigners attempt to jump the fences in both Melilla and Ceuta the Guardia Civil does not intervene unless they have climbed down the internal fences. In most of the cases foreigners endure physical injuries while jumping over the fences. This is the reason why the authorities have entered into a co-operation protocol with the Spanish Red Cross, which provides immediate medical assistance to intercepted foreigners.
The Guardia Civil explained to us that foreigners who jump the fences are usually violent and that they do not communicate with authorities but rather attempt to escape from them. The Guardia Civil also does not seek to establish any communication with foreigners. Hence, no claims for international protection are expressed by foreigners either while climbing or when intercepted at or near the border after jumping the fences. Shortly after receiving the Spanish Red Cross assistance they are returned to Morocco through special doors, which are spread throughout the border fences and are distinct from border-crossing points. Foreigners do not have access to interpreters, lawyers or the asylum offices located at border crossing point. Finally, they are returned to Morocco without any identification or registration having taken place.
In a Chamber judgment, the European Court of Human Rights found that the immediate return to Morocco of Sub-Saharan migrants who were attempting to enter into Melilla amounted to a collective expulsion and held that there had been a violation of Article 4 Protocol 4 and Article 13 of the ECHR taken together with Article 4 Protocol 4. The case has been referred to the Grand Chamber.
Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR entail an obligation on the part of Council of Europe member states not to return a person to his/her country of origin, any other country to which removal is to be effected or any other country to which he/she may subsequently be removed, where there are substantial grounds for believing that the person would run a real risk to his/her life or a real risk of being subjected to torture and other forms of ill-treatment. On the basis of the principle of non-refoulement enshrined in Article 33 of the 1951 Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugees and the relevant jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights, states are obliged to screen intercepted migrants with a view to identifying persons in need of protection, assessing those needs and enabling the relevant persons’ access to asylum procedures.
While the Spanish Law on Aliens contains a general guarantee that the returns described above will be carried out in compliance with international human rights standards, in practice the Guardia Civil does not yet have a protocol on screening foreigners who irregularly cross the borders in Melilla and Ceuta which would provide instructions to its officers on identifying persons in need of international protection and taking necessary action regarding their access to a fair and efficient asylum procedure. As international bodies, including the Commissioner for Human Rights, the CPT and the UNHCR, have called for the issuance of such instructions for some years it is now necessary that Spain takes action. The Council of Europe can provide its human rights expertise to ensure that the relevant instructions provide for the respect of the principle of non-refoulement, prohibit collective expulsion and contain the necessary procedural guarantees regarding access to a fair and effective asylum procedure.
ACCESS TO THE ASYLUM PROCEDURE
Anyone who wishes to seek international protection in Spain must lodge a formal application with the competent authorities. In cases when the asylum seeker is at an airport, maritime port or land borders he/she must lodge a formal application with the border control authority. If the person is already on Spanish territory he/she must lodge a formal application with the OAR, in Detention Centres for Foreigners (Centro de Internamiento de Extranjeros, CIEs)or police stations. The admissibility and merits of applications lodged at the borders and in CIEs are assessed within shorter periods of time compared to applications lodged in Spanish territory, which are examined under the regular procedure. However, procedural safeguards for applications lodged at the border or in CIEs concerning the presence of interpreters and legal assistance are the same as those applicable under the regular procedure.
1.  At the land border
At the Beni Enzar border-crossing point in Melilla we were informed that the persons who crossed the border in a regular manner in order to seek asylum are mostly Syrians, Palestinians, Algerians or nationals of other Northern African countries. They are given an appointment for a preliminary interview by Ministry of Interior officials within two or three days, but no later than nine days, from the time they express their intention to seek asylum. The registration of asylum applications and a preliminary interview takes place in dedicated premises adjacent to Beni Enzar. At the time of our visit there had been around 700 asylum requests for 2018. The OAR in Madrid usually makes a decision on the admissibility of the applications within 48 hours of the registration of the application. The admissibility rate is rather high at 90%. After a decision on admissibility the merits of the asylum application is examined with priority within three months under the regular asylum procedure (see section 4.3. below). At the El Trajal border-crossing point in Ceuta we were informed by the Spanish authorities that no single asylum application had been lodged since 1993.
A number of reports have underlined that persons from sub-Saharan Africa are effectively prevented by Moroccan authorities from approaching regular border crossing points, notably in Melilla (see section 3.1. above). Consequently, they do not have access to the asylum procedure. Spanish authorities explained that one of the possible reasons why sub-Saharan Africans cannot approach the border are the sizeable daily flows of persons involved in the so-called ‘atypical trade’ who cross the border daily into and out of Melilla. While I understand the difficulties that the Spanish authorities encounter in managing such flows I was not convinced that they affect the ability of sub-Saharan Africans to approach the Spanish border. Without any possibility for legal and safe access to the Spanish territory, persons from subSaharan Africa, including women and young children, turn to organised crime networks, hiding in cars or embarking on rafts to gain access to the autonomous cities of Melilla and Ceuta, thereby exposing themselves to risks of trafficking in human beings, violence and sexual abuse. It is, therefore, important that the Spanish authorities provide to persons in need of international protection the possibility to access the Spanish territory safely so that they can submit their asylum claims ...”
The relevant parts of this report read as follows:
“1.  To control and manage migration flows, Council of Europe member States concentrate much of their efforts on guarding frontiers. In this context, refusals of entry and expulsions without any individual assessment of protection needs have become a documented phenomenon at Europe’s borders, as well as on the territory of member States further inland. As these practices are widespread, and in some countries systematic, these “pushbacks” can be considered as part of national policies rather than incidental actions. The highest risk attached to pushbacks is the risk of refoulement, meaning that a person is sent back to a place where they might face persecution in the sense of the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (“the Refugee Convention”), or inhuman or degrading treatment in the sense of the European Convention on Human Rights (ETS No. 5, “the Convention”).
This is why the European Court of Human Rights, for instance in its judgment Hirsi Jamaa and Others v. Italy (Application No. 27765/09), but also in N.D. and N.T. v. Spain (Applications Nos. 8675/15 and 8697/15), requires the individual assessment of protection needs and of the safety of a return in order to prevent violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights and of the prohibition of collective expulsions, as enshrined in Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention (ETS No. 46). Pushbacks take place in particular at European Union borders, which is at least in part a consequence of the shortcomings of the current Dublin Regulation and of the failure of attempts to introduce fair responsibility-sharing in Europe.
Pushbacks often take place where migrants attempt to enter the territory of a member State in large numbers because the passage is, or appears to be, more “open” than elsewhere, or is geographically close to the countries of origin of asylum seekers. However, recent evidence of pushbacks shows that they also take place where numbers of arrivals are low, but where national policies are hostile towards migration in general. There are also cases of “multiple pushbacks” where migrants are expelled by various countries successively.
The Parliamentary Assembly is concerned about the persistent and increasing practice and policies of pushbacks, which are in clear violation of the rights of asylum seekers and refugees, including the right to asylum and the right to protection against refoulement, which are at the core of international refugee and human rights law. In view of the gravity of the human rights violations involved, the Assembly urges member States to provide adequate protection to asylum seekers, refugees and migrants arriving at their borders, and thus to refrain from any pushbacks, to allow for independent monitoring and to fully investigate all allegations of pushbacks.
The Assembly is extremely worried about persistent reports and evidence of inhuman and degrading treatment of migrants by member States and their agencies in the framework of these pushbacks, through intimidation, confiscating or destroying migrants’ belongings, and even through the use of violence and by depriving migrants of food and basic services. In denying having carried out such pushbacks, these types of (sometimes systematic) inhuman and degrading treatment are denied as well, and are therefore not adequately examined or not examined at all.
The Assembly therefore calls on Council of Europe member States to comply with their international obligations in this regard, in particular those set out in the European Convention on Human Rights concerning the prohibition of collective expulsion and inhuman and degrading treatment, as well as the right of access to asylum procedures and the prohibition of refoulement as established in the United Nations Refugee Convention.
...”
The relevant provision of this international instrument reads as follows:
“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures necessary to maintain international peace and security. Measures taken by Members in the exercise of this right of self-defence shall be immediately reported to the Security Council and shall not in any way affect the authority and responsibility of the Security Council under the present Charter to take at any time such action as it deems necessary in order to maintain or restore international peace and security.”
The relevant provisions of the Vienna Convention read as follows:
“A party may not invoke the provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to perform a treaty. This rule is without prejudice to article 46.”
“1.  A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.
The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:
(a)  any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;
(b)  any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.
There shall be taken into account, together with the context:
(a)  any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;
(b)  any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;
(c)  any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties.
A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended.”
“Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 31:
(a)  leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or
(b)  leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.”
The relevant provisions of the 1951 Geneva Convention read as follows:
“A.  For the purposes of the present Convention, the term ‘refugee’ shall apply to any person who:
(1)  Has been considered a refugee under the Arrangements of 12 May 1926 and 30 June 1928 or under the Conventions of 28 October 1933 and 10 February 1938, the Protocol of 14 September 1939 or the Constitution of the International Refugee Organization;
...
(2)  As a result of events occurring before 1 January 1951 and owing to wellfounded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it.
...”
“The Contracting States shall apply the provisions of this Convention to refugees without discrimination as to race, religion or country of origin.”
“The Contracting States shall accord to refugees within their territories treatment at least as favourable as that accorded to their nationals with respect to freedom to practice their religion and freedom as regards the religious education of their children.”
“1.  A refugee shall have free access to the courts of law on the territory of all Contracting States.
A refugee shall enjoy in the Contracting State in which he has his habitual residence the same treatment as a national in matters pertaining to access to the Courts, including legal assistance and exemption from cautio judicatum solvi.
A refugee shall be accorded in the matters referred to in paragraph 2 in countries other than that in which he has his habitual residence the treatment granted to a national of the country of his habitual residence.”
“1.  The Contracting States shall accord to refugees the same treatment as is accorded to nationals with respect to elementary education.
The Contracting States shall accord to refugees treatment as favourable as possible, and, in any event, not less favourable than that accorded to aliens generally in the same circumstances, with respect to education other than elementary education and, in particular, as regards access to studies, the recognition of foreign school certificates, diplomas and degrees, the remission of fees and charges and the award of scholarships.”
“1.  The Contracting States shall not impose penalties, on account of their illegal entry or presence, on refugees who, coming directly from a territory where their life or freedom was threatened in the sense of article 1, enter or are present in their territory without authorization, provided they present themselves without delay to the authorities and show good cause for their illegal entry or presence.
The Contracting States shall not apply to the movements of such refugees restrictions other than those which are necessary and such restrictions shall only be applied until their status in the country is regularized or they obtain admission into another country. The Contracting States shall allow such refugees a reasonable period and all the necessary facilities to obtain admission into another country.”
“1.  The Contracting States shall not expel a refugee lawfully in their territory save on grounds of national security or public order.
The expulsion of such a refugee shall be only in pursuance of a decision reached in accordance with due process of law. Except where compelling reasons of national security otherwise require, the refugee shall be allowed to submit evidence to clear himself, and to appeal to and be represented for the purpose before competent authority or a person or persons specially designated by the competent authority.
The Contracting States shall allow such a refugee a reasonable period within which to seek legal admission into another country. The Contracting States reserve the right to apply during that period such internal measures as they may deem necessary.”
No Contracting State shall expel or return (‘refouler’) a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion.
The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for regarding as a danger to the security of the country in which he is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that country.”
“1.  No State Party shall expel, return (‘refouler’) or extradite a person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to torture.
For the purpose of determining whether there are such grounds, the competent authorities shall take into account all relevant considerations including, where applicable, the existence in the State concerned of a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights.”
The relevant parts of the declaration provide:
“1.  Asylum granted by a State, in the exercise of its sovereignty, to persons entitled to invoke article 14 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ... shall be respected by all other States.
...”
“1.  No person referred to in article 1, paragraph 1, shall be subjected to measures such as rejection at the frontier or, if he has already entered the territory in which he seeks asylum, expulsion or compulsory return to any State where he may be subjected to persecution.
...”
At its sixty-sixth session, in 2014, the International Law Commission adopted a set of Draft Articles on the Expulsion of Aliens. The text, of which the United Nations General Assembly took note (Resolution A/RES/69/119 of 10 December 2014), includes the following provisions:
“1.  The present draft articles apply to the expulsion by a State of aliens present in its territory.
...”
“...
(2)  In stating that the draft articles apply to the expulsion by a State of aliens who are present in its territory, paragraph 1 defines the scope of the draft articles both ratione materiae and ratione personae. With regard to scope ratione materiae, which relates to the measures covered by the draft articles, reference is made simply to the ‘expulsion by a State’, which covers any and all expulsion measures; no further elaboration is provided, since ‘expulsion’ is defined in draft article 2, subparagraph (a), below. With regard to scope ratione personae, that is, the persons covered by the draft articles, it follows from paragraph 1 that the draft articles apply in general to the expulsion of all aliens present in the territory of the expelling State, with no distinction between the various categories of persons involved, for example, aliens lawfully present in the territory of the expelling State, aliens unlawfully present, displaced persons, asylum seekers, persons granted asylum and stateless persons. The term ‘alien’ is defined in draft article 2, subparagraph (b).
(3)  The draft articles cover the expulsion of both aliens lawfully present and those unlawfully present in the territory of the expelling State, as paragraph 1 of the draft article indicates. The category of aliens unlawfully present in the territory of the expelling State covers both aliens who have entered the territory unlawfully and aliens whose presence in the territory has subsequently become unlawful, primarily because of a violation of the laws of the expelling State governing conditions of stay. Although the draft articles apply in general to the expulsion of aliens present lawfully or unlawfully in the territory of the expelling State, it should be noted at the outset that some provisions of the draft articles draw necessary distinctions between the two categories of aliens, particularly with respect to the rights to which they are entitled. It should be also noted that the inclusion within the scope of the draft articles of aliens whose presence in the territory of the expelling State is unlawful is to be understood in conjunction with the phrase in article 2, subparagraph (a), in fine, which excludes from the scope of the draft articles questions concerning non-admission of an alien to the territory of a State.”
“For the purposes of the present draft articles:
(a)  ’expulsion’ means a formal act or conduct attributable to a State by which an alien is compelled to leave the territory of that State; it does not include extradition to another State, surrender to an international criminal court or tribunal, or the nonadmission of an alien to a State;
(b)  ’alien’ means an individual who does not have the nationality of the State in whose territory that individual is present.”
“(1)  Draft article 2 defines two key terms, ‘expulsion’ and ‘alien’, for the purposes of the present draft articles.
...
(4)  Conduct – other than the adoption of a formal decision – that could result in expulsion may take the form of either an action or an omission on the part of the State. Omission might in particular consist of tolerance towards conduct directed against the alien by individuals or private entities, for example, if the State failed to appropriately protect an alien from hostile acts emanating from non-State actors. What appears to be the determining element in the definition of expulsion is that, as a result of either a formal act or conduct – active or passive – attributable to the State, the alien in question is compelled to leave the territory of that State. In addition, in order to conclude that there has been expulsion as a result of conduct (that is, without the adoption of a formal decision), it is essential to establish the intention of the State in question, by means of that conduct, to bring about the departure of the alien from its territory.
(5)  For the sake of clarity, the Commission thought it useful to specify, in the second clause of subparagraph (a), that the concept of expulsion within the meaning of the draft articles did not cover extradition of an alien to another State, surrender to an international criminal court or tribunal or the non-admission of an alien to a State. With respect to non-admission, it should be explained that, in some legal regimes, the term ‘return (refoulement)’ is sometimes used instead of ‘non-admission’. For the sake of consistency, the present draft articles use the latter term in cases where an alien is refused entry. The exclusion relates to the refusal by the authorities of a State – usually the authorities responsible for immigration and border control – to allow an alien to enter the territory of that State. On the other hand, the measures taken by a State to compel an alien already present in its territory, even if unlawfully present, to leave it are covered by the concept of ‘expulsion’ as defined in draft article 2, subparagraph (a). This distinction should be understood in the light of the definition of the scope ratione personae of the draft articles, which includes both aliens lawfully present in the territory of the expelling State and those unlawfully present. Moreover the exclusion of matters relating to non-admission from the scope of the draft articles is without prejudice to the rules of international law relating to refugees. That reservation is explained by draft article 6, subparagraph (b), which references the prohibition against return (refoulement) within the meaning of article 33 of the Convention on the Status of Refugees of 28 July 1951 and hence inevitably touches on questions of admission.
...”
“A State has the right to expel an alien from its territory. Expulsion shall be in accordance with the present draft articles, without prejudice to other applicable rules of international law, in particular those relating to human rights.”
“The present draft articles are without prejudice to the rules of international law relating to refugees, as well as to any more favourable rules or practice on refugee protection, and in particular to the following rules:
(a)  a State shall not expel a refugee lawfully in its territory save on grounds of national security or public order;
(b)  a State shall not expel or return (refouler) a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where the person’s life or freedom would be threatened on account of his or her race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, unless there are reasonable grounds for regarding the person as a danger to the security of the country in which he or she is, or if the person, having been convicted by a final judgement of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that country.”
“(1)  Draft article 6 deals with the expulsion of refugees, which is subject to restrictive conditions by virtue of the relevant rules of international law. It contains a ‘without prejudice’ clause aimed at ensuring the continued application to refugees of the rules concerning their expulsion, as well as of any more favourable rules or practice on refugee protection. In particular, subparagraphs (a) and (b) of draft article 6 recall two particularly important rules concerning the expulsion or return (refoulement) of refugees.
...
(5)  Draft article 6, subparagraph (a), reproduces the wording of article 32, paragraph 1, of the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 28 July 1951. The rule contained in that paragraph, which applies only to refugees lawfully in the territory of the expelling State, limits the grounds for expulsion of such refugees to those relating to reasons of national security or public order.
(6)  The prohibition of expulsion of a refugee lawfully in the territory of the expelling State for any grounds other than national security or public order has also been extended to any refugee who, being unlawfully in the territory of the State, has applied for refugee status, as long as this application is under consideration. However, such protection can be envisaged only for so long as the application is pending. This protection, which reflects a trend in the legal literature and finds support in the practice of some States and of UNHCR, would constitute a departure from the principle whereby the unlawfulness of the presence of an alien in the territory of a State can in itself justify expulsion of the alien. The protection might be set aside only in cases where the manifest intent of the application for refugee status was to thwart an expulsion decision likely to be handed down against the individual concerned. It concerns only individuals who, while not enjoying the status of refugee in the State in question, did meet the definition of ‘refugee’ within the meaning of the 1951 Convention or, in some cases, other relevant instruments, such as the 1969 OAU Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa, and should therefore be regarded as refugees under international law. Any individual who does not correspond to the definition of refugee within the meaning of the relevant legal instruments is ineligible to enjoy the protection recognized in draft article 6 and can be expelled on grounds other than those stipulated in subparagraph (a), including on the sole ground of the unlawfulness of his or her presence in the territory of the expelling State. In any event, article 6 is without prejudice to the right of a State to expel, for reasons other than those mentioned in subparagraph (a), an alien whose application for refugee status is manifestly abusive.
(7)  Draft article 6, subparagraph (b), which concerns the obligation of nonrefoulement, combines paragraphs 1 and 2 of article 33 of the 1951 Convention. Unlike the other provisions of the draft articles, which do not cover the situation of non-admission of an alien to the territory of a State, draft article 6, subparagraph (b), provides that these draft articles are without prejudice to that situation as well, as indicated by the opening phrase: ‘A State shall not expel or return (refouler) ...’. Moreover, unlike the protection stipulated in subparagraph (a), the protection mentioned in subparagraph (b) applies to all refugees, regardless of whether their presence in the receiving State is lawful or unlawful. It should also be emphasized that the mention of this specific obligation of non-refoulement of refugees is without prejudice to the application to them of the general rules prohibiting expulsion to certain States as contained in draft articles 23 and 24.”
“1.  For the purposes of the present draft article, collective expulsion means expulsion of aliens, as a group.
The collective expulsion of aliens is prohibited.
A State may expel concomitantly the members of a group of aliens, provided that the expulsion takes place after and on the basis of an assessment of the particular case of each individual member of the group in accordance with the present draft articles.
The present draft article is without prejudice to the rules of international law applicable to the expulsion of aliens in the event of an armed conflict involving the expelling State.”
“(1)  Paragraph 1 of draft article 9 contains a definition of collective expulsion for the purposes of the present draft articles. According to this definition, collective expulsion is understood to mean the expulsion of aliens ‘as a group’. This criterion is informed by the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights. It is a criterion that the Special Rapporteur on the rights of non-citizens of the Commission on Human Rights, Mr. David Weissbrodt, had also endorsed in his final report of 2003. Only the ‘collective’ aspect is addressed in this definition, which must be understood in the light of the general definition of expulsion contained in draft article 2, subparagraph (a).
...
(4)  The prohibition of the collective expulsion of aliens set out in paragraph 2 of the present draft article should be read in the light of paragraph 3, which elucidates it by specifying the conditions under which the members of a group of aliens may be expelled concomitantly without such a measure being regarded as a collective expulsion within the meaning of the draft articles. Paragraph 3 states that such an expulsion is permissible provided that it takes place after and on the basis of an assessment of the particular case of each individual member of the group in accordance with the present draft articles. ...”
“1.  All aliens subject to expulsion shall be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person at all stages of the expulsion process.
They are entitled to respect for their human rights, including those set out in the present draft articles.”
“The expelling State shall not subject an alien subject to expulsion to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
In his second report on the expulsion of aliens, dated 20 July 2006 (Document A/CN.4/573), examined in connection with the writing of the Draft Articles, Mr Maurice Kamto, Special Rapporteur, stated as follows:
“40.  ... The traditional notion of expulsion ... concerns aliens whose entry or stay are lawful, whereas non-admission concerns those whose entry into or stay on its territory a State seeks to prevent; removal of an illegal immigrant who is at the border or has just crossed it is strictly speaking non-admission, not expulsion. It is by virtue of this judicious distinction that non-admission does not, in the opinion of the Special Rapporteur, fall within the scope of this topic.
...
As can be seen, no real terminological distinction can be drawn among the three terms ‘expulsion’, ‘escort to the border’ and ‘refoulement’; they are used interchangeably, without any particular semantic rigour. The word ‘expulsion’ will consequently be used in the context of the present topic as a generic term to mean all situations covered by all three terms and many others, such as ‘return of an alien to a country’ or ‘exclusion of an alien’, this list not being exhaustive.”
The relevant conclusions provide as follows:
“The Executive Committee,
...
(c)  Reaffirms the fundamental importance of the observance of the principle of nonrefoulement – both at the border and within the territory of a State – of persons who may be subjected to persecution if returned to their country of origin irrespective of whether or not they have been formally recognized as refugees.”
“...
Measures of protection
Admission and non-refoulement
In situations of large-scale influx, asylum-seekers should be admitted to the State in which they first seek refuge and if that State is unable to admit them on a durable basis, it should always admit them at least on a temporary basis and provide them with protection according to the principles set out below.
...
In all cases the fundamental principle of non-refoulement – including nonrejection at the frontier – must be scrupulously observed.
...”
“The Executive Committee,
...
(d)  Reiterates ... the need for full respect to be accorded to the institution of asylum in general, and considers it timely to draw attention to the following particular aspects:
(i)  the principle of non-refoulement, which prohibits expulsion and return of refugees in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where their lives or freedom would be threatened on account of their race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, whether or not they have been formally granted refugee status, or of persons in respect of whom there are substantial grounds for believing that they would be in danger of being subjected to torture, as set forth in the 1984 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
...
(iii)  the need to admit refugees into the territories of States, which includes no rejection at frontiers without fair and effective procedures for determining status and protection needs;
...”
“The Executive Committee,
...
(l)  Expresses concern at the persecution, generalized violence and violations of human rights which continue to cause and perpetuate displacement within and beyond national borders and which increase the challenges faced by States in effecting durable solutions; and calls on States to address these challenges while ensuring full respect for the fundamental principle of non-refoulement, including non-rejection at frontiers without access to fair and effective procedures for determining status and protection needs;
...”
The relevant parts of these views read as follows:
“...The facts as submitted by the complainant
4.  On 2 December 2014, the author and a group of people of sub-Saharan origin left Mount Gurugu with the intention of entering Melilla. The author reached the top of the third fence and saw that other people climbing down the fence on the other side were being summarily pushed back by the Spanish Civil Guard and handed over to Moroccan forces. Then, for fear of being deported and subjected to possible illtreatment and violence by Moroccan forces, the author waited for several hours at the top of the fence. During this period, he was not offered any form of assistance. He had no access to water or food. He was also unable to communicate with the Civil Guard, since he did not speak Spanish and there were no interpreters present. Finally, he climbed down the fence with the help of a ladder provided by the Civil Guard. As soon as he set foot on the ground, he was arrested and handcuffed by the Civil Guard, handed over to the Moroccan forces and summarily deported to Morocco. At no time was his identity checked. He was also denied the opportunity to explain his personal circumstances, give his age, challenge his imminent deportation or claim protection as an unaccompanied child. He was not assisted by lawyers, interpreters or doctors...
5.  The author submits that there were no effective domestic remedies available to him that could have served to suspend his deportation from Spain to Morocco on 2 December 2014. He points out that the deportation was summarily executed without him being notified of a formal expulsion decision that he could have challenged before the competent authorities.
6.  On or around about 30 December 2014, the author entered Spain through Melilla and went to stay in the temporary reception centre for migrants. In February 2015, he was transferred from the enclave of Melilla to mainland Spain. At the end of July 2015, thanks to the assistance of Fundación Raíces, a nongovernmental organization (NGO), and the consular registration card issued to him by the Malian consulate in Madrid, which showed his date of birth as 10 March 1999, the author obtained protection as an unaccompanied child and was placed in a residential centre for minors under the care of the Spanish authorities.
7.  The author states that, on 30 March 2015, Spain adopted Organic Act No. 4/2015 on safeguarding the security of citizens, which entered into force on 1 April 2015. This law, and in particular its tenth additional provision concerning the special regime applicable in Ceuta and Melilla, legalizes the Spanish practice of indiscriminate summary deportations at the border and makes no reference to unaccompanied minors nor establishes any procedure for their identification and protection.
...
Issues and proceedings before the Committee
Consideration of admissibility
...
3.  As to the mismatches between the details of the person registered by the Spanish authorities and those of the author, the Committee notes that the file provides no conclusive evidence that shows that the author is not the person who attempted to gain access to Melilla on 2 December 2014 in the circumstances described. The Committee considers that the burden of proof cannot rest solely on the author of the communication, especially given that the author and the State party do not always have equal access to the evidence and that frequently the State party alone has access to the relevant information. In the present case, the Committee considers that the author has provided a credible and consistent account of the facts, which is supported by evidence. The Committee also notes the author’s allegations that the State party could have compared the fingerprints of the person registered as Y.D. with those of the author. The Committee therefore finds the present communication admissible rationae personae.
4.  The Committee takes note of the State party’s argument that the communication is inadmissible rationae loci because the actions of the Moroccan authorities are not attributable to Spain. The Committee notes, however, that the scope of the present communication is limited to the actions of the Spanish authorities on 2 December 2014, to the exclusion of those of the Moroccan authorities. In this regard, the Committee notes that, according to the author, he was arrested by Spanish security forces at the third fence of the Melilla border crossing and was handcuffed and returned to Moroccan territory. Given these circumstances, and irrespective of whether or not the author is considered to have arrived in Spanish territory, he was under the authority or effective control of the State party. The Committee therefore finds the present communication admissible rationae loci.
5.  The Committee also notes the State party’s argument that the communication is inadmissible rationae materiae because it refers to the author’s right to asylum, which is not covered by the Convention. The Committee notes, however, that the present communication concerns alleged violations of the author’s rights under articles 3, 20 and 37 of the Convention and not his right to asylum. The Committee therefore finds that the communication is admissible rationae materiae.
6.  Lastly, the Committee notes the State party’s argument that the complainant did not exhaust available domestic remedies ... The Committee also notes that it can be gleaned from the case file that on 2 December 2014 no formal expulsion order against the author had been issued. Accordingly, the Committee considers that, in the context of the author’s imminent expulsion on 2 December 2014, and in the absence of a formal expulsion order that could have been challenged by the author, the judicial remedies mentioned in point (d) of the State party’s argument would have been worthless, as they were neither available nor effective. ...
7.  ... The Committee therefore finds the complaint admissible and proceeds to consider it on the merits.
Consideration of the merits
...
2.  The issue before the Committee is whether, in the circumstances of this case, the author’s return to Morocco by the Spanish Civil Guard on 2 December 2014 violated his rights under the Convention. In particular, the author claimed that, by summarily deporting him to Morocco on 2 December 2014, without performing any form of identity check or assessment of his situation, the State party: (a) failed to provide the author with the special protection and assistance to which he was entitled as an unaccompanied minor (art. 20); (b) failed to respect the principle of nonrefoulement and exposed the author to the risk of violence and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment in Morocco (art. 37); and (c) failed to consider the best interests of the child (art. 3).
3.  The Committee is of the view that the State’s obligations to provide special protection and assistance to unaccompanied children, in accordance with article 20 of the Convention, apply even ‘with respect to those children who come under the State’s jurisdiction when attempting to enter the country’s territory’. Similarly, the Committee considers that ‘the positive aspect of these protection obligations also extends to requiring States to take all necessary measures to identify children as being unaccompanied or separated at the earliest possible stage, including at the border’. Accordingly, it is imperative and necessary that, in order to comply with its obligations under article 20 of the Convention and to respect the best interests of the child, the State conducts an initial assessment, prior to any removal or return, that includes the following stages: (a) assessment, as a matter of priority, of whether the person concerned is an unaccompanied minor, with, in the event of uncertainty, the individual being accorded the benefit of the doubt such that, if there is a possibility that the individual is a child, he or she is treated as such; (b) verification of the child’s identity by means of an initial interview; and (c) assessment of the child’s specific situation and particular vulnerabilities, if any.
4.  The Committee is also of the view that, in compliance with its obligations under article 37 of the Convention, in order to ensure that no child is subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, the State should not return a child ‘to a country where there are substantial grounds for believing that there is a real risk of irreparable harm to the child’. The Committee therefore considers that, in accordance with article 37 of the Convention and the principle of non-refoulement, the State has an obligation to carry out a prior assessment of the risk, if any, of irreparable harm to the child and serious violations of his or her rights in the country to which he or she will be transferred or returned, taking into account the best interests of the child, including, for example, ‘the particularly serious consequences for children of the insufficient provision of food or health services’. In particular, the Committee recalls that, in the context of best interest assessments and within best interest determination procedures, children should be guaranteed the right to: (a) access the territory, regardless of the documentation they have or lack, and be referred to the authorities in charge of evaluating their needs in terms of protection of their rights, ensuring their procedural safeguards.
...
6.  The Committee also notes the State party’s allegation that the principle of non-refoulement does not apply in the present case because it only applies when the person comes from a territory where there is a risk of persecution. However, the Committee reiterates that the State party has an obligation not to return a child ‘to a country where there are substantial grounds for believing that there is a real risk of irreparable harm to the child’. The Committee also notes that, before returning the author to Morocco, the State party did not ascertain his identity, did not ask about his personal circumstances and did not conduct a prior assessment of the risk, if any, of persecution and/or irreparable harm in the country to which he was to be returned. The Committee considers that, given the violence faced by migrants in the Moroccan border area and the ill-treatment to which the author was subjected, the failure to assess the risk of irreparable harm to the author prior to his deportation or to take into account his best interests constitutes a violation of articles 3 and 37 of the Convention.
7.  The Committee considers that, in the light of the circumstances of the case, the fact that the author, as an unaccompanied child, did not undergo an identity check and assessment of his situation prior to his deportation and was not given an opportunity to challenge his potential deportation violates his rights under articles 3 and 20 of the Convention.
8.  Lastly, the Committee considers that the manner in which the author was deported, as an unaccompanied child deprived of his family environment and in a context of international migration, after having been detained and handcuffed and without having been heard, without receiving the assistance of a lawyer or interpreter and without regard to his needs, constitutes treatment prohibited under article 37 of the Convention.
9.  The Committee, acting under article 10 (5) of the Optional Protocol, is of the view that the facts before it amount to a violation of articles 3, 20 and 37 of the Convention.
...”