The case originated in an application (no. 4493/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vladimir Leonidovich Atamanchuk (“the applicant”), on 18 January 2011.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 23 January 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Articles 6 and 10 of the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in Sochi.
At the material time, the applicant was leader of the local branch of the Democratic Party of Russia and founder of Sochi–Drugoy Vzglyad, a local newspaper with a circulation of 8,000. He also occasionally published articles in other local newspapers, apparently as a freelancer.
On 1 March 2008 Lazarevskaya Panorama, a local newspaper with a circulation of 10,000, published an article by the applicant headlined “Why I will not vote in these elections”, in which the applicant stated why he would abstain in the presidential election that was due to take place on 2 March 2008.
The article was placed on the front page of the newspaper that had a headline in large red type saying “Time to vote”. There were two subheadings (“Yes!” in red and “No...” in black). The text was divided into two columns: the left side gave the statements of five people who were going to vote while the right side contained the applicant’s article.
The applicant’s article read, in its relevant parts, as follows:
“We are going to have a presidential election soon. It is difficult to grasp the game between good and evil this time ... So, here is my decision.
First of all, I am not a puppet in the hands of political gangs who are making a farce out of the presidential election. They only need our participation in the election for the sake of giving it an impression of a legal process, one which will result in the dislocation of Russia. This might explain the sad results of government by the two recent rulers of the State. As a result, we have what we have: widespread corruption on a broad platform of lies created by the press under the control of the State and oligarchs. Platitudes, depravity, and aggressive propaganda in favour of violence flow out at us from our television screens ...
That is how it all goes. However, it is all depicted as the reconstruction of the State, the strengthening of the economy and the rule of law on the background of growing wealth for the People.
‘Which people?’ I suddenly thought. ‘Does it really matter?’, was the answer from the television screen, ‘It would not be politically correct to give a specific answer to that, to avoid complaints ...’.
Secondly, in fifteen years of ‘new style’ democracy no Russian person [русский человек] has seen anything good. He has been pushed down to the level of a simpleton who is to serve various small ethnic groupings that call themselves ‘republics’, within Russia or elsewhere ... In the Russia destroyed by the Bolsheviks they were called ‘non-Russians’ or the ‘non-Russian population’ ... And no one took offence at the time. Everyone stayed within his own locality, doing his best to make it wealthy. No one was irritated by that.
So what happened? Where do we stand today?
Those who on account of their ethnic [национальные] characteristics had engaged in criminal activities or tended their sheep or goats or prayed to their god abandoned their motherland and came here. They now call themselves builders, entrepreneurs, cultural workers or whatever is needed to get their hands into others’ pockets.
Just look around and you will see crowds of them staring at you greedily at every corner ...
‘We will be victorious over you all. We hold all these Kuban people,’ they say during their closed meetings in their own language that 99% of Russians do not understand.
But they will speak Russian later, when they have totally paralysed our will. That is when they will start to burn, slaughter, rape, rob and enslave, in line with their barbaric ideas, as it was in Chechnya.
But for the time being, it is all ‘friendship and solidarity between nations’. For the time being that is. And the President of Russia is handing out Hero of Russia decorations to slave traffickers! ...
They participate in the destruction of the country ... Various processes of destruction dominate our society today. That is why I will not take part in the election ...
However, I express my hope that when taking his decisions the new President will take into account the views I have expressed for myself and for those who are not going to vote on 2 March 2008.”
The article was accompanied by the applicant’s photograph and indicated that he was leader of the local branch of the Democratic Party of Russia.
The same text was reprinted in Sochi–Drugoy Vzglyad on 25 December 2009. The front page of the newspaper had an article titled “A campaign of criminal prosecutions on political motives has started in Sochi” about the criminal proceedings against the applicant for that text (see below). The article was repeated in small print at the bottom of the same page.
This issue of Sochi–Drugoy Vzglyad also contained a separate page with varying opinions expressed by various people in relation to the applicant’s text and his ongoing criminal prosecution. One comment was made by a lawyer who considered that the main thread of the article concerned various destructive processes in the country arising, for instance, from inefficient migration policies adversely affected by widespread corruption; at the same time, the article contained no calls to action, in particular violent actions, and could not be classified as “extremist activity”. The article also contained a statement by the leader of the Lazarevskoye district branch of the Armenian Union of Russia. It also contained the applicant’s “open letter” in reply to that statement. It was specified in the article that on 17 December 2009 the applicant had had a meeting with the Lazarevskoye district branch.
It appears that both newspapers were distributed for free by being put into people’s letter boxes within several streets in the Sochi area, including Lazarevskoye village for the second publication.
In the meantime, a criminal pre-investigation inquiry was opened on suspicion of inciting hatred and enmity, and at debasing the human dignity of a person or group of people on account of their ethnicity. In this connection, in August 2009 an investigator sought an opinion from professionals in language and psychology.
Ms B. and Ms R., professionals in language and psychology, issued their joint report on 5 November 2009. The report concluded as follows: the text contained statements disclosing a negative attitude toward a social group on the basis of its ethnicity, language and religion; some phrases extended certain negative characteristics of some members of a non-Slavic group to the entire group as such; the text contained no phrases calling for violence against them.
On 24 November 2009 and then in January 2010 the applicant was accused of an offence under Article 282 § 1 of the Criminal Code in relation to each publication. That offence was punishable by, inter alia, a fine from 100,000 to 300,000 Russian roubles (RUB); a court could also prohibit a person from exercising a certain activity for a period up to three years. The applicant was charged with committing actions aimed at inciting hatred and enmity, and at debasing the human dignity of a person or group of people on account of their ethnicity (национальность), language, origin and religious beliefs.
During the preliminary investigation Mr F., a specialist in philology, also issued a specialist report (заключение специалиста).
According to F.’s report, the article contained an implicit incitement to violent acts against people of a certain social group on account of their ethnicity, race, religion or other social characteristics.
The investigator in the case commissioned another expert report (заключение эксперта).
Ms L. and (again) Ms R., professionals in linguistics and psychology, issued their joint report on 29 January 2010.
(a)  The linguistics part of the report stated as follows: the content of the applicant’s text concerned political and social issues addressed to a large audience; the main part of the text started at the phrase “Which people?” that introduced his subsequent discussion based on the opposition between the Russian people and the population of the non-Russian origin; the author presented their “ethnic characteristics” as the reasons for the suffering of the Russian people; the author had used what could be described in linguistics as “hate speech” or aggressive language creating an enemy image; he had used expressions that would be insulting to any ethnic group; while he had not named any specific group, it was clear from the context that he meant (essentially non-Slavic) ethnicities of Central Asia, Northern Caucasus and Transcaucasia; from certain parts of the text it became clear that he was talking about the Armenian ethnicity, among others; the text did not contain phrases calling for violent actions against a person or a group of people on account of his/her/their social status, race, ethnicity, language, gender or religion.
(b)  The psychology part of the report concluded as follows: the article contained phrases disclosing a negative attitude toward a social group on the basis of its ethnicity, language and religion; those phrases could be perceived as inciting readers to feel hatred and enmity; the text did not contain phrases calling for violent actions against a person or a group of people on account of his/her/their social status, race, ethnicity, language, gender or religion.
The criminal case against the applicant was sent for trial before the Lazarevskiy District Court of Sochi. The applicant pleaded not guilty and affirmed that the text represented his own personal views and opinions. After some minor stylistic changes on the part of the newspaper’s editor the applicant had approved the publication by way of his signature of the newspaper issue’s layout. The applicant also argued that he had not had anything to do with the publication of his text on 25 December 2009 (see paragraph 10 above).
The court examined the documentary evidence, including the expert opinions, and heard several witnesses for the defence. The court dismissed an application by the applicant to summon F. for questioning in court about his report. Apparently, neither the prosecution nor the defence deemed it necessary to obtain oral submissions from the other experts whose reports had been admitted in evidence.
By a judgment of 19 July 2010, the District Court convicted the applicant of inciting hatred and enmity, debasing the human dignity of a person or group of people on account of their ethnicity, language, origin and religious beliefs. The trial court phrased the accusation against the applicant as follows:
“In an intentional and premediated manner [the applicant] worded the main part of his text by way of an opposition between the people of Russian ethnicity [русский народ] and members of other ethnicities [национальности] residing in Russia, while making statements that would be insulting and degrading to the dignity of any ethnicity; he indicated that the troubles of the Russian population lay in the nonRussian groups’ ethnic characteristics, thus creating an image of enemies.
Moreover, [the applicant’s] assessment of the situation of the people of the Russian origin is intentionally provocative, being aimed at inciting hatred within the people of Russian ethnicity toward other ethnicities.
Giving a negative assessment of any group on account of its origin, non-Russian ethnicity or on account of their language or religious beliefs, [the applicant] made statements about criminal propensity of those groups and affirmed the existence of their conspiracy against the Kubans [that is to say residents of Krasnodar Region]. He attributed to the non-Russian residents bad intentions toward the Russian population thereby creating a negative image of people prone to commit crimes in Kuban ...
Moreover, in his article [the applicant] characterised people of non-Russian origin as inherently ignorant, rude, cruel, inhuman, aggressive and prone to crime against the Russian population, having secrets plans and conspiracies against people of Russian ethnicity.
[The applicant’s] statements about future violent actions on the part of non-Russian ethnicities toward the Russian people are phrased as statements that cannot be verified as to their veracity because they have no factual basis and do not go beyond his own speculations ...
Clearly being aware that Krasnodar Region is a multi-ethnic region and that newspaper articles have an active influence on many people, [the applicant] disseminated his strong views, thereby undermining the confidence and respect toward a certain ethnicity, a certain religion and inciting hatred and enmity toward a certain way of life, culture, traditions and religious cults of the non-Russian population ...”
Reproducing the concluding remarks from the expert opinions, F.’s report and listing other evidence for each count of the accusation, the court concluded that the applicant was guilty as charged.
As to the publication of the applicant’s article in Sochi–Drugoy Vzglyad on 25 December 2009, the court noted that the applicant was the founder of that newspaper, that he had signed a contract for printing the relevant issue and paid for it, and had then received the whole issue and had distributed it.
The trial court sentenced the applicant to a fine of RUB 200,000 (5,086 euros (EUR) at the time) for each time the article had been published. It also imposed an additional sentence prohibiting the applicant from exercising any journalistic or publishing activities for two years. Noting the expiry of the prosecution period in respect of the first article, the court ordered that the related sentences were not to be enforced as regards the first article.
The court also held as follows:
“The author made manifestly provocative statements when assessing the situation of the Russian people, thus inciting his readers of Russian origin to feel hatred towards other ethnicities [nationalities].
The author made a negative statement about various groups on account of their origin being different from that of Russians ... Thereby, the author made intentional statements concerning the criminal propensities of certain groups, asserted that there was a plot by non-Russians against the population of the Kuban area (that is to say Russians living in Krasnodar Region) ... He said non-Russians had plans to harm Russians, thus creating a negative image of non-Russians ... He described nonRussians as ignorant, rude, cruel or inhuman ... Those are conjectures that are aimed at instilling fear ...
As regards the type of sentence and its severity, the court takes into account the nature and degree of dangerousness of the relevant offences, the information about the defendant’s personality, the circumstances that plead for mitigating or aggravating the sentence and the sentence’s potential for correcting the defendant’s behaviour.
Pursuant to Article 15 of the Criminal Code, the two offences committed by the defendant are offences of minor gravity. The defendant has been given average reviews from his neighbours. No mitigating or aggravating circumstances ... have been established ... In view of the foregoing and bearing in mind the aim of restoring the justice and the principle of proportionality, [the following elements are taken into account:] the influence of the sentence in terms of correcting the defendant’s behaviour and noting that it was the first time he had committed those offences of minor gravity, that he has been taking care of an elderly mother, that he is selfemployed as an entrepreneur. Thus the court imposes the sentence in the form of a fine. Given that all the offences concerned a journalistic activity, the court finds it necessary to impose an additional sentence consisting in prohibiting him from carrying out a certain type of activity ...”
The applicant appealed, stating, inter alia, that the trial court’s refusal to summon “defence witness” F. had undermined the defence’s rights. The applicant indicated that F. had been interviewed during the preliminary investigation as a “specialist” and had then submitted a report (see paragraph 17 above).
On 8 September 2010 the Krasnodar Regional Court upheld the judgment, relying on the expert reports. It made no findings relating to the lack of opportunity to put questions to F. during the trial.
For unspecified reasons the applicant did not pay the fine. On 22 August 2011 the Lazarevskiy District Court of Sochi examined a bailiff’s request, found that the applicant had manifestly evaded payment of the fine and replaced the fine with two hundred hours of community work.
On 8 December 2015 the Council of Europe’s European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) adopted General Policy Recommendation No. 15 on combating hate speech. In its relevant part, the recommendation reads as follows:
“The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI):
...
Recommends that the governments of member States:
...
take appropriate and effective action against the use, in a public context, of hate speech which is intended or can reasonably be expected to incite acts of violence, intimidation, hostility or discrimination against those targeted by it through the use of the criminal law provided that no other, less restrictive, measure would be effective and the right to freedom of expression and opinion is respected, and accordingly:
ensure that the offences are clearly defined and take due account of the need for a criminal sanction to be applied;
ensure that the scope of these offences is defined in a manner that permits their application to keep pace with technological developments;
ensure that prosecutions for these offences are brought on a non-discriminatory basis and are not used in order to suppress criticism of official policies, political opposition or religious beliefs;
ensure the effective participation of those targeted by hate speech in the relevant proceedings;
provide penalties for these offences that take account both of the serious consequences of hate speech and the need for a proportionate response;
monitor the effectiveness of the investigation of complaints and the prosecution of offenders with a view to enhancing both of these;
ensure effective co-operation/co-ordination between police and prosecution authorities...”
The Explanatory Memorandum to the recommendation, in its relevant part, provides as follows:
“16.  ... the assessment as to whether or not there is a risk of the relevant acts occurring requires account to be taken of the specific circumstances in which the hate speech is used. In particular, there will be a need to consider (a) the context in which the hate speech concerned is being used (notably whether or not there are already serious tensions within society to which this hate speech is linked): (b) the capacity of the person using the hate speech to exercise influence over others (such as by virtue of being a political, religious or community leaders); (c) the nature and strength of the language used (such as whether it is provocative and direct, involves the use of misinformation, negative stereotyping and stigmatisation or otherwise capable of inciting acts of violence, intimidation, hostility or discrimination); (d) the context of the specific remarks (whether or not they are an isolated occurrence or are reaffirmed several times and whether or not they can be regarded as being counter-balanced either through others made by the same speaker or by someone else, especially in the course of a debate); (e) the medium used (whether or not it is capable of immediately bringing about a response from the audience such as at a “live” event); and (f) the nature of the audience (whether or not this had the means and inclination or susceptibility to engage in acts of violence, intimidation, hostility or discrimination).”