The case originated in an application (no. 63898/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Konstantin Vladimirovich Bubon (“the applicant”), on 11 October 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Tuzov, a lawyer practising in the Khabarovsk Region. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that the authorities had denied him access to the information necessary for his scientific research.
On 1 July 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
.  The parties submitted written observations on the admissibility and merits of the application. In addition, written submissions were received from the Open Society Justice Initiative and the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights, organisations which had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant is a lawyer who also writes articles for various Russian law journals and online legal information databases and networks.
According to the applicant, his work usually requires extensive scientific research, including in the field of law enforcement in the Khabarovsk Region. He supported his assertion with copies of contracts with well-known Russian publishing houses and owners of a number of legal magazines, including one supervised by the Secretariat of the President of the Russian Federation. Under the contracts he undertook the task of writing articles on specific topics of legal and social interest.
.  Having received an assignment to write an article on prostitution and the fight against it in the Khabarovsk Region, on 12 May 2009 the applicant wrote to the head of the Khabarovsk Region police department by registered letter, asking for statistical data for his research. The relevant parts read:
“[I am] interested in [receiving] information for the period between 2000 and 2009, in particular:
[information on] the number of people found administratively liable under Article 6.11 of the ... Code of Administrative Offences (prostitution), with a breakdown by sex, residence (residents of the Khabarovsk Region or visitors), nationality (nationals of the Russian Federation, foreigners or stateless persons) and the year [of the offence];
[information on] the number of criminal cases instituted during the abovementioned period under Articles 241, 242, 242.1 [and] 127.1 (cases related to sexual exploitation) of the ... Criminal Code, with a breakdown of the specific Articles ... and the year [the case was opened];
[information on] the number of individuals found criminally liable under Articles 241, 242, 242.1 [and] 127.1 ... of the ... Criminal Code, with a breakdown by sex, age, educational background, permanent residence (residents of the Khabarovsk Region or visitors), nationality and period [in which the crime was committed];
general information on sentences imposed on individuals found criminally liable under Articles 241, 242, 242.1 [and] 127.1 ... of the ... Criminal Code  the types of sentences and in how many cases they were imposed, and the years [they were imposed].
...
[I] stress that I do not need any specific personal information about individuals found administratively or criminally liable; [I only need] general statistical information for writing a scientific article.”
.  It appears from an acknowledgement of receipt that the letter reached the Khabarovsk Region police department on 25 May 2009.
.  Under Russian law, State officials must provide a reply to letters from individuals within thirty days. In the absence of any response, on 26 June 2009 the applicant lodged a claim with the Tsentralniy District Court of Khabarovsk (“the District Court”), complaining that the police authorities had failed to provide him with the information he had requested and requesting for access. Relying on the Information Act (see below) and Article 10 of the Convention, he argued that the officials’ implied refusal to provide him with the information had been unlawful as he had not asked for access to any confidential personal information, State secrets or information related to internal police working methods. He claimed that his request had related purely to statistical data of a general nature collected by the Information Centre of the Khabarovsk Region police department (hereinafter “the Information Centre”).
On 18 July 2009 the applicant received a letter from the head of the Information Centre, notifying him that information as specific as he had asked for could only be collected on production of a written order issued by a deputy Minister of Internal Affairs, a head of a regional or municipal police department or their divisions or a prosecutor or investigator from a prosecutor’s office. The Information Centre did not collect such information at the request of private individuals. General statistical data summarised by the Information Centre was provided to the Federal Service of State Statistics and in particular its regional office for the Khabarovsk Region, to whom the applicant could apply for the statistical data.
On 19 July 2009 the applicant wrote to the Khabarovsk Region Service of State Statistics (hereinafter “the Statistics Service”) by registered letter, asking for the statistical data for his research.
On 23 July 2009 the head of the Statistics Service replied, stating that specific statistical information on the fight against prostitution had never been provided by the Khabarovsk Regional police department.
The applicant filed copies of his letters from the Information Centre and Statistics Service with the District Court.
.  On 4 August 2009 it dismissed the applicant’s claim on the grounds that the Information Centre was not authorised to process data requests from private individuals. Under domestic law, the Statistics Service was tasked with dissemination of official statistical data on a broad variety of subjects, including those falling within the applicant’s field of interest. It also noted that the applicant had failed to obtain the information sought from open sources, such as libraries, archives and the Internet. The District Court also stressed that the information requested did not touch upon the applicant’s rights and legitimate interests, so the authorities’ refusal to grant him access to such information had been lawful and well-founded under section 8(2) of the Information Act.
.  The applicant appealed, arguing, among other things, that the police authorities had exclusive possession of the information sought by him and that he had no other means, including through assistance from the Statistics Service, of obtaining the necessary data. In addition, he submitted that the fact that his rights and legitimate interests were not affected by the requested information had no bearing on the case as under Russian law, it was not only those directly concerned who were granted access to public information.
.  On 16 September 2009 the Khabarovsk Regional Court upheld the judgment of 4 August 2009. Relying on section 8(2) of the Information Act, it concluded that the authorities were not obliged to provide the applicant with the information as it did not touch upon his rights and legitimate interests.
The relevant provisions of the Information Act (Federal Law no. 149-FZ of 27 July 2006 “On Information, Information Technology and the Protection of Information”) read:
“1.  Citizens (individuals) and organisations (legal entities) are entitled to search for and receive any information in any form and from any source provided that the requirements of this [Act] and other federal laws are respected.
A citizen (an individual) is entitled to receive information directly affecting his rights and freedoms from State bodies, municipal authorities and their officials in accordance with the procedure established by the law of the Russian Federation.
...
Access may not be restricted to:
(1)  legal acts affecting the rights, freedoms and obligations of individuals and citizens, as well as identifying legal status of organisations and the authority of State bodies [and] municipal authorities;
(2)  environmental information;
(3)  information on the activities of State bodies and municipal authorities, as well as on the use of budgetary funds (except information constituting State or official secrets);
(4)  information collected in the open funds of libraries, museums and archives, as well as in State, municipal and other information systems created or designed to provide such information to citizens (individuals) and organisations;
(5)  other information the restriction of access to which is not permitted by federal law.
State bodies and municipal authorities are required to provide access to information about their activities ... in compliance with federal laws, laws of the constituent elements of the Russian Federation and legal acts of municipal authorities. A person wishing to obtain access to such information is under no obligation to explain why it is required.
Decisions and actions (inaction) of State bodies and municipal authorities, public associations, officials violating the right of access to information are amenable to appeal before a higher authority, a higher-ranking official or a court.
...
Information is provided free of charge [concerning]:
(1)  the activities of State bodies and municipal authorities when the information has been posted on information and telecommunications networks;
(2)  the rights and obligations established by the law of the Russian Federation of the person concerned;
(3)  [any] other information established by law.
A State body or municipal authority may only impose a fee for providing information on its activities in cases and on the terms established by federal law.”
“1.  Federal law lays down restrictions on access to information to protect constitutional order, morals, health, the rights and lawful interests of others, for ensuring national defence and security of the State.
It is mandatory to keep information confidential, access to which is restricted by federal law.
Protection of information constituting State secrets shall be carried out in accordance with the law of the Russian Federation on State secrets.
Federal law lays down the conditions for classifying information as trade, official or other secrets, [and lays down] an obligation to keep such information confidential and [establish] responsibility for its disclosure...”
On 21 February 2002 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation Rec(2002)2 on access to official documents (hereinafter “the Recommendation”). The relevant provisions read:
“For the purposes of this recommendation:
...
“official documents” shall mean all information recorded in any form, drawn up or received and held by public authorities and linked to any public or administrative function, with the exception of documents under preparation.”
“1.  This recommendation concerns only official documents held by public authorities. However, member states should examine, in the light of their domestic law and practice, to what extent the principles of this recommendation could be applied to information held by legislative bodies and judicial authorities...”
“Member states should guarantee the right of everyone to have access, on request, to official documents held by public authorities. This principle should apply without discrimination on any ground, including that of national origin.”
“1.  A request for access to an official document should be dealt with by any public authority holding the document.
Requests for access to official documents should be dealt with on an equal basis...”
The Council of Europe Convention on Access to Official Documents opened for signature on 18 June 2009. The relevant provisions read:
“1.  The principles set out hereafter should be understood without prejudice to those domestic laws and regulations and to international treaties which recognise a wider right of access to official documents.
For the purposes of this Convention:
...
“official documents” means all information recorded in any form, drawn up or received and held by public authorities.
“1.  Each Party shall guarantee the right of everyone, without discrimination on any ground, to have access, on request, to official documents held by public authorities.
Each Party shall take the necessary measures in its domestic law to give effect to the provisions for access to official documents set out in this Convention...”
“1.  The public authority shall help the applicant, as far as reasonably possible, to identify the requested official document.
A request for access to an official document shall be dealt with by any public authority holding the document. If the public authority does not hold the requested official document or if it is not authorised to process that request, it shall, wherever possible, refer the application or the applicant to the competent public authority...”
The convention has not yet entered into force. Russia has not signed or ratified it.