The case originated in an application (no. 3682/10) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Klaus Günter Annen (“the applicant”), on 15 January 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr L. Eck, a lawyer practising in Passau. The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr H.J. Behrens and Ms K. Behr, of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection.
The applicant alleged that an order by the domestic courts to desist from labelling abortions “aggravated murder” on his webpage had violated his freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention.
On 3 January 2017 the complaint concerning Article 10 of the Convention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in Weinheim. He is a campaigner against abortion and operates an anti-abortion website (babycaust.de). At the time of the proceedings outlined below, the website included, among other things, the following content.
On the starting page a picture of graves was shown and the text underneath read “then: Holocaust”. Upon clicking on the picture, the user was directed to a page titled: “Abortion – the new Holocaust?” on which the Holocaust was compared to abortions. On the left margin of the starting page, there were several links, of which one was called “Life or death?”. Upon clicking on it, the user was directed to a page with the headline “Prayer requests for Germany”. From that page, the reader was directed to a location-based alphabetical list mentioning the names and practice addresses of doctors who performed abortions in Germany, and to a request for prayers for those doctors.
At the very bottom of the same page, under the highlighted text “German contemporary history in brief”, a sentence read:
“Perverted doctors murder unborn children at the request of the mothers” (Pervertierte Ärzte ermorden im Auftrag der Mütter die ungeborenen Kinder)
On the same page, clicking on the button “close page” forwarded the user to a page where it was stated:
“Pray, if possible regularly, for the doctors ... who personally undertake the AGGRAVATED MURDER of abortion killing” (Beten Sie – wenn möglich regelmäßig – für die Mediziner ..., welche den MORD der Abtreibungstötung selbst vornehmen ...) (Emphasis in original).
Somewhat farther down on the same page, it was stated that counselling centres that issued certifications:
“... are enabling and facilitating the unpunished aggravated murder of children in their mother’s womb.” (... ermöglichen und begünstigen einen straffreien Kindermord im Mutterschoβ.)
One of the doctors listed on the applicant’s website, Dr Q., sought a civil injunction ordering the applicant to remove his name and address from the website.
On 23 May 2006 the Mannheim Regional Court rejected Dr Q.’s application on the grounds that it was a fact that Dr Q. performed abortions and that the remainder of the website’s content was covered by the applicant’s freedom of expression. It observed, in particular, that the present case was not comparable to similar cases which had concerned an interference with personality rights by the distribution of personalised leaflets. The publishing of a doctor’s name on a list of abortion performing doctors had no comparable “pillory effect”.
Subsequently Dr Q. appealed and – during the appeal proceedings –
modified his application, seeking a civil injunction ordering the applicant to desist from labelling abortions, such as those performed by Dr Q., “aggravated murder”.
On 28 February 2007 the Karlsruhe Court of Appeal granted the sought injunction. The court held that the applicant’s website led it to be understood that abortions performed by Dr Q. constituted “aggravated murder”. While the term “aggravated murder” did not have to be understood in a merely legal sense but could also be understood as a moral judgment, the overall presentation of the website at the very least did not exclude a reading that Dr Q. had perpetrated the criminal offence of aggravated murder. Even though the applicant had pointed out that abortions were exempt from punishment, he had not referred to section 218a of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 14 below), which exempted abortions as performed by Dr Q., from criminal liability. In addition, the applicant had emphasised the term “aggravated murder” in the relevant parts of the website and had compared abortions with the Holocaust. In sum, the statements of the website could be understood as a personalised accusation against Dr Q. of perpetrating aggravated murder.
On 29 May 2007 the Federal Court of Justice refused a request by the applicant for legal aid on the grounds that the applicant’s intended appeal on points of law lacked sufficient prospect of success.
On 2 July 2009 the Federal Constitutional Court refused to admit a complaint by the applicant for adjudication for being inadmissible, without providing reasons (no. 1 BvR 1663/07).
Article 5 of the German Basic Law (Grundgesetz) reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“(1) Every person shall have the right freely to express and disseminate his opinions in speech, writing and pictures, and to inform himself without hindrance from generally accessible sources. ...
(2) These rights shall find their limits in the provisions of general laws, in provisions for the protection of young persons, and in the right to personal honour.”
The relevant provisions of the German Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch) read:
“(1) Whosoever commits aggravated murder shall be liable to imprisonment for life.
(2) A murderer under this provision is any person who kills a person for pleasure, for sexual gratification, out of greed or otherwise base motives, maliciously or cruelly or by means that pose a danger to the public or in order to facilitate or to cover up another offence.”
“(1) Whosoever terminates a pregnancy shall be liable to imprisonment of not more than three years or a fine. Acts the effects of which occur before the conclusion of the nidation shall not be deemed to be an abortion within the meaning of this law.
(2) In especially serious cases the penalty shall be imprisonment from six months to five years. An especially serious case typically occurs if the offender acts against the will of the pregnant woman; or through gross negligence causes a risk of death or serious injury to the pregnant woman.
(3) If the act is committed by the pregnant woman the penalty shall be imprisonment of not more than one year or a fine.
(4) The attempt shall be punishable. The pregnant woman shall not be liable for the attempt.”
“(1) The offence under section 218 shall not be deemed fulfilled if the pregnant woman requests the termination of the pregnancy and demonstrates to a doctor by certificate in accordance with section 219 (2) 2nd sentence that she obtained counselling at least three days before the operation; the termination of the pregnancy is performed by a doctor; and not more than twelve weeks have elapsed since conception.
(2) The termination of pregnancy performed by a doctor with the consent of the pregnant woman shall not be unlawful if, considering the present and future living conditions of the pregnant woman, the termination of the pregnancy is medically necessary to avert a danger to the life or the danger of grave injury to the physical or mental health of the pregnant woman and if the danger cannot reasonably be averted in another way from her point of view.”
The Federal Constitutional Court, in its leading judgment of 28 May 1993 (BVerfGE 88, 203), accepted abortions being performed by doctors after a pregnant woman had obtained counselling by a third person, and developed a rather singular approach by qualifying certain acts of abortion as unlawful, but not punishable. “Abortions which are performed without the establishment of a medical indication must not be treated as being justified (not unlawful)” (Schwangerschaftsabbrüche, die ohne Feststellung einer Indikation nach der Beratungsregelung vorgenommen werden, dürfen nicht für gerechtfertigt (nicht rechtswidrig) erklärt werden). However, abortions performed by a doctor within twelve weeks of conception and following obligatory counselling are considered to be unlawful, but are exempt from criminal liability.
The relevant provision of the Conflicts in Pregnancy Act (Schwangerschaftskonfliktgesetz) reads as follows:
“(1) Nobody is obliged to assist in abortions. ...”
The relevant provisions of the German Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch) read as follows:
“(1) A person who, intentionally or negligently, unlawfully injures the life, body, health, freedom, property or another right of another person, is liable to pay compensation to the other party for the damage arising from this. ...”
“(1) If the ownership is interfered with by means other than removal or retention of possession, the owner may require the disturber to remove the interference. If further interferences are to be feared, the owner may seek a prohibitory injunction. ...”
According to the case-law of the German civil courts, Article 823 §§ 1 and 2 in conjunction with Article 1004 (in analogous application) of the Civil Code grants any person whose personality rights concretely risk being violated by another person a claim to compel that other person to refrain from performing the impugned action.