The case originated in an application (no. 8895/10) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ärztekammer für Wien (“the first applicant organisation”) and Mr Walter Dorner, (“the second applicant”), on 3 February 2010.
The applicants were represented by Mr G. Korn, a lawyer practising in Vienna. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador H. Tichy, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry for European and International Affairs.
The applicants complained that the injunction imposed on them which prohibited them from publicly repeating certain statements concerning the F. company had violated their rights under Article 10.
On 4 September 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The first applicant organisation is the Vienna Chamber of Medical Doctors (Ärztekammer für Wien). The Chamber represents all medical practitioners in Vienna and also has its own website. The second applicant was the Chamber’s president at the time of the events.
On 18 January 2007 the second applicant published a letter on the first applicant organisation’s website, which was addressed to all members of the Chamber in Vienna and was also sent out to all of them via e-mail. The letter was titled “Locust funds want to take over medical practices” (“Heuschreckenfonds wollen Ordinationen übernehmen”). The second applicant went on to state that he had been forced to write to his colleagues for a serious reason, namely, because it had been reported in the media that the F. company planned to go into “the radiology business”. He added that share-bidding companies planned to offer medical services – initially in the area of radiology, but soon enough in other areas of the profession as well  and that doctors risked becoming mere employees of such “locust” companies. If they would not act according to the companies’ wishes, they would be dismissed. The second applicant then explained the assumed legal and organisational basis of such a plan: radiology services which were currently being provided by medical practices could, in future, also be offered by limited companies. Shares of those companies could then be bought by the F. company, and the “locusts” would reach their goal, namely control of the medical profession. Giving an example of a risky development, the second applicant stated that in the last 20 years, colleagues had founded laboratories which had reciprocal agreements with certain health insurance boards. Today, almost all of those laboratories were owned by the F. group, which, in turn, was owned by insurance companies, investment funds and foundations, and which employed a large number of doctors. The second applicant ended his letter by stating that he could guarantee one thing: that the doctors’ professional representative body would make use of all legal and political means available to stop such a disastrous development from going ahead, to prevent that the quality of medical treatment being determined by “managers and controllers” and to ensure, inter alia, that existing medical practices were protected from the competition from “international locust funds” (“internationale Heuschreckenfonds”).
On 24 January 2007 the F. company lodged an action against the two applicants and an application for an injunction with the Vienna Commercial Court (Handelsgericht Wien). The applicants contested the application.
On 16 February 2007 the Vienna Commercial Court issued an injunction prohibiting the applicants (each of them individually) from repeating the statement that the F. company was ruthless towards third parties, in particular medical professionals. The injunction prevented the applicants from referring to the F. company as a “locust”, “locust company” or “locust fund”. The applicants were further prohibited from stating that the provision of services by the F. company, particularly services in the area of radiology, was a disastrous development. The court found that there was a competitive relationship between the F. company and the applicants, and found the statements made by the applicants to be defamatory under Article 1330 of the Civil Code and unethical under the Unfair Competition Act (Bundesgesetz gegen den unlauteren Wettbewerb).
The applicants appealed against the injunction. On 30 October 2007 the Vienna Court of Appeal (Oberlandesgericht Wien) partly granted the appeal, and prohibited the applicants from alleging that the F. company was ruthless towards third parties and medical practitioners, and from calling it, inter alia, a “locust company”. However, it dismissed the F. company’s application to prohibit the applicants from calling its provision of services a “disastrous” development. The Court of Appeal found that the first applicant organisation had locus standi in the injunction proceedings. The Chamber of Medical Doctors held official authority status in relation to certain areas of its work (Bereich der Hoheitsverwaltung), in addition to representing the interests of its members; it was therefore considered a legal entity under the Official Liability Act (Amtshaftungsgesetz). However, when acting as a special interest group, it represented its members’ interests from a mainly economic perspective, rather than acting in its capacity as an official authority. According to the Court of Appeal, the letter in issue pursued the interests of the Chamber’s members, outside the Chamber’s official sphere of activity.
The Court of Appeal further established, referring inter alia to Wikipedia, that the term “locust company“ (“Heuschreckenunternehmen“) was introduced into the political discussion in German speaking countries in 2005 by Mr Franz Müntefering, a German politician, and is ever since used in political debates as a pejorative term for private-equity companies or other forms of capital funds with short-term or exaggerated return expectations – like hedge funds or „vulture“ funds, which also had negative connotations. The domestic court found that there was a need to balance the interests involved in the present debate, reiterating that extreme opinions were only unlawful if they were excessive. As a result of that balancing exercise, the Court of Appeal found that the “locust” statement had to be considered a lawful criticism in the context of a public debate, and that the F. company could therefore not base its claim on Article 1330 of the Civil Code. However, the Court of Appeal classified the applicants’ actions as competitive in nature. Statements of fact made in violation of the Unfair Competition Act could not be justified by the right to freedom of expression. The Court of Appeal found that Austrian law provided wideranging protection for commercial and economic interests. Those who published an opinion in an economically competitive context were obliged to exercise a higher level of diligence with regard to the facts and bases of their allegations than those who acted in the non-competitive context of a public debate of general interest. Therefore, the Court of Appeal upheld the injunction decision with regard to the statements about the “locust company”.
However, as regards the further statement, namely that provision of certain services by the F. company was a “disastrous development”, the Court of Appeal found that, read in context, the statement indicated a general assessment and did not refer to a particular service of the F. company. It was therefore to be considered a personal opinion, and thus a value judgment that was not defamatory under Article 1330 of the Civil Code. It also did not fall under section 7 of the Unfair Competition Act.
The applicants lodged an extraordinary appeal with the Supreme Court (Oberster Gerichtshof). On 22 January 2008 the Supreme Court dismissed the extraordinary appeal. It acknowledged the applicants’ argument that where a competitor, even for economic purposes, took part in a debate of public interest, freedom of expression had to hold more weight in the balancing test. However, the Supreme Court observed that the applicants had made their statement in the clearly economic context of competition between medical practitioners and companies which provided the same services. The applicants could have warned their members of the possible risks of cooperating with companies without overstepping the margin of acceptable criticism. However, the applicants had exceeded that limit and stated that the F. company was a “locust”. That statement was one of fact, and the applicants had not provided evidence of a factual basis for their allegations, and had therefore exceeded the permissible limitations of freedom of expression.
On 7 July 2008 the Commercial Court gave its judgment in the substantive proceedings and ordered the applicants to refrain from: repeating the statement that the F. company was ruthless towards third parties, in particular medical practitioners and patients; and stating that the F. company was a “locust company”, a “locust fund” or a “locust”. It further ordered the applicants to publish and display the operative part of the judgment on the first applicant organisation’s website for thirty days, and to publish it in the first applicant organisation’s print newsletter.
The Commercial Court made substantial reference to the Court of Appeal’s reasoning in the interim injunction proceedings. It followed the previous finding that the relevant statements did not constitute defamation pursuant to Article 1330 of the Civil Code. Examining the statements in relation to the provisions of the Unfair Competition Act, the Commercial Court found that the letter had been written by the Chamber of Medical Doctors in a commercial and not a political context. It had also had the advancement of independent medical practices as an objective, and had contained a warning regarding capital ventures which allegedly threatened doctors’ independence. The Commercial Court found the relevant comparisons with “locusts” to be statements of fact regarding both the F. company and its conduct in relation to third parties, doctors and patients. The statements were also likely to damage the F. company’s commercial interests, and had not been proved to be true.
The used language could also not be justified with a reference to the right to freedom of expression as the statement was uttered within the framework of a commercial competitive relationship. With reference to the Court’s case-law allowing for a wider margin of appreciation under Article 10 of the Convention with regard to commercial language, the Commercial Court observed that a competitor was required to be more diligent in the context of commercial communication among competitors. The term “locust” was almost exclusively loaded with negative meaning, which led to the unethical general vilification of a competitor. The applicants were therefore prohibited from using that statement in relation to the F. company, pursuant to the Unfair Competition Act.
On 19 September 2008 the applicants lodged an appeal against that judgment. On 12 December 2008 the Vienna Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal as unfounded. It referred to the extensive reasoning given in the interim injunction proceedings and added that, according to the case-law of the Supreme Court, the test used to verify whether a statement was covered by the right to freedom of expression required the assessment of whether a factual basis for such a statement existed; if a competitor participated in a public debate of general interest, freedom of expression had more weight with regard to the assessment of the statement than in the context of purely commercial communication. The greater the public interest in being properly informed and the less the statement related to commercial interests, the more the statement would be protected by Article 10 of the Convention. In the present case, there was no doubt that there was an ongoing public debate; however, the commercial interests of the applicants had very much been in the foreground of the communicated statement itself.
The applicants lodged an extraordinary appeal on points of law against that judgment, which was rejected by the Supreme Court on 14 July 2009. The Supreme Court found that the applicants had not only called the F. company a “locust”, but had also reproached this company for negative conduct, such as dominating doctors, dismissing doctors who did not act in accordance with company wishes, and focusing on economic factors rather than the welfare of patients (“Herrschaft über den ärztlichen Berufstand, Kündigung nicht “spurender” Ärzte, Orientierung an ökonomischen Erwägungen und damit nicht am Wohl der Patienten”). Therefore, the expression used had turned into a statement of fact, giving the reader the impression that the F. company had already demonstrated unethical conduct which threatened the interests of doctors and patients. In view of the specific circumstances of the case, the prohibition ruled upon by the lower courts was justified. Even though the applicants had taken part in a debate of general public interest, an untrue and damaging statement of fact was not protected by freedom of expression. Furthermore, the issuing of warnings concerning the potential risks of the provision of medical services by companies was not, as such, prohibited by the decisions of the Austrian courts; the applicants had only been required to refrain from making untrue statements of fact in respect of their competitors.
The decision of the Supreme Court was served on the applicants’ counsel on 27 August 2009.
According to Article 120a of the Federal Constitution Act (Bundesverfassungsgesetz), people may be united by law to selfadministrating bodies to autonomously take care of public interests being in their exclusive or preponderant common interest and qualified to be handled jointly by them. The self-administrating bodies are authorized to take care of their tasks in own responsibility without orders and to render statutes within the frame of the laws. The Federation or the Region has a right of supervision over them on the basis of the legal regulations with regard to the legality of the handling of the administration. Such right of supervision may also extend to the expedience of the handling of the administration, if such is required because of the tasks of the selfadministrating body. Upon the self-administrating bodies tasks of administration of the state may be conferred. The laws have to expressly indicate that such matters belong to the assigned executive responsibility and to provide a binding effect of the instructions by the supreme administrative authorities (see Article 120b of the Federal Constitution Act).
Using the authority granted by these provisions of the Federal Constitution Act, the Medical Practitioners Act (Ärztegesetz), establishes the Chamber of Medical Doctors (“the Chamber”) to represent the interests of medical practitioners in Austria (Standesvertretung). There is a regional chamber in each of the nine Austrian regions and a Federal Chamber, of which the regional chambers are members. The chambers are public-law bodies with compulsory membership. The members are all practising doctors who are registered on the list of active medical practitioners in the geographical area of the regional chambers.
The chambers are established to represent and promote the professional, social and economic interests of doctors; uphold the reputation of the medical profession; and ensure that professional duties are observed by practitioners.
Furthermore, inter alia, they manage the examinations which medical graduates have to pass in order to become practising doctors (sections 7 et seq. of the Medical Practitioners Act); confer institution status on medical education establishments (sections 9 et seq.); and deal with the recognition of foreign qualifications and access to work for both selfemployed and employed doctors (sections 27 et seq.). These duties and responsibilities are divided between the regional chambers and the Federal Chamber, and are regulated by sections 65 et seq. (in relation to the regional chambers) and sections 117 et seq. of the Medical Practitioners Act (in relation to the Federal Chamber).
Section 66 (sections 66 to 66c after 1 January 2010) of the Medical Practitioners Act provides that, within their own sphere (eigener Wirkungsbereich), the regional chambers are called upon to, inter alia, form and terminate contracts which define the relationship between medical practitioners and social security institutions; secure collective agreements on the part of employers in relation to non-medical employees; control fees; give legal advice; make reports, expert opinions and recommendations to state authorities concerning the health system, establish regional collegiate arbitration boards and conduct collegiate arbitration proceedings; establish patient arbitration boards; establish and manage pension and disability funds for their members; establish and manage commercial institutions; report on public health issues; collaborate in the collection of official medical statistical data; collaborate in the establishment of medical universities and other training institutes; examine draft laws; provide quality control for medical training; provide advanced training and training facilities; and provide quality control for services rendered by the medical profession in general.
The Federal Medical Chamber (Österreichische Ärztekammer), inter alia, manages the register of practising doctors; deals with the accreditation process for equivalent medical qualifications; issues diplomas for general practitioners, medical specialists or specialists in other fields; collaborates in the academic and advanced education and training of medical practitioners; and conducts disciplinary proceedings. Section 27 of the Medical Practitioners Act provides that the regional chambers cooperate with the Federal Chamber in managing the register of doctors. Appearing on this register is a precondition to working legally as a medical doctor in Austria.
The regional chambers adopt their own organisational statutes; statutes relating to pension and disability funds; rules on contributions to the chambers themselves and to pension and disability funds; recommendations regarding fee structures for private medical services; and rules on the reimbursement of costs and other fees.
The members are obliged to pay regular contributions (Umlage) to their chambers and to the relevant pension and disability funds (section 69 of the Medical Practitioners Act). These contributions are defined by decree of the regional chambers on the basis of section 91. Payment of arrears of such contributions can be enforced by the chambers on the basis of the federal law for enforcement of administrative orders (Verwaltungsvollstreckungsgesetz).
Until 2010, remedies against decisions of the chambers could, depending on the issue, be raised before the Regional Governor (Landeshauptmann – sections 14, 15, 28, 59 and 197), the Independent Administrative Panel (Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat – sections 35a and 39) or, in respect of decisions relating to pension and disability funds and disciplinary proceedings, with the Federal Chamber. Between 1 January 2010 and 31 December 2013 the rule providing for appeals to the Regional Governor was abolished. In proceedings concerning the recognition of foreign qualifications (sections 32, 33 and 35), there was the possibility of an appeal to the Independent Administrative Panel. With regard to decisions relating to pension and disability funds and disciplinary proceedings, the rule permitting appeals to the Federal Chamber remained in force. As of 1 January 2014 an appeal to the Regional Administrative Courts can be filed against all decisions of the chambers.
The regional chambers are supervised by the regional governments, the Federal Chamber by the Federal Minister of Health. To fulfil this supervisory function, the chambers have to provide information needed by regional governments or the Federal Minister of Health. All decrees have to be presented for supervision automatically. The supervisory body has to examine the lawfulness of the decrees and decisions issued by the chambers, and can suspend unlawful acts (sections 195 et seq.). If an organ of the chamber oversteps its competences or neglects its duties, the regional government may dismiss this organ from office, if this organ acted with culpable negligence or wilful intent and the chamber does not take appropriate measures. If the chamber becomes inquorate, the regional government may depute a commissioner of the Government (Regierungskommissär) to administrate the acts of the chamber until the establishment of a new board of the chamber through elections (see section 195b).
In accordance with Article 127b of the Federal Constitution, the Audit Office (Rechnungshof) examines the finances of the chambers and verifies that all their transactions are lawful, appropriate and in line with relevant budgets. It reports to the chambers themselves and to the supervisory bodies.
Apart from the public responsibilities described above, medical chambers can act as private entities. They may form all manner of civil contracts and acquire possessions. In this field, they can be held liable for violations of laws, in the same way as any private entity.
Article 1330 of the Civil Code (Allgemeines Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch) provides as follows:
Sections 1(1) and 7(1) of the Unfair Competition Act (Bundesgesetz gegen den unlauteren Wettbewerb) provide: