The case originated in an application (no. 1562/10) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Stanisław Remuszko (“the applicant”), on 22 December 2009.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz, succeeded by Ms J. Chrzanowska, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained about a refusal to publish paid advertisements for his book by a newspaper. He relied on Article 10 of the Convention.
On 12 April 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in .
In 1999 the applicant, who is a journalist, published a book entitled “Gazeta Wyborcza. Beginnings and Beyond” (Gazeta Wyborcza. Początki i okolice). The book relates, in an unfavourable light, the story of the founding of Gazeta Wyborcza, one of the best known Polish daily newspapers with a nationwide distribution. The newspaper was founded in 1989 in the wake of the so-called Round Table talks between the communist government and the heads of the then democratic opposition which ultimately led to the first semifree elections in  since 1945 and to the ultimate dismantling of the communist regime by the end of 1989.
The second edition of the applicant’s book was published in 2003. No reviews of the book were published in the press.
Subsequently, the applicant requested seven daily and weekly newspapers to publish an identical paid advertisement for the book. The text of the proposed advertisement reads as follows:
“It does not make for pleasant reading for [the editor-in-chief] of Gazeta Wyborcza, friends. The truth about Gazeta Wyborcza. Previously unseen documents and new witnesses. Stanisław Remuszko, a former journalist [at the newspaper], today working freelance, has written the first ever book in Poland, Europe and the world about Gazeta Wyborcza and its background. Do you have the faintest idea where the wealth of Gazeta Wyborcza comes from? Information available at www.remuszko.pl.”
All the newspapers (Nasz Dziennik, Wprost, Metropol, Newsweek, Polityka and Rzeczpospolita) refused to publish the advertisement. Gazeta Polska was the first to agree to publish it and they signed a contract with the applicant. However, shortly afterwards the editor changed his mind, refused publication and reimbursed the money paid by the applicant.
On 12 June 2003 the applicant lodged seven identical claims with the Warsaw Regional Court against the newspapers. He requested that the court order the defendant newspapers to publish the advertisements. The applicant referred to section 36 of the Press Act 1984 (see paragraph 34 below), arguing that nothing in the advertisement as proposed could reasonably be construed as being in breach of the law or third parties’ personal rights, or contrary to the editorial policy of the defendants, unless they considered that their editorial policy included a duty to protect the interests of Gazeta Wyborcza, its editor-in-chief and publisher. The applicant referred to Article 54 of the Constitution and to section 1 of the Press Act.
The Warsaw Regional Court, by judgments dated 23 January 2004, 11 May 2005, 26 May 2005, 28 January 2004 and 28 March 2006 dismissed his actions against Nasz Dziennik, Wprost, Metropol, Newsweek and Polityka respectively.
The applicant appealed.
By judgments of 14 December 2005 and 23 June 2006 the Warsaw Court of Appeal allowed his appeals and ordered the defendant newspapers Wprost and Metropol to publish the advertisement concerned. No appeal was lodged against those judgments.
During the appellate proceedings against Nasz Dziennik the Warsaw Court of Appeal decided on 15 October 2004 to make use of Article 391 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure and put a legal question to the Supreme Court concerning the interpretation of Article 36 of the Press Act. The Supreme Court refused to reply to this question by way of a decision of 14 October 2004 (CZP 67/05) (see “Relevant domestic law and practice” below).
On 7 March 2005 the Warsaw Court of Appeal rejected the applicant’s appeal against Newsweek on formal grounds (failure to pay the court fee).
By a judgment of 25 April 2006 the Warsaw Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal against Polityka.
By a judgment of 13 July 2004 the Warsaw Regional Court allowed the claim against Gazeta Polska. The editors appealed. The parties settled the case before the Court of Appeal. The applicant submits that ultimately the advertisement was not published.
The present case concerns the proceedings against Rzeczpospolita and its editorinchief.
By a judgment of 30 March 2004 the Warsaw Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s claim. It referred to section 36 of the Press Act, noting that the only requirements that paid advertisements to be published in the press had to comply with were the laws and principles of social coexistence (zasady współżycia społecznego). The editors of Rzeczpospolita had been aware of the content of the book. Publishing the advertisement could have been regarded as endorsing that content, which, in turn, could have been seen as breaching the personal rights of third parties. This could have given rise to civil liability on their part. Not only were the editors allowed to refuse publication of an advertisement in breach of third parties’ rights; they were even obliged to do so.
The applicant appealed, referring to his right to freedom of expression. He also argued that the first-instance court had failed to provide any explanation as to why and how the advertisement breached third parties’ rights.
The Warsaw Court of Appeal, by a judgment of 4 November 2004, allowed his appeal and remitted the case for reexamination. The court first held that publication of advertisements was not covered by freedom of expression.
It further accepted the applicant’s argument about the lower court’s failure to give adequate reasons for its judgment. That court had held that the text of the advertisement was in breach of the law and third parties’ personal rights without adducing any arguments or reasons for that view. The court further observed that the lower court had made its assessment with reference to the content of the book concerned. This was not correct as under section 36 of the Press Act lawfulness and/or respect for third parties’ personal rights had to be examined with reference to the content of the advertisement only, and not of the advertised service or the merchandise. The content of the book was irrelevant in the case at hand.
By a judgment of 30 January 2007 the Warsaw Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s claim. The court was of the view that the advertisement was incompatible with the newspaper’s editorial profile. It further reiterated that the publication of the advertisement could have been understood as an endorsement of the applicant’s views expressed in the book. This circumstance alone was sufficient to justify the refusal to publish the advertisement. Moreover, Rzeczpospolita and Gazeta Wyborcza were competitors in the press market. The publication of the advertisement could have given rise to a suspicion that the editors of the former were trying to denigrate the latter in the eyes of the public. Further, the editors were not obliged by law to endorse the dissemination of views and statements which they did not accept.
The court concluded that the advertisement did not meet the requirements laid down by section 36 of the Press Act.
The court further stated, referring to the views expressed by the Supreme Court in its judgments of 18 January 2007 given in other cases brought by the applicant and concerning refusals to publish the same advertisement (see paragraph 30 below), that the principle of commercial and contractual freedom dictated that a publisher was not under a legal obligation to publish all advertisements submitted to it because it did not have a monopoly on the market.
The applicant appealed, reiterating his earlier arguments. He expressly relied on Article 10 of the Convention.
On 7 February 2008 the Warsaw Court of Appeal dismissed his appeal, essentially endorsing the view expressed by the Regional Court.
The applicant’s lawyer submitted a cassation appeal against that judgment to the Supreme Court, relying on the right to freedom of expression guaranteed by the Constitution and by Article 10 of the Convention.
By a judgment of 26 March 2009, served on the applicant on 24 June 2009, the Supreme Court dismissed the cassation appeal.
The court referred to its judgments given in other cases initiated by the applicant: CZP 67/05 (the Nasz Dziennik case – in which it refused to answer a legal question, see paragraph 35 below; I CSK 351/06 and 376/06 (the Polityka case). It observed that the press market was governed by business and commercial freedom. It resulted therefrom that publishers of newspapers could not be held to be obliged to publish all advertisements simply at the request of clients. The court referred to the Court’s judgment in the case of Appleby and Others v. the United Kingdom, no. 44306/98, ECHR 2003VII. It shared the Court’s view that the principles governing the exercise of the freedom of expression were also applicable to commercial speech. However, it did not necessarily result therefrom that in horizontal relations this freedom could not be limited in compliance with the constitutional principle of proportionality.
Whereas it was true that section 36 paragraph 4 of the Press Act could not be said to be fully consistent with other provisions of that Act, it could validly be relied on by publishers wishing to refuse the publication of an advertisement if they were of the view that the advertisement as proposed was not compatible with the newspaper’s profile.
The Supreme Court concluded that the contested judgment was ultimately in conformity with the law.
Article 54 of the Constitution provides:
“1.  Freedom to express opinions, and to acquire and disseminate information shall be ensured to everyone.
Preventive censorship of means of social communication and licensing of the press shall be prohibited.”
Article 31 of the Constitution reads:
“1.  Freedom of the person shall receive legal protection.
Everyone shall respect the freedoms and rights of others. No one shall be compelled to do that which is not required by law.
Any limitation upon the exercise of constitutional freedoms and rights may be imposed only by statute, and only when necessary in a democratic state for the protection of its security or public order, or to protect the natural environment, health or public morals, or the freedoms and rights of other persons. Such limitations shall not violate the essence of freedoms and rights.”
Section 36 of the Press Act 1984 reads as follows:
“1.  The press may publish paid advertisements and notices.
Press advertisements shall not be in breach of the laws or of the principles of social co-existence.
Advertisements shall be put in such a form as to make it clear that they are not to be identified with the editorial content.
The publisher and editor shall have the right to refuse the publication of an advertisement if its content or form is incompatible with the editorial profile or character of the newspaper.”
In a decision of 14 October 2004 (CZP 67/05) the Supreme Court examined a legal question submitted to it by the Warsaw Court of Appeal in the applicant’s case against Nasz Dziennik. In its request the Court of Appeal summarised the difficulties arising in connection with the interpretation of section 36 of the Press Act. On the one hand, section 36 provided, in paragraph 1, that newspaper publishers had a right to publish advertisements. This formulation suggested that they were free to decide on the choice of advertisement to be published.
On the other hand, the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 4 of that section, in so far as they defined situations where a publisher could refuse to publish an advertisement, suggested that such refusal was possible only where that advertisement as proposed failed to meet the requirements laid down in those provisions. Otherwise, publishers were obliged under the provisions to publish an advertisement as long as it had been duly paid for. This conclusion was further strengthened by the fact that under paragraph 2 of section 44 of the Act publishers did not bear any legal responsibility for the content of paid advertisements.
The Court of Appeal noted in its question that the freedom of expression of the person trying to place an advertisement had to be weighed against the publisher’s commercial freedom. It further observed that if decisive weight was given to the publisher’s freedom to choose the advertisements to be published, a form of unlimited control of content by private commercial entities could result, comparable to preventive censorship.
The Supreme Court endorsed the reasoning of the requesting court that section 36 of the Press Act could, and indeed did, give rise to discrepancies in its judicial interpretation. A literal interpretation a contrario indicated that a refusal to publish an advertisement was justified only when one of the four conditions laid down in paragraphs 2 and 4 was not fulfilled. Had the legislator accepted that publishers were completely free in deciding whether to publish an advertisement or to refuse its publication, it would have been redundant to list the requirements that an advertisement had to comply with in order to be published. Hence, the majority of legal writers were of the view, which was apparently also shared by the requesting Court of Appeal, that this provision of the Press Act limited the publisher’s freedom in respect of commercial advertisements.
The Supreme Court expressed the view that it was difficult to accept such an opinion. It observed that many arguments could be adduced in support of a contrary opinion. However, in the circumstances of the case it was not necessary for that court to give a reply to the legal question posed by the Court of Appeal as such a reply was not necessary for a decision on the merits of the case. The outcome of the case pending before the Court of Appeal hinged only on that court’s assessment of whether the advertisement as proposed was in breach of the applicable law, not on the clarification of the scope of the publisher’s duty to publish a paid advertisement.
The Supreme Court made similar observations as to the interpretation of section 36 of the Press Act in its two judgments given on 18 January 2007 concerning the applicant’s cases (I CSK 351/6 and 376/06). The applicant’s claim to have the advertisement published was rejected in both cases.