The case originated in an application (no. 13311/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Chinese national, Mr Jingcai Liu (“the applicant”), on 6 March 2010.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms Y.V. Yefremova, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 6 July 2015 the complaints concerning conditions of detention and prohibition of family visits were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Sovetskaya Gavan, Khabarovsk Region.
On 22 October 2009 the applicant was arrested and brought to the Khabarovsk Administrative Detention Centre where he stayed until 27 November 2009.
Since 22 October 2009 he had been detained with more than 12 inmates in the cell no. 9 designed for 12 persons and had to take turns to sleep. A month after he had been transferred to another cell with the area of 6 square meters which he had shared with another inmate.
The detention centre had no shower facilities or a place for outdoor walks. The applicant’s cell was cold and damp, iron banks were not covered by mattresses. Toilets were not separated from the living area, and the persons using them were in full view of others. Food supply was inadequate, the applicant was served meals only once a day and had no drinking water from within the cell.
The Government submitted that the Khabarovsk Administrative Detention Centre comprised two cells: no. 5 with the area of 14.6 square meters for 3 inmates and no. 6 with the area of 18 square meters for 4 inmates. There was no overcrowding; the toilet had been separate by a shoulder length fence. The detainees may take a shower once a week. The temperature was 23oC, there were kettles with boiled water in the cells.
On 26 October 2009 the applicant’s wife, Mrs Liu, sought to visit the applicant but was refused.
On 6 and 10 November 2009 the applicant’s wife filed complaints with the Khabarovsk Prosecutor’s Office stating that she had not been allowed to see the applicant.
In August 2010 the applicant brought a civil claim for compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage, stating that the conditions of his detention had been inhuman and degrading, and that the prohibition on family visits was unlawful.
On 9 February 2011 the Industrialnyy District Court of Khabarovsk dismissed his claim. Relying on the statements of a representative of the detention centre, the court held that the Internal Rules of the Administrative Detention Centres approved by the Decree of the Ministry of Defence of Russia of 6 June 2000 no. 605 dsp (“the Rules”) did not make provision for family visits, and that the applicant’s right to family life had not been breached as he had met his wife during court hearings.
On 18 May 2011 the Khabarovsk Regional Court upheld the above decision on appeal.
Domestic provisions relating to conditions of detention are described in Ananyev and Others v. Russia (nos. 42525/07 and 60800/08, §§ 25-54, 10 January 2012). Moreover, according to the Rules every detainee shall be provided with not less than four square meters of personal space; the cells shall be equipped in accordance with the standards applied to temporary detention centres (points 18 and 19).
The Rules provide that the detainees may talk on the phone with their next-of-kin for up to three minutes only once during all period of their detention, except for intercity calls which are not allowed (point 25).