The case originated in an application (no. 41828/10) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Georgiy Grigoryevich Gurenko (“the applicant”) on 4 May 2010.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not benefited from adequate medical care in detention.
On 31 May 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1). Further to the applicant’s request, the Court granted priority to the application (Rule 41 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1941 and lived in the , Kursk Region. He was serving a sentence in a correctional colony in the Kursk Region until his release in April 2012.
On 29 September 2006 the Kursk Leninskiy District Court found the applicant guilty of having beaten his female partner to death in a drunken rage. The applicant was sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment. The judgment became final on 14 December 2006 when the  upheld it on appeal.
According to the applicant, following his arrest in January 2006 he was detained in inhuman conditions in facility no. IZ-46/1 in . On 26 December 2006 he was transferred to a correctional colony to serve his sentence.
As is stated in the applicant’s medical records, on 28 November 2001 he suffered a large transmural myocardial infarction and underwent lengthy treatment in a cardiology clinic. Having been examined in October 2002 by a cardiologist, the applicant was diagnosed with coronary artery disease, postinfarction cardiosclerosis and cardiac aneurysm, a severe form of chronic arterial hypertension and a latent form of urolithiasis. He was classed as permanently (category 2) disabled as a result of his illness.
In March 2005 the applicant had another myocardial infarction.
On 2 January 2006, the day following his arrest, an ambulance was called for the applicant, who had complained of a severe heartache. Having learned that the applicant suffered from stage 3 arterial hypertension and coronary artery disease, the emergency doctors provided him with urgent assistance and authorised his further detention in facility no. IZ-46/1.
Having been admitted to the detention facility, the applicant did not cease to complain about his state of health. He claimed to be experiencing a severe pressing chest pain and shortness of breath. Following an examination by the head of the medical unit of the detention facility ten days after the applicant’s admission, his diagnosis of severe essential hypertension (stage 2-3) with a very high risk of development of further cardiovascular complications was confirmed. The applicant was prescribed treatment with four medicines (nitroglycerine, to be taken in case of a sharp chest pain, aspirin, Nitrosorbide (isosorbide dinitrate) and Diroton (lisinopril/hydrochlorothiazide)).
On 19 January 2006 the applicant complained to a prison physician on duty that he was experiencing a sharp pain in the left side of his chest reverberating into the left arm and shoulder blade. Having copied the diagnosis and the treatment to be followed from the medical certificate issued by the head of the medical unit on the previous occasion, the physician sent the applicant back to the cell. Subsequent medical examinations by prison physicians ended with a similar result. The applicant was told to continue with the treatment prescribed by the head of the medical unit.
In March 2006 the applicant complained to warders of angina which he could only relieve with nitroglycerine, occasional loss of consciousness, acute elevation of the pulse, reflex pain in the left arm, pain in the eyes, and extremely high blood pressure. On 28 March 2006 he was transferred to the therapy ward of the Kursk Regional prison hospital, where he remained for two months with his state being considered moderately severe. The prison doctors’ diagnosis was: “coronary artery disease, recurrent myocardial infarction, extensive transmural scarring of the anterior, lateral and frontal walls of the left ventricle of the heart, postinfarction cardiosclerosis (myocardial infarctions in 2001 and 2005), stable exertional angina, chronic aneurysm of the left ventricle of the heart, stage 3 arterial hypertension, [and] singular premature ventricular complex”. During the entire period of his admission to the hospital the applicant had eleven electrocardiogram examinations (hereinafter – “ECG tests”). His blood and urine were also clinically tested on several occasions. However, he was never examined by a cardiologist. The medical team attending on him included general physicians, the head of the therapy ward, a dermatologist, an ophthalmologist and a dentist, depending on which medical specialist was on duty on the day of the applicant’s examination. During each examination the applicant continued complaining of angina, fatigue, shortness of breath and that his “heart had stopped working [properly]”.
On release from the prison hospital on 26 May 2006, the applicant’s condition was considered satisfactory with the state of his health having improved during treatment in the hospital, despite his having continued to suffer from fatigue and an aching pain in the chest during physical exercise. The release certificate also indicated that, in addition to the two myocardial infarctions in 2001 and 2005, the applicant had suffered a third one in 2006. He was prescribed symptomatic treatment with a long list of medicines.
Following his release from the hospital the applicant continued complaining of angina. He was recommended close supervision by prison medical personnel and was prescribed treatment with four heart medicines. On 3 July 2006 the applicant complained to the attending prison doctor of a severe headache and pain in the chest. He was given a shot of magnesium solution.
On 20 July 2006 the applicant suffered a heart attack during a trial hearing. Having heard the applicant’s complaints of severe chest pain for the last three days, shortness of breath, sweating, dizziness and elevated heart rate, emergency doctors called to the courthouse suspected that he could have suffered another myocardial infarction. Having provided the applicant with urgent medical assistance they took him to the medical unit of detention facility no. IZ-46/1. He was to remain under close supervision by the prison medical personnel and urgent admission to a hospital was recommended, should his condition deteriorate.
According to the applicant’s medical records, the following medical examination took place on 3 August 2006, when a physician from the Kursk Regional prison hospital came to the detention facility to check on the applicant. Having noted that the applicant had already survived three myocardial infarctions, the physician recommended his admission to the hospital when the convoy service could organise his transfer. Four days later the applicant was sent to the Kursk Regional prison hospital, where he remained until 25 August 2006.
As is clear from medical record no. 767 drawn up in the hospital and from the Government’s submissions, while he underwent a number of clinical blood and urine tests, as well as a chest X-ray exam, the applicant was not subjected to ECG testing in the hospital. Similarly, having been examined by a number of medical specialists, including an ophthalmologist, a neurologist and a dentist, the applicant was not seen by a cardiologist during that stay in the hospital.
The Government’s submissions do not contain any further records of the applicant’s medical examinations or treatment until his transfer to correctional colony no. 2 in the Kursk Region on 26 December 2006. On admission to the colony the applicant was placed on a list of inmates requiring close medical supervision, given the seriousness of his condition. Following a complaint of dizziness and discomfort in the chest, the applicant was taken to the medical unit in the colony and was advised to continue with the treatment with four heart medicines. An examination by a prison physician five days later resulted in an amendment of the treatment with the introduction of an increased dose of medication. During a subsequent examination a week later new drugs were introduced to the applicant’s regimen. He was released from the medical unit on 19 January 2007.
On 26 February 2007 the applicant was examined by a medical panel comprising a number of specialists, including a physician, a surgeon, an ophthalmologist, an otolaryngologist, a tuberculosis specialist, a physiatrist, a dentist and a drug addiction specialist. The panel confirmed the diagnosis of a severe case of arterial hypertension, a coronary disease and postinfarction cardiosclerosis and declared the applicant permanently disabled. Another examination by a physician took place on 20 March 2007 with the diagnosis and recommendations for treatment remaining without any amendments. A handwritten note enclosed by the Government with their submissions showed that a large number of medicines required for the applicant’s treatment had been provided to the detention facility by the applicant’s son.
In April 2007, following an acute deterioration of his condition, the applicant was again admitted to the colony medical unit for treatment. As is evident from extract no. 315 of his medical records, during a one-month stay in the unit the applicant was not examined by a cardiologist. A record of the applicant’s ECG testing could not be interpreted, as the unit did not have the necessary specialist. Ultrasound scanning was also impossible, as the unit did not employ the required specialist either.
After his release from the medical unit, the applicant was examined once a month by a colony physician or a drug addition specialist who was acting as an on-duty doctor on the relevant days.
On 30 August 2007 the applicant arrived at the colony medical unit complaining of a sharp pain in the heart area which he could not relieve with any heart medicine. He was immediately accepted by the unit for inpatient treatment. Having been examined by a prison physician on the following day, the applicant was released on the basis that the examination had not revealed any negative changes in his condition.
In October 2007 the applicant sought assistance from the medical unit once every few days, complaining of high blood pressure, angina and heavy breathing. A prison physician, a medical assistant or a drug addiction specialist measured his blood pressure and slightly amended his drug or food regimens.
Following a number of repeated, similar complaints being made by the applicant between January and April 2008 and his subsequent examinations by prison physicians, a medical assistant or tuberculosis specialist, he was sent to the Kursk Regional prison hospital for treatment on 15 April 2008. On admission to the hospital, the examining physician noted that the applicant’s hypertension had progressed to stage 3. The applicant was visited by a hospital physician nearly every day and underwent clinical urine and blood testing. He was not seen by a cardiologist but received ECG testing once, on the day following his admission to the hospital. On 13 May 2008 the attending physician performed a visual examination of the applicant and measured his pulse and blood pressure. Having been prescribed treatment with long-term nitrates and admission to the colony medical unit for inpatient treatment, the applicant was released from the hospital on 15 May 2008, despite his complaints of stabbing pain in the heart area, dizziness and blackouts.
The applicant’s medical records do not show that the recommendation that he be admitted to the medical unit was followed. They list six consultations with a prison physician between the end of May 2008 and March 2009. The entries in the records indicate that the consultations comprised a discussion about the state of the applicant’s health and the progress of his condition, and obtaining an authorisation to administer an injection of a painkiller in the event that the applicant experienced particularly strong pain.
It appears that the applicant suffered another episode of illness towards the end of March 2009, having complained to the colony staff of severe angina. For three days he was given injections of a painkiller and provided with Diroton to stop the attack. The prison physician relieved the applicant from having to take part in any type of activities related to inmates’ everyday life, only authorising him to attend the morning roll call. On 7 April 2009 the applicant was admitted to the Kursk Regional prison hospital where he remained until 21 April 2009, having undergone ECG testing and having received treatment with nitrates.
On 14 September 2009 the applicant was admitted to the colony medical unit for inpatient treatment. The medical personnel recorded that his blood pressure was very high and prescribed treatment with nitrates and antihypertensive medicines. Physicians and medical assistants continued recording episodes of hypertension and heart attacks between October 2009 and February 2010, having provided symptomatic treatment. The applicant remained in the unit until 27 January 2010.
In April 2010 the applicant was transferred to correctional colony no. 9 in the Kursk Region. A colony tuberculosis specialist who had examined the applicant on his admission confirmed the previous diagnosis, having noted the negative progress of his arterial hypertension and chronic heart disease. In April 2010 the applicant suffered two episodes of hypertensive emergency, having also complained of periodic angina. Towards the end of May 2010 he had another episode of hypertensive emergency and heart attack, having for several consecutive days experienced pain in the chest, headache, dizziness, nausea and angina which could only be relieved with an injection of papaverine. Colony physicians also provided the applicant with aspirin and nitrates and planned to have him transferred to a prison hospital for in-depth examinations and treatment.
Between 1 and 25 June 2010 the applicant was admitted to the therapy ward of the Kursk Regional prison hospital, where he received treatment by the hospital’s physicians. On admission to the hospital the attending physician noted the critical development of the applicant’s arterial hypertension, with a blood pressure reading of 220 over 120, and recommended daily monitoring of the applicant’s condition by way of ECG tests and measuring of his blood pressure, an ultrasound scan of his heart accompanied by a Doppler examination, a scan of the major blood vessels of the heart, and examinations by a cardiologist, a neurologist and a cardiac surgeon. There is no indication in the applicant’s medical records that the recommendations, save for the performance of two ECG tests, were complied with. On the basis of the two ECG tests performed on 3 and 11 June 2010, an ultrasound examination of the abdominal cavity, and clinical blood and urine exams and visual examinations, the attending physician authorised the applicant’s release from the hospital on 24 June 2010. During the last consultation with the physician, the applicant continued complaining of pressing chest pain, heart pain and a burning sensation behind the ribs which even arose during simple physical exercise, such as a slow walk for ten minutes or using stairs. He also stressed that he was constantly experiencing feelings of fear and panic attacks at night, when he was covered in a cold sweat and shivering.
Following his release from the hospital and until February 2011 the applicant sought urgent medical assistance at least once a month, having persistently complained of chest pain, headache, shortness of breath, dizziness and fatigue. Emergency care, including injections with muscular relaxants to arrest acute arterial spasm and provision of nitrates and medicines to lower his blood pressure, was provided each time by a colony tuberculosis specialist or by a psychiatrist. Having received emergency treatment, the applicant was sent back to the colony unit with the recommendation to continue taking his medicines until the next episode of illness requiring the urgent attention of the medical staff. The hypertensive emergencies recurred in May and July 2011, with similar emergency actions being taken by a colony psychiatrist or the head of the medical unit to stop the attacks.
The hypertensive emergency in July 2011 was the most recent attack of the illness described by the Government in their submissions to the Court. According to them, the applicant had remained under the supervision of a colony physician, with his condition being considered satisfactory. He had received “necessary” inpatient medical treatment.
According to the applicant, his condition had continued deteriorating in view of the fact that the colony and the prison hospital had not been equipped to address his needs, as they had been lacking necessary equipment, specialists, including a cardiologist, and had been unable to provide emergency resuscitation assistance if need be. His complaints to various State authorities, including the Russian Ministry of Health and Social Development, the deputy head of the Kursk Regional Service for the Execution of Sentences, prosecution authorities and the administration of the detention facilities, had either not brought about any response or had been addressed in a very superficial manner. For instance, in January 2009 the applicant had lodged an action with the Kursk Leninskiy District Court, complaining of inadequate medical care in detention and seeking compensation for damage. His complaint had been returned with a letter on 4 February 2009. While the letter of 4 February 2009 was submitted to the Court, a copy of the decision disallowing the complaint was not provided by either party.
In response to another complaint by the applicant, on 1 July 2009 the deputy head of the Kursk Regional Service for the Execution of Sentences sent a letter, which read as follows:
“Your complaint, sent to the head of the medical department of the Kursk Regional Service for the Execution of Sentences, has been examined by staff members of [that] department.
An attending doctor, and not a patient, is competent to prescribe diagnostic examinations. By virtue of paragraph 125 of the Rules of Internal Order in Correctional Facilities ... you may receive additional prophylactic medical treatment (including a consultation with an independent medical specialist – a cardiologist), having paid for it yourself.”
In his most recent letter to the Court in May 2012, the applicant informed it that upon a request from the administration of the prison hospital he had been released from detention in view of the seriousness of his condition. He attached a copy of a decision issued on 29 March 2012 by the Kursk Leninskiy District Court authorising his release. As is stated in that decision, having heard the representatives of the prison hospital, who had argued that the applicant was suffering from a very serious heart condition which, under domestic laws and regulations, precluded his serving the sentence, the fact that he could not receive the necessary medical assistance in detention and that the prognosis for his condition was unfavourable, the District Court accepted the request for release.
Having been released from detention, the applicant was immediately admitted to the cardiology department of a hospital close to his place of residence. It also appears from the medical documents submitted that upon his release prison doctors advised him to consult an oncologist. The applicant stated that he had followed that advice and had been diagnosed with cancer.
Russian law gives detailed guidelines for provision of medical assistance to detained individuals. These guidelines, found in the joint Decree of the Ministry of Health and Social Development and the Ministry of Justice no. 640/190 on Organisation of Medical Assistance to Individuals Serving Sentences or Detained (“the Regulation”), enacted on 17 October 2005, are applicable without exception to all detainees. In particular, section III of the Regulation sets out the procedure for initial steps to be taken by medical personnel of a detention facility on admission of a detainee. On arrival at a temporary detention facility all detainees should be subjected to preliminary medical examination before they are placed in cells shared by other inmates. The examination is performed with the aim of identifying individuals suffering from contagious diseases and those in need of urgent medical assistance. Particular attention should be paid to individuals suffering from contagious conditions. No later than three days after the detainee’s arrival at the detention facility he should receive an in-depth medical examination, including X-ray. During the in-depth examination a prison doctor should record the detainee’s complaints, study his medical and personal history, record injuries if present, and recent tattoos and schedule additional medical procedures, if necessary. A prison doctor should also authorise laboratory analyses to identify sexually transmitted diseases, HIV, tuberculosis and other illnesses.
Subsequent medical examinations of detainees are performed at least twice a year or on detainees’ complaints. If a detainee’s state of health has deteriorated, medical examinations and assistance should be provided by medical personnel of the detention facility. In such cases a medical examination should include a general medical check-up and additional methods of testing, if necessary, with the participation of particular medical specialists. The results of the examinations should be recorded in the detainee’s medical history. The detainee should be comprehensively informed about the results of the medical examinations.
Section III of the Regulation also sets the procedure for cases of refusals by detainees to undergo a medical examination or treatment. In each case of refusal, a respective entry should be made in the detainees’ medical record. A prison doctor should comprehensively explain the detainee consequences of his refusal to undergo the medical procedure.
Detainees take prescribed medicines in the presence of a doctor. In a limited number of cases the head of the medical department of the detention facility may authorise his medical personnel to hand over a daily dose of medicines to the detainee for unobserved intake.
The Rules of Internal Order in Correctional Facilities, in force since 3 November 2005, lay down regulations determining every aspect of inmates’ lives in correctional facilities. In particular, paragraph 125 of the Rules provides that inmates who are willing and able to pay for it may receive additional medical assistance. In such a situation, medical specialists from a State or municipal civilian hospital are to be called to the medical unit of the correctional facility where the inmate is being detained.
Prosecutors Act (Federal Law no. 2202-1 of 17 January 1992)
Chapter 25 sets out the procedure for the judicial review of complaints about decisions, acts or omissions of the State and municipal authorities and officials. Pursuant to Ruling no. 2 of 10 February 2009 by the Plenary Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, complaints by suspects, defendants and convicts of inappropriate conditions of detention must be examined in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 25 (point 7).
A citizen may lodge a complaint about an act or decision by any State authority which he believes has breached his rights or freedoms, either with a court of general jurisdiction or by sending it to the directly higher official or authority (Article 254). The complaint may concern any decision, act or omission which has violated rights or freedoms, has impeded the exercise of rights or freedoms, or has imposed a duty or liability on the citizen (Article 255).
The complaint must be lodged within three months of the date on which the citizen learnt of the breach of his rights. The time period may be extended for valid reasons (Article 256). The complaint must be examined within ten days; if necessary, in the absence of the respondent authority or official (Article 257).
The burden of proof as to the lawfulness of the contested decision, act or omission lies with the authority or official concerned. If necessary, the court may obtain evidence of its own initiative (point 20 of Ruling no. 2).
If the court finds the complaint justified, it issues a decision requiring the authority or official to fully remedy the breach of the citizen’s rights (Article 258 § 1). The court determines the time-limit for remedying the violation with regard to the nature of the complaint and the efforts that need to be deployed to remedy the violation in full (point 28 of Ruling no. 2).
The decision is dispatched to the head of the authority concerned, to the official concerned or to their superiors, within three days of its entry into force. The court and the complainant must be notified of the enforcement of the decision no later than one month after its receipt (Article 258 §§ 2 and 3).
Damage caused to the person or property of a citizen shall be compensated in full by the tortfeasor. The tortfeasor is not liable for damage if he proves that the damage has been caused through no fault of his own (Article 1064 §§ 1, 2).
State and municipal bodies and officials shall be liable for damage caused to a citizen by their unlawful actions or omissions (Article 1069). Irrespective of any fault by State officials, the State or regional treasury are liable for damage sustained by a citizen on account of: (i) unlawful criminal conviction or prosecution; (ii) unlawful application of a preventive measure; and (iii) unlawful administrative punishment (Article 1070).
Compensation for non-pecuniary damage is effected in accordance with Article 151 of the Civil Code and is unrelated to any award in respect of pecuniary damage (Article 1099). Irrespective of the tortfeasor’s fault, non-pecuniary damage shall be compensated if the damage was caused: (i) by a hazardous device; (ii) in the event of unlawful conviction or prosecution or unlawful application of a preventive measure or unlawful administrative punishment: or (iii) through dissemination of information which was damaging to the victim’s honour, dignity or reputation (Article 1100).
The European Prison Rules provide a framework of guiding principles for health services. The relevant extracts from the Rules read as follows:
“Health care
Prison authorities shall safeguard the health of all prisoners in their care.
Organisation of prison health care
1 Medical services in prison shall be organised in close relation with the general health administration of the community or nation.
2 Health policy in prisons shall be integrated into, and compatible with, national health policy.
3 Prisoners shall have access to the health services available in the country without discrimination on the grounds of their legal situation.
4 Medical services in prison shall seek to detect and treat physical or mental illnesses or defects from which prisoners may suffer.
5 All necessary medical, surgical and psychiatric services including those available in the community shall be provided to the prisoner for that purpose.
Medical and health care personnel
1 Every prison shall have the services of at least one qualified general medical practitioner.
2 Arrangements shall be made to ensure at all times that a qualified medical practitioner is available without delay in cases of urgency.
...
4 Every prison shall have personnel suitably trained in health care.
Duties of the medical practitioner
1 The medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall see every prisoner as soon as possible after admission, and shall examine them unless this is obviously unnecessary.
...
3 When examining a prisoner the medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall pay particular attention to:
..;
diagnosing physical or mental illness and taking all measures necessary for its treatment and for the continuation of existing medical treatment;
...
1 The medical practitioner shall have the care of the physical and mental health of the prisoners and shall see, under the conditions and with a frequency consistent with health care standards in the community, all sick prisoners, all who report illness or injury and any prisoner to whom attention is specially directed.
...
Health care provision
1 Sick prisoners who require specialist treatment shall be transferred to specialised institutions or to civil hospitals when such treatment is not available in prison.
2 Where a prison service has its own hospital facilities, they shall be adequately staffed and equipped to provide the prisoners referred to them with appropriate care and treatment.”
The complexity and importance of health care services in detention facilities was discussed by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture in its 3rd General Report (CPT/Inf (93) 12 - Publication Date: 4 June 1993). The following are the extracts from the Report:
“33. When entering prison, all prisoners should without delay be seen by a member of the establishment’s health care service. In its reports to date the CPT has recommended that every newly arrived prisoner be properly interviewed and, if necessary, physically examined by a medical doctor as soon as possible after his admission. It should be added that in some countries, medical screening on arrival is carried out by a fully qualified nurse, who reports to a doctor. This latter approach could be considered as a more efficient use of available resources.
It is also desirable that a leaflet or booklet be handed to prisoners on their arrival, informing them of the existence and operation of the health care service and reminding them of basic measures of hygiene.
While in custody, prisoners should be able to have access to a doctor at any time, irrespective of their detention regime... The health care service should be so organised as to enable requests to consult a doctor to be met without undue delay...
A prison’s health care service should at least be able to provide regular out-patient consultations and emergency treatment (of course, in addition there may often be a hospital-type unit with beds)... Further, prison doctors should be able to call upon the services of specialists.
As regards emergency treatment, a doctor should always be on call. Further, someone competent to provide first aid should always be present on prison premises, preferably someone with a recognised nursing qualification.
Out-patient treatment should be supervised, as appropriate, by health care staff; in many cases it is not sufficient for the provision of follow-up care to depend upon the initiative being taken by the prisoner.
The direct support of a fully-equipped hospital service should be available, in either a civil or prison hospital...
A prison health care service should be able to provide medical treatment and nursing care, as well as appropriate diets, physiotherapy, rehabilitation or any other necessary special facility, in conditions comparable to those enjoyed by patients in the outside community. Provision in terms of medical, nursing and technical staff, as well as premises, installations and equipment, should be geared accordingly.
There should be appropriate supervision of the pharmacy and of the distribution of medicines. Further, the preparation of medicines should always be entrusted to qualified staff (pharmacist/nurse, etc.). ...
A medical file should be compiled for each patient, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the patient’s evolution and of any special examinations he has undergone. In the event of a transfer, the file should be forwarded to the doctors in the receiving establishment.
Further, daily registers should be kept by health care teams, in which particular incidents relating to the patients should be mentioned. Such registers are useful in that they provide an overall view of the health care situation in the prison, at the same time as highlighting specific problems which may arise.
The smooth operation of a health care service presupposes that doctors and nursing staff are able to meet regularly and to form a working team under the authority of a senior doctor in charge of the service. ...”