The case originated in an application (no. 36538/17) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr G.S. (“the applicant”), on 22 May 2017. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr N. Bibilashvili and Mr Sh. Manelidze, lawyers practising in Tbilisi, Georgia. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms I. Stancheva-Chinova of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the Bulgarian authorities’ decision to extradite him to Iran would, if implemented, expose him to corporal punishment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention in that country.
On 30 May 2017 the Court, acting pursuant to a request by the applicant, indicated to the Government, under Rule 39, not to extradite him to Iran until the conclusion of these proceedings. The Court gave priority to the application under Rule 41 and gave the Government notice of it under Rule 54 § 2 (b).
On 31 July 2017 the Georgian Government, who had been advised of their right to submit written comments (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1), said that they would not seek to exercise this right, adding that they expected the Court to adhere to its consistent approach to extradition cases raising issues under Article 3 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1951 and is currently detained in Sofia Prison.
On 17 December 2016 the applicant took a flight from Kutaisi, Georgia, to Sofia, Bulgaria. When trying to pass through the passport control at Sofia Airport, he was arrested pursuant to a red notice issued by the National Central Bureau of Interpol for Iran on 14 September 2016.
According to the red notice, on 24 June 2016 the applicant and another person had stolen by means of trickery a bag containing 50,000 euros from a foreign-exchange office in Tehran. The applicant’s alleged accomplice had been arrested, but the applicant had fled Iran the same day.
The notice went on to say that the offence in connection with which the applicant was being sought was one under Article 656 of the Iranian Penal Code (see paragraphs 38-40 below), and that the maximum penalty in respect of it was three years’ imprisonment.
The next day, 18 December 2016, the National Central Bureau of Interpol for Iran confirmed that the applicant was still being sought and sent to the Bulgarian authorities a copy, in Persian, of the warrant for his arrest.
The same day the Bulgarian prosecuting authorities detained the applicant for seventy-two hours. On 21 December 2016 they asked the Sofia City Court to place him in detention for up to forty days pending receipt of a formal extradition request by the Iranian authorities.
The Sofia City Court heard the prosecuting authorities’ application the same day. In his closing statement, the applicant said:
“[S]ending me to Iran would be unfair, because they have no laws, they decide as they please, they will ascribe this to me and I will not make it home. You know their laws! I have no one to protect me there. They have no laws and judges, but decide as they please. Can you give the sheep to the wolves?”
Having deliberated immediately after the hearing, the Sofia City Court allowed the prosecuting authorities’ request. It noted, inter alia, that at that stage it was not yet deciding whether to extradite the applicant but simply whether to keep him in custody in the meantime.
The applicant’s court-appointed counsel appealed against that decision. However, when the appeal was heard by the Sofia Court of Appeal on 27 December 2016, the applicant said that he had not instructed the court-appointed counsel to lodge it and wished to be represented by counsel of his own choice. In view of the applicant’s statement, the court discontinued the appeal proceedings.
In January 2017 the Iranian authorities submitted to the Bulgarian authorities an extradition request in respect of the applicant. The request stated that the act allegedly committed by him constituted an offence under Article 656 § 4 of the Iranian Penal Code (see paragraphs 38-40 below), and specified that according to the text of that provision the punishment envisaged under it was six months’ to three years’ imprisonment.
In the request the Iranian authorities assured their Bulgarian counterparts that the applicant would not face torture or inhuman treatment if extradited to Iran. They also expressed their willingness to honour extradition requests by Bulgaria. On that basis, on 26 January 2017 the Bulgarian Minister of Justice confirmed that de facto reciprocity existed between Bulgaria and Iran with respect to extradition.
Extradition proceedings against the applicant were opened in the Sofia City Court on 29 January 2017. He had counsel of his own choice and was given an interpreter into Russian, a language that he apparently speaks.
The same day the prosecuting authorities presented to the applicant and his counsel the extradition request and the documents enclosed with it (see paragraphs 15 and 16 above).
The prosecution also asked the court to keep the applicant in detention until the conclusion of the extradition proceedings. The court allowed that request the same day, 29 January 2017.
The court heard the extradition case on 6 and 28 February, 23 March and 12 April 2017.
The line of argument taken by counsel for the applicant from the outset was that the evidence enclosed with the extradition request left some doubt about the actual date and time of the offence the applicant had allegedly committed, and that he could not have committed it on the date and at the time initially specified because he had by then already left Tehran. The prosecution urged the court to invite the Iranian authorities to clarify the date and time of the commission of the alleged offence.
The court did so, in the exercise of its powers under section 17(3) of the Extradition and European Arrest Warrant Act 2005 (see paragraph 34 below), and in a diplomatic note of 5 April 2017 the Iranian authorities said that the applicant had committed the offence at 1.40 p.m. on 23 June 2016.
In his closing statement on 12 April 2017 counsel for the applicant argued that the extradition request, even as supplemented later, failed in various ways to comply with the formal requirements. He said that doubts about the date and time of the commission of the alleged offence – 23 or 24 June 2016 – persisted, and that the available evidence gave rise to misgivings about whether the applicant had really committed the offence. He also pointed out that although Bulgaria had extradition agreements with many States, Iran was not among them.
The same day the Sofia City Court allowed the request for the applicant’s extradition to Iran. It found, inter alia, that the extradition request met all formal requirements, and that it was permissible to proceed on the basis of the de facto reciprocity between Bulgaria and Iran. It also noted that the Iranian authorities had given assurances that the applicant would not face torture or inhuman treatment, and that there were no reasons to suspect that he would be exposed to a real risk of such treatment. In particular, Iranian law only envisaged imprisonment in respect of the alleged offence. It was not for the extradition court to delve into the merits of the criminal case.
Counsel for the applicant appealed to the Sofia Court of Appeal. He reiterated that the applicant had already left Tehran at the time when the alleged offence had been committed.
The appeal hearing took place on 9 May 2017. Counsel for the applicant made the same points as those that he had made at first instance (see paragraphs 21 and 23 above).
In a final decision of the same date, the Sofia Court of Appeal upheld the Sofia City Court’s decision to allow the extradition request, for essentially the same reasons. It likewise noted that according to the information from the Iranian authorities, the punishment possibly awaiting the applicant was a term of imprisonment.
The court also decided to keep the applicant in detention pending his extradition to the Iranian authorities.
Section 7 of the Extradition and European Arrest Warrant Act 2005 sets out circumstances in which requests for extradition from Bulgaria must be refused. These include a risk that the requested person would be subjected to “violence, torture, or inhuman or degrading treatment in the requesting State”, or a failure to guarantee his or her “rights in relation to the criminal proceedings and the execution of the punishment in accordance with the requirements of international law” (point 5).
This provision is similar to its predecessor, Article 439b § 2 (3) of the 1974 Code of Criminal Procedure, added in 1997. A leading textbook on the subject (А. Гиргинов, Екстрадицията по българското право, Сиела, 1998 г., p. 113) commented that its text was based on Article 3 (f) of the Model Treaty on Extradition adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1990 (Un Doc. ).
Another textbook (А. Гиргинов, Международна правна помощ по наказателни дела, Софи-Р, 2012 г., pp. 45-46) said that section 7(5) of the 2005 Act had been put in place in execution of Bulgaria’s obligations under Article 3 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (see paragraph 60 below), which it had signed and ratified in 1986.
Section 9(3) of the 2005 Act sets out the types of documents which must be enclosed with an extradition request. These include a description of the offence under the law of the requesting State and a copy of the applicable legal provisions (section 9(3)(2)).
Extradition requests must be made through the Bulgarian Ministry of Justice (section 9(1) of the 2005 Act). The Minister or an authorised official checks the request and the enclosed documents. If they do not meet the requirements of section 9, he or she can return them to the requesting State with an indication of the deficient points (section 10 of the 2005 Act).
Under section 17(3) of the 2005 Act, the court hearing the extradition case can seek additional information from the requesting State. This information can relate to the matters under section 9(3) (see реш. № 44 от 19.03.2010 г. по в. ч. н. д. № 70/2010 г., ВнАС, and прот. опр. от 28.06.2016 г. по ч. н. д. № 2805/2016 г., СГС).
In a 2009 case, faced with deficient information about the criminal law of the requesting State, the Sofia Court of Appeal repeatedly sought clarifications and, in the absence of a satisfactory response, refused the extradition request (see реш. № 236 от 10.06.2009 г. по в. н. ч. д. № 90/2009 г., САС).
Section 20(3) of the 2005 Act provides that the decisions of the courts of appeal in extradition cases are final. According to the Supreme Court of Cassation’s case-law, such final extradition decisions cannot be reopened in any circumstances (see реш. № 135 от 26.03.2013 г. по н. д. № 194/2013 г., ВКС, III н. о.).
It appears that in recent years, apart from this case, the Bulgarian courts have only twice had occasion to deal with requests for extradition to Iran, both times again on the basis of de facto reciprocity. In both cases the Sofia Court of Appeal refused the requests, chiefly on the basis that the requested persons had obtained international protection. In the second case the court also found that the requested person would risk torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in Iran owing to his political views (see реш. № 129 от 08.04.2015 г. по в. ч. н. д. № 306/2015 г., САС, and реш. № 279 от 23.09.2015 г. по в. ч. н. д. № 881/2015 г., САС).
According to an English translation of Part Five of Iran’s Penal Code, published in 2013 on the website of the Iran Human Rights Documentation Center, a non-governmental organisation based in Connecticut, United States of America, Article 656 § 4 of the Code reads:
“If a theft does not meet the requirements for the hadd punishment and satisfies the following conditions, the offender shall be sentenced to six months to three years’ imprisonment and up to 74 lashes:
...
The thieves are two or more persons.”
The text of Part Five of the Code, published in Persian on a website operated under the auspices of the Iranian legislature, also says that theft under that provision is punishable with six months’ to three years’ imprisonment and up to seventy-four lashes.
So does the text of the Code published in Persian on a website operated under the auspices of the judiciary in Tehran.
According to a 2014 report (Iran’s Penal Code: Report on Conflicts With Human Rights Law) by Südwind, a non-governmental organisation based in Austria which has consultative status in the United Nations Human Rights Council, in Iran theft which does not amount to hadd but merely to ta’zir is punishable with up to seventy-four lashes (rather than amputation, which is the punishment envisaged for hadd theft) (at pp. 17-18 of the report).
In its concluding observations on the third periodic report by Iran under Article 40 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, made public in November 2011 (UN Doc. ), the Human Rights Committee expressed concern about “the continued imposition of corporal punishment ..., in particular amputations and flogging for a range of crimes, including theft” (at p. 4, § 16).
In a 2012 report to the General Assembly (UN Doc. ) the first Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran said that according to unpublished data submitted to him, “3,766 flogging sentences ha[d] been implemented since 2002” (at p. 17, § 55).
In a report of March 2017 to the Human Rights Council (UN Doc. ) the second Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran said that since her appointment, she had received numerous reports about the use of amputations, blinding and flogging as forms of punishment (at p. 6, § 26).
In a report of March 2017 to the Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights in Iran (UN Doc. ) the Secretary General said that a “wide range of acts considered as crimes under the Penal Code are punishable by flogging, including ... theft”. He added that he did not “share the view of the [Iranian] Government, which argue[d] that Islamic punishments [we]re effective deterrent penalties and more humane in comparison with long-term imprisonment” (at p. 5, § 23).
In a (posthumous) report of March 2018 to the Human Rights Council (UN Doc. ) the second Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran said that according to information received by her, “over 100 flogging sentences have been awarded, and 50 have reportedly been implemented in the course of 2017” in Iran (at p. 8, § 29).
In their comments on that report, made also in March 2018 (UN Doc. , at p. 13), the Iranian Government said:
“[T]he physical punishments which are anticipated in the laws of the Islamic Republic of Iran are legislated and legalized, and therefore they are not in contradiction with Iran’s obligations under paragraph 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
As for the issue of the use of lash punishments in the Islamic law, it has been considered and stipulated to prevent similar crimes and to reduce the use of sentences of imprisonment, which by themselves, have had major social, moral and economic consequences. Regrettably, this punishment has been interpreted wrongfully, by the West, as a degrading punishment. Lash punishments are issued and enforced as a substitute punishment for limited cases and, at the discretion of the judge, could be replaced by cash penalty. In addition, research shows that, in most cases, convicts prefer to receive a few lashes rather than going through a few months of imprisonment.”
In a report of March 2018 to the Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights in Iran (UN Doc. ), the Secretary General said that “the judiciary continue[d] to sentence people to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, such as amputation of limbs, blinding and flogging in accordance with the provisions of the Penal Code” (at p. 5, § 18). He also noted that the “Iranian Penal Code continue[d] to include a wide range of acts that can be punished by flogging, including ... theft”. He went on to say that according to statements by judicial officials in the media, “over 100 flogging sentences [had been] issued, and at least 50 reportedly implemented in 2017”, and that “19 sentences of amputation of hands or feet [had been] issued and at least five such sentences [had been] carried out” (at p. 6, § 20).
According to a publication on the website of the Abdorrahman Boroumand Center for Human Rights in Iran, a non-governmental organisation based in Washington D.C., United States of America:
“In ... Iran, at least 148 crimes are punishable by flogging. The laws related to flogging are broad and encompass a wide array of acts recognized as crimes. The criminal code recognizes corporal punishment (hadd and ta’zir) for offenses such as ... theft ...”
On its website the Center also maintains a database of all cases about which information is available in which the Iranian courts have meted out a flogging sentence. It specifies that the data is “not exhaustive, as Iranian authorities do not systematically or thoroughly release information on flogging sentences or implementation”, but that it was able to build up the database using “official statements and reports by the Iranian media and international and local human rights organizations, as well as testimonies of victims and witnesses”.
According to that database, the annual number of reported floggings for the whole of Iran between 2000 and 2013 had fluctuated between 81 (in 2000) and 1,832 (in 2009), with an average of 531. 1,129 of all floggings during that period had been carried out in Teheran. A perusal of the countrywide data relating to the period between 2007 and 2013 reveals reports of flogging for various forms of theft and related offences, including “purse snatching” (20 lashes), “buying stolen goods” (40 lashes), “breaking the lock and stealing the items from her husband’s store” (74 lashes), “stealing from the charity box” (30 lashes), “stealing from a twelve-year-old boy” (15 lashes), “stealing cash” (50 lashes), “stealing from Afghans” (20 lashes), “participation in pickpocketing” (50 lashes), “purse snatching” (74 lashes), “stealing four pigeons” (30 lashes), “stealing cables and power equipment” (40 lashes) and “stealing power cables” (70 lashes).
According to a report of January 2017 entitled “Iran: Wave of floggings, amputations and other vicious punishments” by Amnesty International, “[h]undreds are routinely flogged in Iran each year, sometimes in public”, and the use of corporal punishment, including flogging, is “prolific”. The report went on to say that under Iranian law more than a hundred offences are punishable by flogging, including theft.
According to Amnesty International’s report on Iran for 2017-18, “[s]cores of individuals, including children, [had] faced up to 100 lashes for theft and assault as well as for ... extra-marital relationships, attending mixed[-]gender parties, eating in public during Ramadan or attending peaceful protests.” The report also stated that “[d]ozens of amputation sentences [had been] imposed and subsequently upheld by the Supreme Court”.
According to a 2012 report (Codifying Repression: An Assessment of Iran’s New Penal Code) by Human Rights Watch, under Iranian law flogging must be administered to a man while he is standing upright and stripped of his clothes (except for his genitals, which should remain covered), and should not target his head, face or genitals. For their part, women are to be flogged while seated with their clothes tightly bound to their body (fn. 7 on p. 10).
Thus far, 165 States have become party to the 1984 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (). Six other States have signed but not yet ratified it. Iran is one of the 26 States which have not signed it.
According to two reports by the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the situation of human rights in Iran (UN Doc. , at p. 7, § 24, and UN Doc. , at p. 9, § 29), when the Iranian Parliament approved the above-mentioned Convention in 2002, the Guardian Council overruled that decision, reportedly owing to perceived conflicts with Islamic principles.
When several States urged Iran to accede to that Convention during the second cycle of the Universal Periodic Review by the United Nations Human Rights Council in 2014 (UN Doc. , at pp. 11-12), Iran declined, saying that “[s]ome recommendations [had been] made without due regard to the fundamental values and Islamic teachings governing [its] society”, “contravene[d] substantively the Constitution and basic laws of the Country” and “vividly contravene[d] the spirit of cooperation ... by using accusatory allegations in ambiguous and inappropriate language with the aim to suggest unacceptable presumptions and claims” (UN Doc. , at pp. 3-4).
The recommendation, made on the same occasion, that Iran amend its Penal Code and outlaw corporal punishments (UN Doc. , at p. 23), was likewise rejected by it (UN Doc. , at p. 4).
Since 2001 the General Assembly of the United Nations has consistently expressed its concern (more recently, its “very serious” and “deep” concern) at, inter alia, the use of flogging as a form of punishment in Iran (see General Assembly resolutions nos. 56/171, 58/195, 59/205, 60/171, 61/176, 62/168, 63/191, 64/176, 65/226, 66/175, 67/182 and 68/184, all of which were supported by Bulgaria).
Article 3 § 1 of the 1984 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment () provides that States Parties to that Convention must not, inter alia, extradite someone to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he or she would be in danger of being subjected to torture. To determine whether there are such grounds, the competent authorities must take into account, inter alia, the existence in the destination State of “a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights” (Article 3 § 2).
In its General Comment No. 4 on the implementation of that Article, issued in September 2018 (UN Doc. ), the United Nations Committee against Torture said that in deciding whether someone should be removed from their territory, States should consider, inter alia, whether he or she would be exposed to a sentence of corporal punishment if sent to a State in which such punishment is permitted by law (at pp. 6-7, § 29 (f)).
Article 83 § 2 of Interpol’s Rules on the Processing of Data sets out the minimum “judicial” data which each red notice must contain in order to be published. According to sub-paragraphs (b)(iii) and (iv) of that provision, this data must include:
“(iii)  [the] law(s) covering the offence (whenever possible, and subject to national law or the rules governing the operation of the international entity, the requesting National Central Bureau or international entity shall provide the wording of the relevant penal provision(s)); and
(iv)  [the] maximum penalty possible ...”
According to Article 86 of the Rules, Interpol’s General Secretariat must legally review red notices before their publication to ensure compliance with, in particular, Article 2 of Interpol’s Constitution, which refers to “the spirit of the ‘Universal Declaration of Human Rights’”.