The applicant complained, under Article 3 of the Convention, that the conditions of his detention and provision of medical care to him in the Simferopol SIZO had been inadequate, and, under Article 5 §§ 1 and 3 of the Convention, that his pre-trial detention had been arbitrary and unreasonable.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Mikhaylovka. The applicant was represented by Mr A.R. Ismailov, a lawyer practising in Simferopol.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2010 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant on suspicion of: 1) having inflicted bodily damage of light severity on a private individual, and 2) threatening a law-enforcement official in the course of the latter’s professional duties. During the course of the investigation the applicant was remanded in custody pending trial.
On 29 November 2010 the Zaliznychnyy District Court of Simferopol (“the District Court”) found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to three years’ imprisonment suspended on probation for two years. The court released the applicant from custody subject to an undertaking not to abscond.
On 25 January 2011 the Court of Appeal of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea (“the Crimea Court of Appeal”) quashed the sentence of 29 November 2010 and remitted the case for additional pre-trial investigation. It also remanded the applicant in custody, referring to “the seriousness and the nature of the criminal offences committed”. The applicant was detained following the court hearing.
On 12 March 2011 the investigation was completed and the case was referred to the District Court for trial.
On 23 June 2011 the District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to three years’ imprisonment, not suspended on probation. The court also decided to keep the applicant in detention as a preventive measure until the verdict became final.
On 9 August 2011 and 19 January 2012 the Crimea Court of Appeal and the Higher Specialised Court for Civil and Criminal Matters, respectively, upheld the judgment of the District Court of 23 June 2011.
On 17 September 2013 the applicant was released from prison, having served his sentence in full.
The applicant is certified as Category 1 disabled (the most severe level of disability) on account of paraplegia of his lower limbs as a result of a gunshot wound to his spinal cord suffered in 1996. Owing to being wheelchair-bound, he developed a skin condition known as pressure sores (decubitus ulcers).
During the period of time from 21 July to 29 November 2010 the applicant was held in the Simferopol Pre-Trial Detention Centre (“the SIZO”) within the framework of the same criminal proceedings against him. Then he was at liberty from 29 November 2010 to 25 January 2011.
During his detention in 2010 the applicant underwent inpatient medical treatment in respect of aggravated chronic pyelonephritis and surgery for his pressure sores.
On 26 January 2011, following the decision of the Court of Appeal of 25 January 2011 ordering the applicant’s detention on remand (see paragraph 6 above), the applicant was again placed in the Simferopol SIZO. In view of his state of health, the applicant was placed in the SIZO medical unit.
On 12 April 2011 he had his chest X-rayed. He was diagnosed with aggravated chronic bronchitis, but refused the recommended treatment.
On 18 April 2011 the applicant was examined by a neurosurgeon of Saky Hospital, who reported that he had a black burn wound on three toes on his left foot and a burn blister on his right foot. The doctor recommended treatment. The applicant was also diagnosed with aggravation of the pressure sores on his buttocks, which had progressed to the purulonecrotic stage, with the formation of fistulas. The doctor recommended that the applicant be laid on his stomach, turned every two hours, and, on a daily basis, he take showers while remaining horizontal. Sitting was prohibited altogether. Lastly, the doctor held that the applicant required urgent inpatient treatment for his pressure sores in a specialised hospital environment.
On 19 April 2011 the applicant was examined by a burn specialist of the Simferopol City Hospital, who diagnosed him with second- and thirddegree (on a four-degree scale) boiling-water burns on both feet. The specialist concluded that the applicant did not require hospitalisation, and that his burns were considered to be superficial and they would heal by themselves within two to three weeks. An ointment was prescribed to be applied daily. The applicant refused that treatment.
On 4 May 2011 the applicant’s lawyer requested that the prison authorities have the applicant examined by a panel of medical specialists with a view to determining his state of health and medical needs and the possibility of meeting those needs in the SIZO.
On 5 May 2011 the applicant was examined by a neurosurgeon of Semashko Republic Clinical Hospital (“Semashko Hospital”), who generally confirmed the diagnoses given on 18 and 19 April, but considered that the applicant did not require hospitalisation. He was prescribed some treatment, the nature of which was not specified by the parties.
On the same day the applicant was also examined by a nephrologist from Semashko Hospital who diagnosed him with urethral atony (urinary incontinence) and chronic pyelonephritis. The doctor concluded that the applicant did not require hospitalisation and wrote up a prescription for his outpatient treatment. The applicant refused to follow that treatment.
On 6 May 2011 the applicant was examined by a surgeon of Semashko Hospital who noted that the second- and third-degree burns had failed to heal. The doctor prescribed treatment. No hospitalisation was deemed necessary.
On the same date the applicant was also examined by an ophthalmologist of Semashko Hospital who diagnosed him with acute conjunctivitis of both eyes and prescribed treatment.
Following his complaints of pain in the chest area, on 16 May 2011 an X-ray was taken of the relevant area, which showed that he had a broken rib.
On 19 May 2011 the applicant was examined by a trauma specialist from Simferopol City Hospital no. 6 (“Hospital no. 6”). The medical report stated that the applicant had been behaving aggressively and had not been able to explain in what circumstances he had broken his rib. Some unspecified recommendations were given as to the applicant’s treatment.
On 3 June 2011 the prison authorities wrote to the applicant’s lawyer that there were no reasons to have the applicant examined by a panel of medical specialists, given that he had already been examined by various doctors on many occasions.
On 14 July 2011 the applicant was examined by a surgeon of Hospital no. 6, who diagnosed paraproctitis (purulent inflammation of the cellular tissues surrounding the rectum) and recommended that the abscess be surgically drained in a hospital environment. The doctor made a written statement that the surgery was “contraindicated in the ... conditions pertaining in the SIZO”.
On 15 July 2011 the applicant was taken to Hospital no. 6. The Chief of Surgery examined him and concluded that no hospitalisation was required. As a result, the applicant was returned to the SIZO on the same day.
On 20 July 2011, in response to the request of the applicant’s lawyer to allow a civilian doctor to examine the applicant, the Crimea Court of Appeal wrote that that matter was within the competence of the SIZO administration.
On 10 August 2011 the prison authorities informed the applicant’s representative that during his detention in the SIZO the applicant had been examined by a surgeon seven times; by a neurosurgeon – twice; by a gastroenterologist – twice; by a trauma specialist – once; by a nephrologist – once; by an urologist – twice; by an ophthalmologist – once; by a therapist – once; and by a burn specialist – twice. The applicant had refused the treatment recommended by all those doctors, and forty-five reports had been drawn up in that connection.
On 20 September 2011 the applicant was transferred from the SIZO to serve his prison sentence.
According to him, while in the SIZO he was held in a cell measuring about 11 sq. m and shared by three inmates, with no space for any movement in a wheelchair. He did not specify the dates of his detention in the mentioned cell. The applicant further submitted that he had been assisted by cellmates who had carried him during his stay in the SIZO.
The relevant part of the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Punishment or Treatment (CPT) from 9 to 21 December 2013 (CPT/Inf (2014) 15) reads as follows:
“120. ... The situation was no better at Simferopol SIZO. The conditions in the cells were as miserable as some thirteen years previously when the Committee had first visited this establishment. The semi-basement cells located in the establishment’s block I clearly offered unacceptable conditions in terms of state of repair, humidity, in-cell lighting and ventilation.”