The case originated in two applications (nos. 37871/14 and 73986/14) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Hungarian nationals, Mr T.P and Mr A.T. (“the applicants”), on 28 October 2014 and 20 November 2014 respectively. The President of the Section acceded to the applicants’ request not to have their names disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Kovács, a lawyer practising in Szeged. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their whole life sentences were de iure and de facto irreducible under Hungarian law, in breach of Article 3 of the Convention.
On 30 March 2015 the applicants’ complaints concerning irreducibility of their whole life sentences were communicated to the Government and the remainder of their complaints were declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
A submission was received by Hungarian Helsinki Committee, which had been granted leave to intervene as a third party (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The first applicant, Mr T. P. was born in 1981 and is currently serving his prison term in Sátoraljaújhely.
On 22 November 2006 the Nógrád County Regional Court convicted the first applicant of murder committed with special cruelty and abuse of firearms. The applicant was sentenced to life imprisonment with no possibility of parole.
On 28 June 2007 the Budapest Court of Appeal upheld the judgment, adding that the murder had been committed for ‘villainous’ reasons, namely, the applicant was considered to have killed the victim in a particularly atrocious manner, so as to prevent her from reporting the initial abduction and stabbing and thereby to cover up a previous crime.
On 14 February 2008 the Supreme Court dismissed the first applicant’s petition for review.
On 5 November 2013 the President of the Republic dismissed the applicant’s request for pardon, by which he sought commutation of his life sentence to twenty years fixed-term imprisonment as well as allowing the possibility of his release on parole.
The second applicant, Mr A.T. was born in 1985 and is currently serving his prison term in Sátoraljaújhely.
On 14 May 2010 the Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén County Regional Court convicted the second applicant of double murder and abuse of firearms. He was sentenced to life imprisonment with no possibility of parole.
On 9 November 2010 the Debrecen Court of Appeal upheld this judgment.
On 13 September 2011 the Supreme Court dismissed the second applicant’s petition for review.
On 23 October 2014 the President of the Republic dismissed the applicant’s request for pardon, by which he sought commutation of his life sentence to twenty years fixed-term imprisonment as well as allowing the possibility of his release on parole.
Article 9 of the Fundamental Law (as in force since 1 January 2012) provides as follows:
“(4) The President of the Republic shall:
...
g) exercise the right to grant individual pardon.
...
(5) Any measure and decision of the President of the Republic under paragraph (4) shall be subject to the countersignature of a government member. An Act may provide that a decision within the statutory competence of the President of the Republic shall not be subject to a countersignature.”
The relevant parts of Act no. CCXL of 2013 on the Execution of Punishments, Measures, Certain Coercive Measures and Confinement for Infractions, as amended by Act no. LXXII of 2014, in force as of 1 January 2015, read as follows:
“(1) The person vested with the power to grant pardon may ..., by an act of grace, terminate or commute a convicted prisoner’s punishment. Where a punishment or measure has been terminated or commuted on pardon, the terminated or commuted part of the punishment or measure shall not be enforceable.”
“(1) The pardon application shall be transmitted, ex officio or upon request, ... by the minister responsible for justice to the President of the Republic.
(3) A request for pardon shall be filed by the convicted prisoner, his defence counsel, the statutory representative of a minor convicted prisoner or a relative of the convicted prisoner.
(4) ... The request for pardon shall be submitted to the court having proceeded at first instance.
(5) The minister responsible for justice shall transmit the request for pardon to the President of the Republic even if he himself does not endorse the granting of pardon.”
“(1) Pursuant to the provisions of this Act, ex officio clemency proceedings (henceforth: mandatory pardon proceedings) shall be conducted in respect of convicted prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole.
(2) Having recourse to such mandatory pardon proceedings shall not exclude the possibility of filing a request for pardon according to the general rules by a convicted prisoner sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole or by any other person entitled to do so, or of initiating pardon proceedings ex officio by a person entitled to do so.”
“(1) The correctional facility detaining the convicted prisoner shall notify the minister responsible for justice when the convicted prisoner has served forty years of imprisonment.
(2) Prior to the notification mentioned in subsection (1), the correctional facility shall invite the convict to make a declaration as to whether he gives consent to the mandatory pardon proceedings. The declaration of consent or the declaration of refusal by the convicted prisoner, or in case the convict has refused to make a declaration the records thereof, shall be attached to the notification made under subsection (1).
(3) Should the convicted prisoner not consent or should he refuse to make a declaration, no mandatory pardon proceedings may be instituted.”
“Pursuant to section 46(4), the minister responsible for justice shall, within sixty days from the receipt of the notification made under section 46/B, obtain the personal data required for the mandatory pardon proceedings and ... shall obtain the preparatory documents to be examined in making a decision in the clemency case, in particular:
“(1) The minister responsible for justice shall, within three days, at the latest, from the receipt of the notification made under section 46/B, notify the President of the Kúria of the commencement of the mandatory clemency proceedings.
(2) The Clemency Board is a five-member board participating in the mandatory clemency proceedings.
(3) The Clemency Board shall operate on a case-by-case basis from the appointment of its members till the transmission of its opinion to the minister responsible for justice.
(4) Members of the Clemency Board shall be appointed following the notification mentioned in subsection (1), upon the proposal of the Criminal Division of the Kúria by the President of the Kúria, without delay. Judges trying criminal cases at the Kúria or at a court of appeal may be appointed to be members of the Clemency Board. Such an appointment requires the judge’s consent.
(5) A judge
“(1) The requirements laid down in Article 26(1) of the Fundamental Law shall also apply to members of the Clemency Board.
(2) The Clemency Board shall take its decisions by majority voting.
(3) The Clemency Board shall elect a chairman from among its members. If the chairman is prevented from acting, he shall be substituted, with full authority, by a member of the Clemency Board appointed by the chairman.”
“(1) The minister responsible for justice shall transmit the documents obtained within the time limit specified in section 46/C to the Clemency Board within eight days from the receipt of the documents.
(2) Within ninety days from the receipt of the documents obtained under section 46/C the Clemency Board shall examine whether, based on
(3) ... the Clemency Board may obtain any further data and documents found to be necessary for the conduct of the mandatory clemency proceedings.
(4) In the course of the proceedings the Clemency Board may resort to any person having expert knowledge on a technical issue deemed to be significant for the examination or may ask for an expert opinion on an issue. As to the convicted prisoner’s mental state, the Clemency Board is obliged to involve a specialized doctor or a psychologist. The contacted expert may consult the documents and data obtained in the proceedings. The costs of the contacted expert’s work shall be borne by the state.
(5) The Clemency Board shall hear the convicted prisoner in the course of the proceedings.
(6) Based on the examination conducted under subsection (2), the Clemency Board shall adopt a reasoned opinion containing a recommendation on the granting of clemency.
(7) The reasoned opinion, the documents received and the data obtained in the course of the examination shall, together with the expert opinions, be transmitted by the Clemency Board to the minister responsible for justice.”
“(1) The minister responsible for justice may not depart from the Clemency Board’s opinion. The minister responsible for justice shall draft the clemency application for the President of the Republic in line with the content of the Clemency Board’s opinion, including the reasoning of the opinion.
(2) The minister responsible for justice shall transmit the clemency application to the President of the Republic within fifteen days from the receipt of the Clemency Board’s opinion.
(3) The minister responsible for justice shall also transmit the clemency application to the convicted prisoner, via the correctional facility in which he is detained.
...”
“If the mandatory pardon proceedings are closed without granting clemency to the convicted prisoner and the convicted prisoner continues to serve his life imprisonment, another set of mandatory pardon proceedings shall be instituted after a lapse of two years following the completion of the mandatory pardon proceedings.”
The relevant texts of the Council of Europe, the European Union and other international legal texts on the imposition and review of sentences of life imprisonment are set out in Kafkaris v. Cyprus ([GC], no. 21906/04, §§ 68-76, ECHR 2008), Vinter and Others v. the United Kingdom ([GC], nos. 66069/09, 130/10 and 3896/10, §§ 60-75, 9 July 2013), and most recently Murray v. the Netherlands [GC], 10511/10, §§ 58-65, 26 April 2016).
The relevant Council of Europe and international instruments on the objectives of a prison sentence, notably as regards the importance to be attached to rehabilitation, are outlined in Dickson v. the United Kingdom ([GC], no. 44362/04, §§ 28-36, ECHR 2007-V), and summarised in Vinter and Others (cited above, §§ 76-81) and Murray (cited above, §§ 7076).