The case originated in an application (no. 16363/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Ms Nino Dzidzava (“the applicant”), on 17 April 2007.
The applicant was represented by Ms T. Abazadze, a lawyer practising in Tbilisi, and Mr P. Leach from the European Human Rights Advocacy Centre (EHRAC) in London. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that the death of her husband, Mr Togonidze, during detention in the Russian Federation has violated Article 2. Furthermore, she maintained that the authorities had not carried out an effective investigation as required by Articles 2 and 13 of the Convention. The applicant further complained that the authorities had failed to provide Mr Togonidze with the appropriate medical treatment and that this, in connection with general conditions of detention and transportation to the airport, amounted to a violation of Article 3 of the Convention. She also considered that the lack of an effective remedy amounted to a violation of Article 13 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Article 3.
On 17 April 2007 the applicant’s representative sent an initial letter to the Court summarising the facts of the application and outlining the complaints. On 6 June 2007 a further letter was sent, enclosing the original power of attorney of the applicant’s representative.
On 26 July 2007, the Registry of the Court replied to the applicant’s initial letter and instructed the applicant to fill in an application form and return it together with copies of all relevant documents within six months of the date of the letter.
On 25 January 2008 the applicant sent the completed application form and copies of the relevant documents.
The application was allocated to the former Fifth Section of the Court. On 9 February 2010 a Chamber of the former Fifth Section decided to communicate the application to the Government for information and to adjourn its examination pending the outcome of the proceedings in the interState case Georgia v. Russia (I) [GC] (no. 13255/07).
On 5 February 2014 the President of the Court decided to allocate the application to the former First Section, which, on 27 January 2015, decided to invite the Government to submit observations on the admissibility and merits of the application and to produce the relevant documents. Subsequently the application was allocated to the Third Section.
The Government and the applicant submitted observations on the admissibility and merits of the case. In addition, thirdparty comments were received from the Government of Georgia (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 of the Rules of Court).
During the period from the end of September 2006 to the end of January 2007 identity checks of Georgian nationals residing in Russia were carried out in the streets, markets and other workplaces and at their homes. Many were subsequently arrested and taken to police stations. After a period of custody in police stations, they were grouped together and taken by bus to a court, which summarily imposed administrative penalties on them and gave decisions ordering their administrative expulsion from Russian territory. Subsequently, after sometimes undergoing a medical visit and a blood test, they were taken to detention centres for foreigners where they were detained for varying periods of time, taken by bus to airports in Moscow, and expelled to Georgia by aeroplane. (for further details as to the background of the case see Georgia v. Russia (I) [GC], no. 13255/07, § 45, ECHR 2014).
The applicant was born in 1959 in Senaki (Georgia) and married to Mr Tengiz Togonidze, a Georgian national born in 1958. Together they had lived in St Petersburg since 2004. In April 2006 Mr Togonidze had started suffering from coughing fits, shortness of breath and thickening of the aorta walls.
In May 2006 the applicant returned to Georgia because her visa had expired. Mr Togonidze, whose visa had expired on 9 February 2005 and whose registration was no longer valid either, stayed in St Petersburg.
At about 8.50 p.m. on 3 October 2006 Mr Togonidze was arrested by police officers in St Petersburg and placed in detention.
At about 3.30 p.m. on 4 October 2006 the Nevskiy District Court of St Petersburg ordered Mr Togonidze to be expelled from the Russian Federation and detained at the St Petersburg special detention centre for aliens pending his administrative expulsion on the ground that he had infringed the residence rules governing foreign nationals, namely Article 18.8 of the Code of Administrative Offences. The court also fined the applicant in the amount of RUB 1,500.
Mr Togonidze was subsequently brought to the reception centre for foreigners of the Main Internal Affairs Directorate for St Petersburg and Leningrad Region. Upon his arrival he was examined by a medical officer, who found that Mr Togonidze did not show any health problems preventing him from being placed in the reception centre. Mr Togonidze informed the medical staff that he suffered from asthma attacks and was subsequently placed together with another Georgian detainee who suffered from asthma in a cell measuring between 35 and 40 m2 with 25 to 30 other Georgian nationals.
The sanitary conditions of the cell were very poor, as the toilets were only separated from the rest of the cell by a partition measuring 1.1 m at one side, and there was a lack of fresh air. In addition, while Mr Togonidze was provided with possibilities to take walks, he was not permitted outdoor activities.
On 13 October 2006 Mr Togonidze was suffering from nausea and a headache and asked for medical assistance. Subsequently a medical officer checked his blood pressure and temperature, which was slightly raised. He was given paracetamol. A re-examination the same day showed that his temperature was back to normal.
On 14 October 2006 Mr Pataridze, Consul of Georgia in the Russian Federation at the material time, visited the detention centre. When he saw Mr Togonidze, who was having difficulties breathing and whose face had turned black, he had requested that Mr Togonidze be immediately transferred to a hospital but that request was not complied with.
On 16 October 2006 Mr Togonidze, together with 24 other Georgian nationals, was placed in a bus to Domodedovo Airport in Moscow with a view to his expulsion by aeroplane to Georgia. Prior to entering the bus the detainees and their belongings were searched. In addition the detainees were accompanied by 20 officers of the special police force of the Main Internal Affairs Directorate (OMON) on the bus and two further police cars escorted the bus on the way to the airport.
The conditions of transport in the bus were very difficult, with no air conditioning, and although the journey lasted between eight and nine hours, the officers who had been accompanying the detainees had not allowed them to open the windows. On the way to the airport the bus stopped five times to let people, allegedly for a bribe, use the toilet and purchase food. Exiting the bus was closely monitored by the accompanying police officers.
On 17 October 2006 between 7 and 8 a.m. the bus arrived at the airport and around 8.30 a.m. Mr Togonidze, whose health had deteriorated during the bus ride, was allowed to leave the bus upon the request of Mr Pataridze, who was awaiting the Georgian nationals at the airport.
Mr Pataridze indicated that when Mr Togonidze had got off the bus he had seen that he was very ill and was “suffocating like a fish out of water” and begging to be allowed to breathe fresh air.
On the way to the terminal Mr Togonidze collapsed after walking a few steps and died. A called ambulance was unable to resuscitate him and he was declared dead at 10.20 a.m.
On 18 October 2006 the Bureau of Forensic Medical Examination of the Moscow Health Department conducted an autopsy of Mr Togonidze’s corpse and indicated that his death was caused by tuberculosis. In addition blood and urine samples were taken and sent for forensic chemical examination.
On 19 October 2006 the Moscow Regional Prosecutor’s Office decided not to initiate criminal proceedings, as the competent prosecutor found that Mr Togonidze had died of a natural cause.
During the forensic chemical examination of the taken blood and urine samples methadone was detected in both samples. In regard to the urine sample a high-performance liquid chromatography (HLPC) was applied, which established 0,11 mg% methadone and 0,69 mg% methadone metabolite in Mr Togonidze’s urine. A closer inspection of Mr Togonidze’s blood was not conducted and the exact level of methadone in his blood was not established. Based on these findings the Bureau of Forensic Medical Examination of the Moscow Health Department finally concluded that Mr Togonidze had died of methadone poisoning.
On 8 November 2006 the decision not to initiate criminal proceedings of 19 October 2006 was quashed and the case file was forwarded for additional examination.
On 9 November 2006 the Moscow Regional Prosecutor’s Office decided again not to initiate criminal proceedings. This time finding that, owing to detecting methadone in the urine and blood of Mr Togonidze (see paragraph 26 above) and finding three injection marks on his corpse, there was evidence for repeated use of narcotics for a long period of time. Therefore the prosecutor concluded that Mr Togonidze took the methadone voluntarily and that his death was caused by negligent poisoning with methadone.
On 14 December 2006 the General Prosecutor’s Office of the Russian Federation proposed that the decision of 9 November 2006 would be quashed and further investigations would be conducted. It held that thus far the deterioration of Mr Togonidze’s health during the bus ride had not sufficiently been examined and that relevant officials had not been interviewed.
On 15 December 2006 the Federal Migration Service challenged the allegation that Mr Togonidze had died of methadone poisoning, saying that he had died of tuberculosis.
On 20 December 2006 a criminal investigation was initiated against an unknown person for selling methadone to Mr Togonidze at an unknown date and unknown location.
On 30 July 2007 the decision to dismiss criminal proceedings was quashed and the case was forwarded for additional examination. In particular it was held that the dismissal was premature and that it should be established whether any narcotics were found on Mr Togonidze, the amount of methadone taken by him, whether such a dose could be lethal, why Mr Togonidze’s health deteriorated during the bus ride and whether he received adequate health care during his detention and transfer to the airport.
On 8 August 2007 the criminal proceedings were dismissed and on 9 August 2007 the dismissal was quashed again, as the instructions of 30 July 2007 had not been fulfilled.
On 14 August 2007 the criminal proceedings were dismissed again and the dismissal was quashed on 11 December 2007.
On 20 December 2007 criminal proceedings were finally dismissed. A subsequent request to quash the dismissal was denied on 14 February 2008 and confirmed on 1 September 2010.
Based on the documents provided by the Government, and in particular on the autopsy report and the report of the forensic chemical examination, the applicant submitted her own medical report regarding her husband’s death. The report was compiled by a forensic pathologist, Dr John Clark – a former lecturer at different universities in the United Kingdom and chief pathologist for the United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) – supported by a forensic toxicologist, Dr Hilary Hamnett.
The experts pointed out that the Russian authorities gave the cause of death as methadone intoxication based on the fact that methadone was detected in the blood and urine of Mr Togonidze and that he had three injection marks on his body. They also emphasised that the authorities concluded from these facts that Mr Togonidze had repeatedly used narcotics for a long period of time. As regards the needle punctures they pointed out that the injection mark at the bend of the left elbow stemmed most probably from the resuscitation attempts at the airport, in which intravenous drugs were given, and that the other two marks, on the lower third of the left shoulder, appear as a very unusual site for self-injection of drugs. They further indicated that methadone is usually taken in liquid form and only very uncommonly by injection. In addition, according to their opinion, the last few hours of Mr Togonidze’s life did not coincide with the ‘normal’ death of a person dying from methadone intoxication. Being a sedative, people dying from methadone intoxication typically do so after a period of unconsciousness. Mr Togonidze, however, did not show any signs of drowsiness and was able to talk to the Georgian consul and walk a few steps before suddenly collapsing. Lastly they pointed out that the conclusion of repeated drug use was not confirmed by an analysis of a hair sample or finding any supporting evidence, such as needles, ampoules or syringes, on Mr Togonidze’s corpse or in his cell.
As regards the forensic chemical examination the experts indicated that the applied analyses appear not to have been carried out according to international recommendations and that the level of methadone was only measured in the urine and not in the blood. In their opinion it is unacceptable to conclude intoxication on urine levels alone, as drugs accumulate in the bladder over time and only blood levels can give an indication of a likely intoxication or incapacitation.
In sum the forensic pathologist concluded that there was no scientific justification for giving methadone intoxication as the cause of death. He himself would have given the cause of death as suppurative bronchopneumonia due to chronic obstructive airways disease. He further indicated that, given Mr Togonidze’s chronic lung disease, he was more likely to develop a chest infection and to progress his pneumonia in a crowded, airless space. The deterioration of his health, however, would have been noticeable, as he would have been unwell and showed signs such as wheezing and coughing. A timely hospitalisation and antibiotic treatment would have been the correct course of action.
The relevant domestic law is set out in the Court’s judgment Georgia v. Russia (I) (cited above, §§ 75, 77).