The case originated in an application (no. 42969/18) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Artur Rasiński (“the applicant”), on 31 August 2018.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 7 February 2019 the Government were given notice of the complaint concerning the applicant’s detention in overcrowded cells and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1972 and is detained in Łowicz Prison.
The applicant and the Government gave partly different statements in respect of the conditions of the applicant’s detention (see paragraphs 68).
The applicant submitted that during his detention in the Łowicz Prison he had been held in cells in which the space per person had been below the Polish statutory minimum standard of 3 sq. m.
From the reasoning of the domestic courts’ judgments it is clear that the applicant had been detained in overcrowded cells during his stay in the Łowicz Prison from 18 July 2013 to 16 April 2015 (one year, eight months and twentyeight days). The cells had been poorly equipped, not properly ventilated and there had been mold on the walls.
In their observations of 11 June and 6 September 2019 the Government contested the national court’s findings. In particular they stressed that the applicant had not been kept in overcrowded and inadequately furnished cells (see paragraphs 912 below). They submitted that the national courts had not been provided with sufficient information by the State Treasury’s representative and had based their findings solely on the applicant’s submissions and general statistics. The Government also submitted a statement from the Prison Service providing information on the surface of the applicant’s cells and the number of persons incarcerated with him. According to that document, the applicant did not serve his sentence in overcrowded cells.
On 1 July 2016 the applicant brought a civil action against the State Treasury for infringement of his personal rights and for compensation for his detention in overcrowded cells in the Łowicz Prison. He claimed 300,000 Polish zlotys (PLN) – approximately 75,000 euros (EUR) in damages.
On 13 April 2017 the Łódź Regional Court (Sąd Okręgowy) awarded the applicant PLN 5,000 (approximately EUR 1,250) in compensation and dismissed the remainder of his action. The court found that the applicant had been detained in overcrowded cells during his detention in the Łowicz Prison and that all the applicant’s complaints in this regard had been dismissed by the prison authorities. It concluded that this situation had violated the applicant’s personal rights. The court exempted the applicant from the costs of proceedings for the part in which his action was dismissed.
On 23 February 2018 the Łódź Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) dismissed appeals lodged by the applicant and the State Treasury. The court dismissed evidence submitted by the State Treasury, i.e. the Prison Service’s information on the surface of the applicant’s cells and the number of persons incarcerated with him as filed out of time. In the written reasoning the court fully upheld all the factual and legal findings of the Łódź Regional Court. It also exempted the applicant from the costs of the appellate proceedings.
On 7 May 2018 a court-appointed lawyer prepared an opinion informing the applicant of the lack of grounds to lodge a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court.
A detailed description of the relevant domestic law and practice concerning general rules governing the conditions of detention in Poland and domestic remedies available to detainees, who allege that the conditions of their detention are inadequate, are set out in the Court’s pilot judgments in the cases of Orchowski v. Poland (no. 17885/04) and Norbert Sikorski v. Poland (no. 17599/05), delivered on 22 October 2009 (see §§ 7585 and §§ 4588, respectively). More recent developments are described in the Court’s decision in the case of Łatak v. Poland (no. 52070/08), delivered on 12 October 2010 (see §§ 25-54).