The case concerns the abduction and subsequent disappearance of the applicant’s daughter in North Ossetia-Alania in 2010 and the ineffectiveness of the ensuing investigation into the matter.
The applicant was born in 1947 and lives in Karabulak, Ingushetia. He was represented by Mr I.K. Gandarov, a lawyer practising in Sunzha, Ingushetia and lawyers from the NGO EHRAC/Memorial Human Rights Centre.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is the father of Ms Zalina Yelkhoroyeva, who was born in 1980. At the material time she and the applicant lived in Karabulak.
On 18 November 2010 her brother (the applicant’s son) Mr T.Ye. was arrested by law-enforcement agents on suspicion of involvement in illegal armed groups. He was taken to a remand prison in Vladikavkaz, North Ossetia-Alania (North Ossetia), about forty-five kilometres from Karabulak. On 1 December 2010 he was taken to a military hospital in Vladikavkaz to be treated for gunshot wounds allegedly inflicted by the law-enforcement officers during his arrest.
At about 11 a.m. on 22 December 2010 Ms Yelkhoroyeva went to see her brother at the hospital. In order to get to Vladikavkaz by car, she needed to pass the “Chermenskiy Krug” checkpoint (also known as KPM-105) situated on the administrative border between Ingushetia and North Ossetia.
Ms Yelkhoroyeva went to the hospital in a taxi, with the driver Mr G., her brother’s wife Ms L.E. and a lawyer Ms B. Upon their arrival, the taxi driver remained outside while the three women went to see Mr T.Ye., whose room was guarded by law-enforcement agents around the clock. It was Ms Yelkhoroyeva’s fourth or fifth visit to her brother at the hospital.
The documents submitted indicate that while Ms Yelkhoroyeva, Ms L.E. and the lawyer were with Mr T.Ye., an officer of the Federal Security Service (FSB) carried out an identification parade (in Russian) by showing him photographs. During the procedure Ms Yelkhoroyeva advised her brother in Ingush not to identify anyone as it was not in his interests. The lawyer Ms B. was in the room for some time and then left, whereas Ms Yelkhoroyeva and Ms L.E. stayed there longer.
Around 4 p.m. that day, as the taxi with all of the passengers was on its way back to Ingushetia, it was blocked by four armoured UAZ vehicles and one silver-coloured VAZ-2114 vehicle. It happened near the village of Novoye in the Prigorodniy district of North Ossetia, about twenty-five kilometres from Karabulak and a few hundred metres from the “Chermenskiy Krug” checkpoint. A group of about six armed men in camouflage uniforms and balaclavas got out of the vehicles. They spoke unaccented Russian and were wearing camouflage or traffic police uniforms. Some of the men were armed with machineguns.
The men ordered everyone to get out of the car and show them their documents. When they learned who Ms Yelkhoroyeva was, they put her in a VAZ-2114 and drove away. The other men ordered the taxi driver, Ms B. and Ms L.E. to drive to the nearby checkpoint and wait for Ms Yelkhoroyeva there. When asked who they were, the men answered that they were from the FSB and the Main Military Intelligence Directorate (GRU).
After waiting for Ms Yelkhoroyeva to return for about half hour, Ms L.E., the taxi driver and Ms B. left the checkpoint. Ms B. got another taxi and went home, while Ms L.E. and the taxi driver went to the nearby settlement of Mayskoye (also spelled Mayskiy) in North Ossetia, on the border with Ingushetia. Ms L.E. lodged an official complaint at the local police station regarding the abduction of Ms Yelkhoroyeva. The taxi driver Mr G. corroborated her statement. While at the police station Ms L.E. received a mobile telephone call from a lawyer who told her that Ms Yelkhoroyeva was most probably being detained at a law-enforcement agency in Magas, Ingushetia. The documents submitted indicate that the complaint lodged at the Mayskoye police station was not duly registered.
The Government did not dispute the factual circumstances as submitted by the applicant or give their own version of events.
In reply to the Court’s request for a copy of the entire contents of the criminal case file opened into Ms Yelkhoroyeva’s disappearance, the Government furnished a partial copy of the contents, volumes 2 and 3 of the case file. Each page of the documents had either double or triple numbering. Based on the documents submitted, the investigation in the criminal case can be summarised as follows.
On 24 December 2010 the applicant lodged an official complaint regarding his daughter’s abduction by law-enforcement agents with the Nazran police in Ingushetia. He provided a detailed description of the incident similar to his submissions to the Court and stressed that he believed that his daughter had disappeared in life-threatening circumstances.
In the days that followed and throughout January 2011 the applicant lodged several complaints with the Prosecutor General of Russia, the Prosecutor of the Republic of Ingushetia and the FSB. In those complaints the applicant stated that his daughter had been abducted by State agents in life-threatening circumstances.
On 18 January 2011 the Nazran police transferred the applicant’s abduction complaint of 24 December 2010 to the Prigorodniy District Department of the Investigative Committee in North Ossetia. On 7 February 2011 it opened criminal case no. 21/1648 under Article 126 § 1 of the Russian Criminal Code (“the CC”) (abduction).
On 10 February 2011 the investigators granted the applicant victim status in the criminal case and questioned him. He told them that he had two sons and two daughters, including Ms Yelkhoroyeva and Mr T.Ye., and stressed that, in his opinion, FSB officers had abducted his daughter in connection with their investigations into her brother’s activities. The applicant provided the investigators with the number of the mobile telephone which she had had with her on the day of her abduction.
On 10 March 2011 the investigators examined the crime scene. No evidence was collected.
On 10 March 2011 the investigators questioned the taxi driver Mr G., whose statement about the circumstances of the abduction was similar to the applicant’s submissions to the Court. In addition, he stated that when he and Ms L.E. had reported the incident at the police station in Mayskoye, the latter had received a telephone call from a lawyer who had told her that Ms Yelkhoroyeva had been taken to a law-enforcement agency in Magas, Ingushetia.
On 20 March 2011 the investigators questioned Ms Yelkhoroyeva’s ex-husband, Mr Ge., whose statement provided no information relating to her abduction.
On 21 March 2011 the investigators questioned Ms L.E., whose statement concerning the abduction was similar to the applicant’s submissions to the Court. She did not say who had telephoned her while she had been at the Mayskoye police station and told her that Ms Yelkhoroyeva had allegedly been taken to Magas, Ingushetia.
On 23 March 2011 the investigators questioned Mr T.Ye., who stated that, in his opinion, his sister had been abducted by law-enforcement agents in connection with their investigation into his involvement in illegal armed groups.
On 23 March 2011 the Prigorodniy District Court of North Ossetia (“the District Court”) granted the investigators’ request for a list of the calls made to and from Ms Yelkhoroyeva’s mobile telephone between 20 and 24 December 2010. The documents submitted indicate that the list obtained provided no information relating to either the identities of Ms Yelkhoroyeva’s abductors or her whereabouts.
On 6 May 2011 the investigators questioned the mother of Ms Yelkhoroyeva, Ms S.Ye., who stated that her daughter’s disappearance had to have been connected to the authorities’ investigation into the illegal activities of her brother, Mr T.Ye.
On 11 July 2011 the investigators questioned the lawyer Ms B., who stated that on 22 December 2010 she had gone in a taxi with Ms Yelkhoroyeva and Ms L.E. to visit Mr T.Ye. at the hospital in Vladikavkaz. She had gone there as a replacement for Mr T.Ye.’s legal counsel, who had been unavailable. At the hospital they had seen that Ms Yelkhoroyeva’s brother was being guarded in his room by a guard in a balaclava. There had also been a FBS officer present, who had introduced himself as Alexey. He had carried out an identification parade by showing Mr T.Ye. photographs of a number of people and asking in Russian whether he knew any of them. Ms Yelkhoroyeva had dissuaded her brother in Ingush from identifying anyone. Ms B. had then left the room and waited for Ms Yelkhoroyeva and Ms L.E. outside.
According to Ms B., on their way back from the hospital to Ingushetia, the taxi driver had become increasingly nervous, as he had thought that a car was following them. When they had been about five hundred metres from the “Chermenskiy Krug” checkpoint, their taxi had been stopped by a traffic police officer. Several UAZ vehicles and a VAZ vehicle with other officers had also been at the side of the road. The officer had asked for their identity documents and then for Ms Yelkhoroyeva to get out. He had taken her to the VAZ car, where she had spoken with someone through the window, then another officer, in camouflage uniform and balaclava, had put her in that car and it had driven off. After that, the taxi driver had asked one of the remaining officers where Ms Yelkhoroyeva had been taken. He had been told to wait in the taxi for her at the checkpoint. After waiting at the checkpoint for about twenty minutes, Ms B. had taken another taxi and gone home to Ingushetia, whereas the taxi driver and Ms L.E. had gone to North Ossetia to report the abduction to the police.
On 9 August 2011 the investigators questioned a surgeon from the Vladikavkaz military hospital, Dr P., who stated that on 1 December 2010 Mr T.Ye. had arrived at the hospital with several gunshot wounds to the lower extremities. He had undergone surgery and remained in his room under the constant surveillance of law-enforcement officers in balaclavas. Dr P. had no information about who had visited Mr T.Ye. while he had been in the hospital. On 22 December 2010 Mr T.Ye. had been discharged.
Between 16 and 19 August 2011 the investigators questioned nine officers, all of whom stated that on 22 December 2010 they had been manning the “Chermenskiy Krug” checkpoint. According to their almost identical statements, since armoured UAZ cars passed through the checkpoint on a daily basis they could not remember anything specific concerning the passage of such vehicles on 22 December 2010. None of them had any information concerning Ms Yelkhoroyeva’s disappearance.
On 27 August 2011 the investigators questioned officer B., who stated that he had been the driver of one of the armoured UAZ vehicles operated by the Ingushetia police. In the afternoon of 22 December 2010, as had been recorded in the official departure log, he had indeed gone somewhere in the armoured vehicle, but he could not remember where and why due to the passage of time. He had no information pertaining to Ms Yelkhoroyeva’s disappearance.
On 29 August 2011 the investigators questioned two officers from the Kabardino-Balkaria police special task unit, both of whom denied any involvement in the abduction of the applicant’s daughter. They maintained that they had been in their home region at the time, situated not far from North Ossetia and Ingushetia.
On 4 September 2011 the investigators questioned the officer, who was in charge of maintenance of the fleet of vehicles operated by the Ingushetia police. According to his statement, three UAZ vehicles with the identified registration numbers belonged to various departments of the Ingushetia police and one with the registration number did not. He did not know whether any of those vehicles had been used for any police operations outside of Ingushetia.
On 7 September 2011 the investigation in the criminal case was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators. The applicant was not informed of that decision.
On 7 June 2012 the investigators’ superior criticised the investigation, stating that it had been ineffective and suspended unlawfully. He ordered that a number of steps be taken. The document stated, amongst other things, the following:
“... The investigation established that at about 4 p.m. on 22 December 2010 ... Ms Yelkhoroyeva had been forced into a UAZ vehicle by unidentified persons and taken away ...
...On 7 September 2011 the investigation was suspended ... this decision was taken prematurely as not all of the necessary steps had been taken. It is necessary to take the following steps: ...
-  identify the UAZ vehicles which had passed through the administrative border of North Ossetia and ... their drivers... and question them;
-  question the witness Mr G. again concerning the circumstances of the abduction;
-  carry out a confrontation between Mr G. and Ms B. concerning their statements about the circumstances of the abduction;
-  request information on the cars from the fleet of vehicles of the Ingushetia [police] and question the drivers of those vehicles as to who had driven them on 22 December 2010; ...”
On 15 July 2012 the investigators again questioned the taxi driver Mr G., who confirmed his previous statements.
The copies of the documents submitted indicate that the investigation was again suspended on 17 August 2012 and that no further active steps were taken to solve the crime.
It appears that the investigation is still ongoing. The whereabouts of Ms Yelkhoroyeva and the identities of the perpetrators of her abduction remain unknown.
The documents submitted indicate that the applicant lodged a number of requests with the investigators asking to be kept informed of the progress of the investigation into his daughter’s abduction. The investigators either did not reply or provided a formal reply stating that the investigation was underway. The applicant complained to the District Court about the lack of access to information regarding the investigation. For instance, his requests to the investigators lodged on 1 October 2012, 9 and 29 November 2012, and then 19 February 2013 either remained unanswered or information was given to him only after he had complained to the District Court. His subsequent requests for information as to the progress of the investigation lodged on 26 June and 5 September 2013, 11 February and 8 May 2015 were granted only in part. He again complained to the District Court about the lack of information, but to no avail.
Then, on 28 July and 18 September 2015 and 2 March 2016 the applicant complained to the investigators’ superiors, asking that they compel the investigators to expedite the search for his daughter. On each occasion he was informed that all necessary investigative steps were being taken. No other information was provided. It appears that he only received a reply on 6 April 2016 stating that the investigation had been suspended in 2012.
On 4 August 2016 the applicant appealed against the suspension of the investigation to the District Court, which dismissed his appeal on 14 August 2017. The applicant’s subsequent appeals against the suspension were finally dismissed on 12 March 2018 (in the documents submitted the date was also referred to as 12 September 2018) by the Russia Supreme Court as lodged out of time.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and international materials, see Turluyeva v. Russia (no. 63638/09, §§ 56-74, 20 June 2013).