The case concerns the first applicant’s complaints in respect of his unrecorded detention and subsequent ill-treatment at the hands of the police and the lack of an effective investigation in respect of those matters.
The first and the second applicants were born in 1981 and 1955 respectively. They were represented by lawyers of the Stichting Russian Justice Initiative NGO in partnership with Astreya (SRJI/Astreya), a nongovernmental organisation.
The Government were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
At the relevant time the first applicant lived in the Kolos settlement in the town of Karabulak, Ingushetia. The second applicant lived in the town of Grozny. The first applicant made regular trips to Grozny to visit his mother and attend lectures and take exams at the Chechen State University.
According to medical documents, the first applicant was in good health and did not have any complaints in that regard. Nor did he seek medical assistance in the period from the year 2003 to 26 May 2004.
The Government submitted that at 5.30 p.m. on 27 May 2004 police officers arrested the first applicant on suspicion of his having committed a criminal offence. Then the first applicant was taken to the Leninskiy district police station in the town of Grozny (Ленинский РОВД – hereinafter “the Leninskiy ROVD”) and questioned. During questioning the police officers did not put any pressure on him. The Government relied on the first applicant’s arrest record dated 27 May 2004, which had been signed by the attesting witnesses P. and D., by the first applicant and his counsel, and on the first applicant’s interview record prepared on the same day and containing no complaints of police ill-treatment.
At 4 a.m. on 26 May 2004, when the first applicant was asleep in the second applicant’s house in Grozny, a group of armed men in balaclavas burst into the house. They pushed him to the floor and beat him. Then the men put a black plastic bag over the first applicant’s head and drove him to the Leninskiy ROVD. On the way there the perpetrators questioned the first applicant and kicked him if his answers did not satisfy them.
At the Leninskiy ROVD the first applicant realised that the perpetrators of his abduction were police officers. Following his arrival they took him to an office and handcuffed him to a chair. Then several officers in camouflaged uniforms, including officers R.Kh and I.A. beat him with rubber truncheons on the soles of his feet, suffocated him with the plastic bag and gave him electric shocks through wires attached to different parts of his body, including his anus, until he lost consciousness.
During the ill-treatment the officers ordered the first applicant to confess to a number of crimes. When he refused, the torture continued.
When the police officers left the office, Investigator D. came in and pushed the first applicant to the wall. The investigator said that the first applicant had been involved in several offences and had to assist the investigation. The first applicant replied that the officers had arrested the wrong person, since he knew nothing either about the offences to which Investigator D. was referring to or about the people involved in them. Investigator D. said that the first applicant would be sorry for the refusal to cooperate and left.
Then police officers returned to the room and continued beating and insulting the first applicant. The officers pulled down his pants, put a truncheon near his anus and threatened to thrust it inside. They also took photos and videos of the first applicant in this position and threatened to distribute them among his neighbours. They also threatened to rape him.
At some point the first applicant gave up and wrote his “confession” and a number of other documents dictated by the officers and signed them. It did not stop the beatings. The officers wanted the first applicant to memorise the details of each offence he had “confessed” to. For every mistake in recounting he was beaten. The ill-treatment continued until late at night when suddenly there was a blackout across the entire city of Grozny. The officers then handcuffed the first applicant and left him in the room with a plastic bag over his head.
In the morning of 27 May 2004 the officers returned to the room. One of them pushed the first applicant’s face against the wall, aimed a rifle at his back and threatened to execute him if he refused to do what they told him. Then they showed him photos of several people. When the first applicant said that he did not know anybody in the photos, the officer hit him on the head and kicked him in the scrotum. Later the first applicant was taken downstairs to the holding cells (ИВС).
The first applicant’s ill-treatment continued for several days. On one of those days he had heart pains and the police officers called an ambulance. The doctor provided the first applicant with medical aid. According to him, their visit was not registered. On another day (apparently on 29 May 2004), the first applicant was taken from the holding cells to an office upstairs, where the police officers beat him to force him to decline the services of R.D., the counsel hired by the second applicant. The first applicant was presented with another lawyer, G.B., who was present in the office, and told that he would be his counsel from then on. The first applicant refused his assistance and insisted that his counsel was R.D. Then both Investigator D. and G.B. ordered the first applicant to confess, threatening him with transfer to operational-search bureau no. 2 (“ORB-2”), where he would be tortured.
Subsequently Investigator D. and G.B. left the office and the police officers continued beating the first applicant while he was handcuffed to a chair. They beat him on the head and damaged his right ear. When the first applicant fell off the chair during his beating, the police officers started kicking him. After that he was taken back to the holding cells and in the evening transferred to ORB-2.
The first applicant was held in ORB-2 for eighteen days following his transfer there on 29 May 2004.
On 30 May 2004 the first applicant was taken to a room where another handcuffed detainee (M.V.) with visible marks of torture on him was sitting on a chair. The police asked him to identify the detainee as his accomplice. When he refused, the police officers beat both of them. Apparently those officers were from the Leninskiy ROVD, as the first applicant recognised their voices. He also heard screams of detainees being tortured in the adjacent room. All this led to the first applicant having a nervous breakdown.
On 14 July 2004 the second applicant was allowed to visit the first applicant. According to her, she could not recognise her son since his entire body was covered with bruises and haematomata. The first applicant told her that they had brutally beat him on the instructions of Investigator D.
After eighteen days’ detention in ORB-2 the first applicant was transferred back to the holding cells. On the day of his return the first applicant was threatened that his mother would be killed if he refused to identify his accomplice. Later the first applicant was shown M.V., the detainee from ORB-2. The first applicant was supposed to identify him as his accomplice. Under undue pressure from Investigator D., the first applicant said that the detainee was his accomplice. After Investigator D. had left the room the policemen started to insult and humiliate the first applicant and hit him on the head.
In September 2004 the first applicant was transferred to remand prison no. 20/1 in Grozny.
On 29 May 2004, following an application by the investigator, the Leninskiy District Court authorised the first applicant’s detention pending investigation. It appears that at the hearing the first applicant’s counsel noticed bodily injuries on his client and then asked Investigator D. to explain their origin (see paragraph 33 below). The first applicant remained in custody pending investigation and trial.
On 23 June 2004 the first applicant was charged with participation in an unlawful armed group.
On 22 November 2004 the bill of indictment was drawn up in respect of the first applicant and M.V. The first applicant was charged with participating in an illegal armed group comprised of several persons including M.V. and with committing terrorist attacks in Chechnya.
On 30 March 2005 the Supreme Court of Chechnya acquitted the first applicant and M.V. and ordered the first applicant’s immediate release from detention.
The court found that the first applicant’s questioning on 27 and 28 May 2004 had been conducted in breach of procedural guarantees and declared the respective reports inadmissible evidence. It further noted that the first applicant’s medical examination had revealed numerous injuries on him and that during the court hearing the first applicant and M.V. had identified officers R.Kh and I.A. involved in their ill-treatment. The court stated that investigating authorities had abetted those officers by accepting the information obtained from the first applicant in violation of procedural rules. Comparing various documents from the case file, the court concluded that the first applicant’s arrest record of 27 May 2004 had been forged. That fact was supported by the statement of an attesting witness, D., who said that he had not been present during the arrest. Instead, he had been asked to come to the Leninskiy ROVD, where police officers had made a copy of his passport. The court noted, however that according to an expert examination report, the signature on the arrest record had been made by D. The court further found that the first applicant’s allegations that he had been detained on 26 May 2004 and subjected to physical violence had not been rebutted by the investigator. The fact that the first applicant had sustained bodily injuries after 27 May 2004 had been confirmed by medical documents.
The court further observed that, following an application by the first applicant, the Leninsky district prosecutor’s office had conducted a preinvestigation inquiry and had refused to institute criminal proceedings in connection with the alleged ill-treatment. The decision had provided no information as to where exactly, at what time, by which officers and in which particular circumstances the first applicant had been arrested.
The court held that the charges against the first applicant were primarily based on his confessions that had been declared inadmissible evidence and which he had refuted during the preliminary investigation, and that no other evidence corroborated his guilt in the offences concerned.
On 14 April 2005 the Prosecutor of Chechnya appealed against the acquittal.
On 1 June 2005 the Supreme Court of Russia set aside the acquittal and remitted the case for a fresh examination on the grounds that the impugned judgment contained conflicting findings.
The first applicant’s counsel lodged an application for supervisory review of the above decision with the Presidium of the Supreme Court of Russia. The court refused to entertain the application on 4 October 2005.
On 1 September 2005 the Supreme Court of Chechnya held the first hearing in the case following its remittal. The first applicant did not appear at the hearing since by that time he had left Russia. The court therefore placed him on a wanted list and ordered that he be remanded in custody when apprehended.
On 2 June 2004, after having noticed the first applicant’s bodily injuries (see paragraph 22 above) his counsel R.D. complained to Investigator D. of his client’s unlawful arrest on 26 May 2004, unrecorded detention and ill-treatment at the hands of the police. Shortly thereafter the investigator ordered a forensic expert to examine the first applicant.
On 4 June 2004 the forensic expert examined the first applicant and prepared report no. 521. The copy of the report provided by the applicants is not fully legible. As far as can be seen from the copy, the first applicant told the expert that on 27 May 2004 he had been abducted from his home by armed men and taken to the Leninskiy ROVD, where he had been illtreated. It is further stated in the report that, according to the entry in the register of the police holding cells of 28 May 2004, the first applicant had no injuries and made no complaints. Later (the date is illegible) medical aid was required for him in connection with a contusion of the lumbosacral region and an (illegible) injury of the front abdominal wall. The examination conducted on 4 June 2004 revealed numerous bruises and abrasions of the thorax and lower extremities caused by hard blunt objects. The expert stated that they might have been caused at the time and in the circumstances described by the first applicant.
On 4 June 2004 the investigator obtained “explanations” of four police officers from the Leninskiy ROVD (including officers R.Kh and I.A.) concerning the circumstances of the first applicant’s arrest and his questioning. They submitted that the first applicant had been arrested on 27 May 2004 and that no pressure had been put on him during questioning.
On the same day, taking into account the expert report and the submissions by the police officers, Investigator D. refused to open a criminal case into the allegations of unlawful arrest and ill-treatment.
On 2 July 2004 Investigator D. ordered a second forensic examination of the first applicant. The report prepared at his request concluded that the first applicant had four scars on the chest and one the right knee, sustained from between three to six months before. Owing to the time elapsed, it was impossible to determine how they had been inflicted.
Later, on an unspecified date, the Chechnya police opened an internal investigation into the alleged ill-treatment of the first applicant. It appears that during that investigation Investigator D. was questioned. He denied that the first applicant had been ill-treated. On 15 July 2004 the police closed the investigation with the finding that the first applicant’s allegations were ill-founded. A copy of the relevant report was not submitted to the Court.
On various dates including 4 and 11 August, 4 October and 15 November 2004 the applicants complained to the Prosecutor of Chechnya concerning the first applicant’s unlawful arrest and ill-treatment. It appears that the complaints were dismissed for being unsubstantiated.
On 17 February 2006 the second applicant again complained to the Prosecutor of Chechnya of her son’s ill-treatment. In reply the investigating authorities conducted a new pre-investigation inquiry. They questioned Investigator D. and three officers of the Leninskiy ROVD, who unanimously stated that no pressure had been put on the first applicant. On the grounds of those submissions the authorities refused to open a criminal case on 2 March 2006. The second applicant challenged that decision before the Prosecutor of Chechnya, who dismissed the challenge on 7 July 2006.
On an unspecified date the Chechen police at the request of a nongovernmental organisation, The Committee against Tortures (Комитет Против Пыток), carried out a second internal investigation in respect of the applicant’s allegations. It resulted in a finding that the applicants’ claims were unsubstantiated. A copy of the relevant report has not been submitted to the Court.
In the meantime, on 5 April 2006 the second applicant located T., a witness who had been detained in a cell with the first applicant. He stated in writing that the latter had been ill-treated and forced into self-incrimination.
On 29 May 2006 the Chechen Prosecutor informed the second applicant that her complaints regarding her son’s alleged ill-treatment would be examined within criminal case no. 50057, which had been opened into M.V.’s allegations of ill-treatment during his pre-trial detention.
On 28 April 2007 the Russian Prosecutor General informed the second applicant that the latest decision not to open a criminal case had been annulled and that a new pre-investigation inquiry in respect of the alleged ill-treatment was ongoing. From the Government’s submission it appears that the pre-investigation inquiry ended with a decision not to open a criminal case dated 4 June 2009. A copy of this decision has not been furnished to the Court.
On 25 September 2006 the second applicant complained to the Leninsky District Court of Grozny about the investigating authorities’ refusal to institute criminal proceedings into her son’s ill-treatment. The outcome of those proceedings is unknown.
Later, on an unspecified date, she challenged the investigator’s decision of 3 March 2006 before the Zavodskoiy District Court of Grozny.
On 25 December 2006 that court dismissed her claim. It found that the pre-investigation inquiry had been carried out in accordance with the law and that the second applicant had failed to furnish any evidence capable of rebutting the investigator’s finding that the first applicant had not been ill-treated.
The second applicant appealed against the above decision to the Supreme Court of Chechnya, which dismissed her appeal on 18 April 2007.
In 2008 the first applicant was admitted for treatment at the Centre for Torture Survivors in Finland (“the Centre”). According to a report of 10 September 2009, prepared by a psychologist practising at that centre, the first applicant was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and anxiety. At the beginning of treatment he seemed to be in a state of constant alert. He had a very high anxiety level and it was difficult for him to remain seated during the appointments. He experienced strong headaches on an almost daily basis and had trouble sleeping at night. The headache problems had not ceased. The first applicant had continued experiencing dissociative symptoms typical for post-traumatic stress including difficulties in orientation and focusing as well as shifts of his emotional state.
On 7 and 14 September 2009 a physiotherapist from the Centre examined the first applicant on account of the trauma allegedly inflicted by the police in 2004. The doctor established a number of scars on his body, including a scar measuring 10 cm on the posterior side in the middle of the cranium, scar tissue on the auricle of the right ear, as well as scars on both scapulae and his back (in the lumbar area and in the area of the twelfth rib), and scars on both arms and wrists. In addition the first applicant suffered from restricted movement, back pain and other symptoms. The doctor concluded that the bodily marks and the symptoms fitted the first applicant’s detailed description of ill-treatment.
On 16 September 2009 the first applicant was examined by the Centre’s specialist in neurology and psychotherapy. The first applicant complained to that doctor of his health problems related to the alleged illtreatment in 2004. The doctor found that his symptoms were consistent with the allegation of torture.
For a summary of relevant provisions of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation, see, in so far as relevant, Ryabtsev v. Russia (no. 13642/06, §§ 42-52, 14 November 2013) and Lyapin v. Russia (no. 46956/09, §§ 99-102, 24 July 2014).
On 10 July 2003 Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the “CPT) made Public statement concerning the Chechen Republic of the Russian Federation (CPT/Inf (2003) 33), which in the relevant part reads as follows:
“4. In the course of the CPT’s visits to the Chechen Republic in 2002 and, most recently, from 23 to 29 May 2003, a considerable number of persons interviewed independently at different places alleged that they had been severely ill-treated whilst detained by law enforcement agencies. The allegations were detailed and consistent, and concerned methods such as very severe beating, the infliction of electric shocks, and asphyxiation using a plastic bag or gas mask. In many cases, these allegations were supported by medical evidence. Some persons examined by the delegation’s doctors displayed physical marks or conditions which were fully consistent with their allegations. Documentation containing medical evidence consistent with allegations of ill-treatment during periods of detention in law enforcement agencies was also gathered. The allegations of ill-treatment received by the CPT concerned law enforcement establishments (Departments of Internal Affairs and certain Federal Security Service facilities) throughout the territory of the Chechen Republic and related to both official and unofficial places of detention. ...
One establishment stands out in terms of the frequency and gravity of the alleged ill-treatment, namely [ORB-2].”
On 13 March 2007 the CPT made another Public statement concerning the Chechen Republic of the Russian Federation (CPT/Inf (2007) 17), which in the relevant part reads as follows:
“15. In the course of the visits to the North Caucasian region in 2006, the CPT’s delegation once again received many credible allegations of recent ill-treatment of detained persons by members of law enforcement agencies and security forces in the Chechen Republic. The ill-treatment alleged was frequently of such a severity that it could be considered to amount to torture; the methods involved included extensive beating, asphyxiation using a plastic bag or gas mask, electric shocks, suspension by the limbs, hyperextension and, more rarely, the infliction of burns by cigarettes, lighters or other devices. Accounts were also received of threats of execution or of sexual abuse in order to obtain a confession or information. The general picture which emerged was that any detained person who did not promptly confess to the crime of which he was suspected (or provide information being sought by those responsible for the detention) would be in imminent danger of being ill-treated...
As regards official law enforcement structures, a particularly high number of allegations of ill-treatment continue to relate to [ORB-2] in ... Other law enforcement structures where there would appear to be a particularly high risk of ill-treatment include ... [the Leninskiy ROVD] ...”