The case originated in an application (no. 45705/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr D.G. (“the applicant”), on 20 September 2007. The President of the Section decided of her own motion not to have the applicant’s name disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz, succeeded by Ms J. Chrzanowska, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions of his detention had been incompatible with his disability (paraplegia).
On 23 January 2012 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1). In addition, thirdparty comments were received jointly from the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights (Warsaw, Poland), the European Disability Forum (Brussels, Belgium) and the International Disability Alliance (Geneva, Switzerland), which had been given leave by the President of the Chamber to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2). The parties have not responded to those comments (Rule 44 § 5).
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in Siedlce.
In 2000 he was diagnosed with paraplegia. He is in a wheelchair and suffers from serious malfunctions of the urethral and anal sphincters and other ailments.
The applicant was tried in a number of criminal proceedings and sentenced to a total of eight years’ imprisonment.
The applicant was arrested on 7 January 2001 and was initially committed to Siedlce Prison.
On 11 January 2001 he was transferred to the surgical and orthopaedic ward of the Warszawa-Mokotów Remand Centre hospital, where he underwent medical examinations and treatment.
From 15 January to 28 February 2001 he was detained in the general wing of Warszawa-Mokotów Remand Centre.
On 28 February 2001 the applicant was granted a six month period of leave in the enforcement of his sentence (przerwa). He was taken home by ambulance.
The licence for this temporary release was extended for a further six months in August 2001. It was subsequently extended on 3 August 2001 until 28 February 2002, after which date the applicant failed to return to prison. On 20 May 2002, however, he was granted a further extension until 28 August 2002.
In August 2002 the  (Sąd Okręgowy) refused to extend the applicant’s licence again, finding that he was fit for detention. An appeal lodged by the applicant was dismissed by the Warsaw Court of Appeal. Following the expiry of the licence, the applicant again chose not to return to prison.
On 15 April 2003 the applicant was granted another extension until 15 June 2003. Again, he failed to return to prison after that date.
On 1 September 2003 the applicant was arrested, taken to Siedlce Prison by prison bus and placed in a single-occupancy cell (a socalled “infirmary cell”). During the transfer to the prison, the applicant was seated in his immobilised wheelchair, leaning against the back of the bus.
The applicant was not offered any fresh incontinence pads on his arrival in Siedlce Prison, and had to use the ones which he had managed to take with him at the time of his arrest. The prison did not provide him with fresh catheters.
On 3 September 2003 the applicant was transferred by prison bus to Warszawa-Mokotów Remand Centre. During the transfer he was seated in an immobilised wheelchair, but according to his submissions he had to hold on to the handrails for stability throughout the transfer. During the journey, the catheter which he had been using since his arrest broke and began to leak.
Upon his arrival at the remand centre hospital, the applicant was placed alone in a cell measuring about 7.5 square metres with two double bunk beds. In the applicant’s submission, which was not contested by the Government, the cell walls and ceiling were dirty and the toilet was not separated from the rest of the cell.
On 5 September 2003 the applicant was placed in another, cleaner cell where the toilet had been separated from the rest of the cell by a narrow partition. The applicant had to rely on the help of his fellow inmates, who heaved him onto the toilet so that he could change his incontinence pad and helped him to access the washbasin for daily hygiene. When taking a shower in the remand centre’s bathhouse, the applicant sat on a stool placed under the showerhead. He submitted that, on one occasion, he had fallen off the stool and had had to continue taking the shower while lying on the floor, unassisted by anyone.
On an unspecified date in September 2003, the applicant noticed that he had developed a bedsore. On 11 September 2003 he was taken to the remand centre hospital ward in order to treat the bedsore. The bedsore was stitched up but, in the applicant’s submission, the stitches did not last a long time and the wound soon opened up again.
From 15 September 2003 onwards the applicant was detained in a general wing of Warszawa-Mokotów Remand Centre.
The Government submitted that the general wing of Warszawa-Mokotów Remand Centre had been adjusted to the needs of disabled persons. In particular, the remand centre was equipped with special lifts, wide doors and driveways for wheelchairs. All toilets were easily accessible to a person in a wheelchair.
On several occasions the applicant was taken by prison bus to attend hearings in courts in Siedlce and . During each of those transfers he was seated in his wheelchair.
In December 2003 the applicant developed foot dermatomycosis. He was given an anti-mycosis cream. The applicant submitted that he had preferred to use the cream given to him by a fellow inmate.
On 7 or 12 January 2004 the applicant was transferred by prison bus back to Siedlce Prison, where he was placed in a large cell designed to hold twelve detainees. It was a smoking cell and the applicant was one of only two non-smoking detainees. He was allocated one of the lowest-level bunk beds. He was assisted by his fellow inmates in caring for his daily hygiene, but was often forced to remain in a soaked incontinence pad, in particular during the night.
The Government made a general submission in that respect, stating that Siedlce Prison had not been adapted to the special needs of disabled prisoners.
The Government also submitted that, on an unspecified date, a neurosurgeon who had examined the applicant had insisted that the patient needed daily physiotherapy. A medical certificate dated 16 January 2004 stated that such therapy was not available in prison. On the same day the Deputy Governor of Siedlce Prison applied for the applicant’s release.
On an unspecified date in April 2004 the applicant was transferred by prison bus to the hospital wing of Warszawa-Mokotów Remand Centre, where he underwent a short medical examination in order to assess the state of his health with a view to being granted another licence for temporary release. On the same day he was taken back to Siedlce Prison, again by prison bus.
On 26 May 2004 the applicant was granted a further six months’ temporary release. He was taken home from prison by his mother.
A medical report issued on 27 May 2004 by the regional hospital in Siedlce confirmed the presence of a bedsore measuring 2 cm by 3 cm on the applicant’s buttock.
From 15 November to 6 December 2004, the applicant received medicinal treatment and physiotherapy in the  (Wojewódzki Szpital Specjalistyczny). The discharge certificate stated that the applicant’s overall health had been improved (“wzmocnienie kondycji ogólnej) and that he was to continue his physiotherapy under the hospital scheme, remain under medical supervision and undergo periodic rehabilitation therapy. The applicant also received the following recommendations from the hospital nurse: to change the catheter bag at least once every twenty-four hours; to rinse the urethra with an antiseptic solution after each change of catheter tube; to self-monitor the urethra; and to see a doctor in the event of inflammation.
The applicant’s temporary release from prison was subsequently extended on 19 November 2004, and again on 14 February 2005 for another six-month period. The applicant failed to return to prison after the expiration of the latter period.
On 6 June 2005 the  refused to grant the applicant a further extension of the licence for temporary release. The applicant unsuccessfully appealed against that decision.
On 2 September 2005 the applicant was arrested.
On 2 September 2005 the applicant was taken by police car to Siedlce Prison, which is a standard prison that has not been adapted for persons with disabilities.
He was placed in the prison infirmary.
He was not given any fresh incontinence pads or catheters and had to use the ones which he had taken with him at the time of his arrest.
On 8 September 2005 the applicant was seen by a doctor for the first time since his arrest.
The applicant submitted that he was then given an unspecified number of fresh incontinence pads, but no catheters. As revealed by the Ombudsman’s inquiry (see paragraph 96 below), the applicant was supplied with four pads every twenty-four hours. The applicant claimed that because he had been unable to change his catheters and pads often enough during his detention in Siedlce Prison, he had developed a skin rash in the genitals area. He had also had to ration his pads. In order to do so, he limited his food and drink intake at weekends and sometimes also on weekdays. The Government did not contest that submission.
It appears that throughout his detention in Siedlce Prison, the applicant received regular supportive treatment (leczenie zachowacze) for the bedsore he had developed in 2003, which was considered a non-healing wound.
On an unspecified date, the applicant was transferred from the infirmary cell.
At first he was placed in a cell with smokers.
The passageway to the toilet in that cell was too narrow for his wheelchair and he was unable to reach the washbasin without soliciting help from his cellmates.
In this initial period of his detention in Siedlce Prison, the applicant did not have daily access to a shower room, which was situated on a different floor from his cell.
The applicant submitted that that was either because no recommendation to that effect had been issued by the prison doctor or because nobody had been found to carry him up and down the stairs to the shower room. Eventually, the applicant had been allowed to take a shower on a daily basis and his fellow inmates, who he claimed were “alcoholics who could barely stand on their own feet”, had been designated to carry him up and down the stairs. During his “baths”, the applicant had been seated on an ordinary chair placed directly under the showerhead. No hand rails had been installed in the shower cabin. Those submissions were not contested by the Government.
Towards the end of September 2005, the applicant was transferred to a cell measuring about 8 square metres. It appears that the cell was for both smoking and non-smoking prisoners.
As submitted by the applicant and expressly acknowledged by the Government, the cell in question had been inadequately furnished and had not been adapted for special-needs prisoners. In particular, in order to reach his bunk, the applicant had had to heave himself up from his wheelchair onto his bed without the aid of any handles or special bars. Nor could he access the cell’s toilet annex because the passageway was too narrow.
On 3 October 2005 the applicant asked the  to grant him another period of temporary release.
On 20 November 2005 the applicant fell painfully after an attempt to heave himself up from his wheelchair onto his prison bunk. An ambulance was called and the applicant was administered anaesthetics and sedatives. He claimed that he had continued to suffer back pains from the fall for a period of two weeks.
The Government submitted, without providing any supporting documents, that on 25 November 2005 the head of healthcare at Siedlce Prison had stated that the applicant could receive adequate treatment in prison.
On 19 December 2005 the  ordered the applicant to undergo a medical examination in order to assess the state of his health with a view to granting him another licence for temporary release. The examination was carried out on 21 December 2005.
The Government submitted that the medical examination had revealed that the applicant’s continued detention would not pose any danger to his health or life. The medical experts had also been of the opinion that the fact that the applicant had had trouble reaching the toilet had not caused him any inconvenience because he had been using incontinence pads and a catheter. No documents were presented to the Court in support of those submissions.
On an unspecified date in January 2006, the applicant had a high fever and experienced problems urinating. On 15 January 2006 he was taken by ambulance to the regional hospital in Siedlce, where he was diagnosed with a massive infection of the urethra and the presence of the bacteria enterococcus faecalis.
The applicant was not admitted to the civilian hospital but was offered admission to the Warszawa-Mokotów Remand Centre hospital instead. He refused, stating that his condition was serious enough to warrant his immediate hospitalisation in Siedlce and pointing out that the remand centre hospital did not have a urological ward. The regional hospital staff then gave the applicant anti-fever medication and a new catheter. They also carried out blood and urine tests, following which the applicant was taken back to Siedlce Prison by ambulance. On 19 January 2006 he was administered intravenous antibiotics and had another urine test. He continued to be treated on an outpatient basis until 26 January 2006.
On 8 February 2006 the Siedlce Regional Court refused to grant the applicant a licence for temporary release (file no. III Kow 399/05). The court found, on the basis of medical opinions prepared by an expert traumatologist and a neurologist, that the applicant’s health had been stable and that he could receive adequate medical care in detention, provided that: (1) two to three times a year he underwent physiotherapy at the hospital; (2) he was free to do a range of rehabilitation exercises on his own and to move around in his wheelchair; (3) he had the opportunity to lie on his stomach for long periods; (4) he was administered the prescribed medicines; (5) his bedsore was regularly checked by a doctor, and if necessary, treated; (6) he was placed in a single-occupancy cell; and (7) he had unrestricted access to a shower. The court noted that the applicant had refused a transfer to undergo a medical examination in the hospital wing of the Warsaw-Mokotów Remand Centre and considered that his refusal had been unjustified.
On 23 February 2006 the Siedlce District Court (Sąd Rejonowy) refused to suspend the applicant’s sentence (odroczenie wykonania kary; zawieszenie postępowania wykonawczego) (file nos. II K 11/00, II K 1070/02, II 1Ko 488/05). The court observed that two medical opinions prepared by an expert neurologist and an expert orthopaedist had confirmed that the applicant’s health problems could be properly treated in prison (see paragraph 55 above). The domestic court also took note of two other medical opinions (issued on unspecified dates) by experts in neurology and traumatology who had reached the conclusion that the applicant was not fit for detention for a period of at least one year, until his urological infection and his bedsore had been cured. These experts also stated that if the conditions of the applicant’s care and treatment enumerated in the preceding paragraph were not met, his life and health would be in danger.
The domestic court concluded that Siedlce Prison had so far been able to provide the applicant with adequate conditions of detention. Consequently, the applicant’s request was not granted. An appeal lodged by the applicant with the  was later dismissed on similar grounds.
On 10 May 2006 the Lublin Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal lodged by the applicant against the Siedlce Regional Court’s ruling of 8 February 2006, adding to the reasoning invoked by the lower court the argument that the applicant belonged to the prison subculture as he had committed another crime while on temporary release from prison (file no. II AKzw 259/06).
In the applicant’s own submission, on the night of 10 May 2006 he had attempted to commit suicide by slashing his left wrist, but had been rescued and had his veins stitched during the morning roll call. He did not provide any evidence in support of that submission.
On 15 May 2006 ultrasound imaging revealed a blockage of the applicant’s urethra and calculi (stones) in his bladder (złogi w pęcherzu moczowym).
On 22 May 2006 the applicant lodged a further request for temporary release with the . There is no information in the file as to the outcome of his request.
On 2 June 2006 the applicant was examined by an expert urologist, who prescribed the surgical removal of his bladder stones and further urgent specialist treatment.
On 21 June 2006 the Governor (Dyrektor) of Siedlce Prison asked the Łódź  to allow the applicant’s request for temporary release. The Governor relied on a medical report issued by the head of the Health Establishment (Zakład Opieki Zdrowotnej) at Siedlce Prison on 20 June 2006 and submitted that, despite the fact that the applicant had been doing some rehabilitation exercises on his own, muscular dystrophy, contractures in the hips and knees, and a general deterioration in his health had been observed. The applicant therefore required advanced physiotherapy, which could not be provided within the prison system. Although Łódź Prison would be prepared to offer the applicant basic physiotherapy, it could not do so before September 2006. It was also noted that after a number of recurring urological infections, the applicant required surgery for bladder stones. Moreover, according to the medical report, the applicant had developed a bedsore measuring 3 cm by 3 cm and his general state of health had been deteriorating. The report’s conclusion was that the applicant could not be properly treated in prison.
On 2 August 2006 a medical certificate prepared by an expert orthopaedist confirmed that the applicant should undergo further physiotherapy. A medical report prepared on 16 August 2006 stated that it was possible for the applicant to remain in detention provided that he could also be treated in the urological ward of the regional hospital in Siedlce.
On 28 August 2006 the applicant was transferred by prison bus to Łódź Prison, a modern detention facility adapted for the disabled. During the transfer he was seated in his wheelchair facing the front of the bus. In his submission, which was not contested by the Government, even though the wheelchair had been immobilised, the applicant himself had bounced around during the ride as he had had nothing to hold on to.
In the Government’s submission, which was not contested by the applicant, his cell in the general wing had been adapted for special-needs prisoners. It had been spacious enough for a wheelchair and the toilet had been easily accessible. The applicant did not need the assistance of a third person at the material time but was, nevertheless, under the constant supervision of nurses and paramedics.
The applicant was afforded basic physiotherapy. He was initially trained to use a Parapodium orthotic device, but his training was discontinued after he developed severe back pain, which had to be treated with an anaesthetic. He was also afforded supportive treatment for his bedsore in Łódź Prison and he remained under the constant supervision of the prison’s medical staff.
A medical report issued on 5 October 2006 by a physiotherapist from Łódź Prison stated that the applicant’s ailments could be adequately treated within the prison system and that the surgery for his gallbladder stones would be scheduled once his bedsore had healed.
On 23 October 2006 the Łódź  refused to agree to the Siedlce Prison Governor’s request to grant the applicant another licence for temporary release (file no. VI Kow 1499/06/Pr). The court observed that on 28 August 2006 the applicant had been transferred to Łódź Prison and held that he had been receiving adequate physiotherapy there. The court referred to the medical report issued on 5 October 2006 by Łódź Prison’s medical staff confirming that the applicant could be afforded adequate treatment in the prison system. The court also noted that the applicant had abused its trust by failing to return to prison on time after the previously granted period of temporary release.
On 30 or 31 October 2006 the applicant was transferred back to Siedlce Prison by prison ambulance.
On 28 November 2006 the applicant underwent a short medical examination in the hospital in Konstancin, after which he was taken back to Siedlce Prison by prison bus.
On 29 November 2006 the Siedlce District Disability Evaluation Board (Powiatowy Zespół do Spraw Orzekania o Niepełnosprawności) declared the level of the applicant’s disability as “significant” (znaczny) and confirmed that he required the constant care of another person owing to his limited capacity to deal with his handicap.
On 20 December 2006 the Łódź Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal lodged by the applicant against the Łódź Regional Court’s decision of 23 October 2006, finding the ruling to be justified (file no. II AKzw 872/06).
On 1 March 2007 the applicant had an X-ray which revealed the presence of three large bladder stones measuring 2 to 3 cm.
On 21 March 2007 the applicant was transferred by prison bus to the surgical ward of the Warszawa-Mokotów Remand Centre hospital. He was offered reconstructive surgery for his bedsore. The applicant refused for an unknown reason and continued to be administered only supportive treatment to the wound.
The applicant was subsequently committed to the remand centre’s general wing and given further outpatient treatment for his bedsore. Several blood and urine tests were also performed.
In the applicant’s submission, which was not contested by the Government, he had been supplied with two incontinence pads every twenty-four hours and with one single-use catheter every two to four weeks.
As a result, the applicant considered it necessary to reduce his intake of food and fluids, and developed a rash in the genitals area. When he complained about the catheter problem, the remand centre doctor told him that all colleagues whom she had consulted were in agreement that catheters such as those used by the applicant were to be changed only every few weeks.
The applicant claimed that the above-mentioned treatment had been intentional. It constituted a form of punishment for his written complaints about the authorities and staff of the remand centre and prisons in question. It was also meant to serve as a deterrent to other prisoners.
On 24 April 2007 the applicant was transferred to the urology ward of Łódź Prison hospital, where he was given laser treatment for his bedsore and afforded further medical care. On 30 April 2007 he had his bladder stones surgically removed. The applicant also had a special Foley catheter put in place.
In between the medical procedures, the applicant was detained in the prison’s general wing, in a cell adapted for disabled prisoners in wheelchairs.
According to a report of 28 May 2007, the applicant was discharged from the hospital in overall good health. It was recommended that his Foley catheter be changed every two weeks and that his bedsore be disinfected and treated in the prison infirmary.
On 28 May 2007 the applicant was transferred back to Siedlce Prison by ambulance.
On 19 June 2007 he was placed in a non-smoking cell.
In order to access the toilet in that cell, he had to heave himself from his wheelchair onto a stool, and from the stool onto the toilet seat.
On 27 June 2007 another request for temporary release from prison submitted by the applicant was dismissed by the  (file no. III Kow 218/07/pr). The court observed that, according to the most recent medical reports available, the applicant could be properly treated within the prison system. It was further observed that the applicant had abused his previous release from prison by failing to return to prison after the expiry of the period granted. Lastly, the court pointed out that, despite having been confined to a wheelchair, the applicant had still managed to commit a theft.
An appeal lodged by the applicant against the abovementioned decision was rejected by the President (Prezes) of the  for being lodged out of time. On 30 October 2007 the Lublin Court of Appeal dismissed an interlocutory appeal lodged by the applicant against the rejection ruling (file no. II AKzw 759/07).
On 15 October 2007 an expert neurologist prescribed a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) test on the applicant’s spine.
On 21 October 2007 the applicant had a high fever. An ambulance was called and he was administered anti-fever medication and a sedative.
On 19 November 2007 the applicant experienced sudden pain in the spine. He was examined by the prison doctor and administered painkillers.
On 2 January 2008 the applicant’s spine was examined by means of an MRI test in the regional hospital in Siedlce .
On 10 January 2008 the applicant was taken by prison bus to the hospital in Konstancin, where a neuro-orthopaedic examination was performed and surgery of the spine was prescribed. The applicant was subsequently taken back to Siedlce Prison by prison bus.
On 6 February 2008 the applicant was moved to wing IX of Siedlce Prison.
He was later moved to wing IV and placed in a dirty cell with smokers, which in the applicant’s submission, had not been adapted to the needs of a disabled person. The Government did not contest that submission.
On 18 June 2008 the applicant was granted a licence for temporary release until 28 December 2008. The court considered that he required urgent surgery followed by physiotherapy. Following that date, the court extended the licence three more times – on 1 December 2008, 18 June 2009 and 7 December 2009 – in order to allow the applicant to undergo further operations and urological treatment. It was also held that the applicant’s behaviour outside the prison had been correct. The applicant’s temporary release from prison continued until 18 June 2010.
On 19 June 2010 the Siedlce District Court, on the basis of an expert surgeons’ opinion, suspended the applicant’s sentence until his health problems requiring surgery had been resolved (case no. II K 538/05, II 2 Ko 1250/10).
Since his release, the applicant has been under medical treatment, including physiotherapy, and has periodically been admitted to hospital.
On 12 May 2006 the applicant complained to the Ombudsman (Rzecznik Praw Obywatelskich) about the quality of the medical care afforded to him while in prison.
On 10 October 2006 the Ombudsman informed the applicant of the results of his inquiries: during the applicant’s detention in Siedlce Prison, he had been entitled to take a daily bath and had been given four incontinence pads per day; and he had been examined many times by surgeons, orthopaedists and neurologists. The Ombudsman also made a concise summary of the medical care afforded to the applicant, in particular the physiotherapy in Łódź Prison, and concluded that it had been adequate for the applicant’s needs.
Following a further complaint from the applicant lodged on 29 May 2007, on 27 September 2007 the Ombudsman asked the Regional Inspectorate of the Prison Service (Okręgowy Inspektorat Służby Więziennej) to provide him with details concerning the conditions of the applicant’s detention.
On 9 November 2007 the Inspectorate informed the Ombudsman that, according to the information in its possession, from the beginning of his detention in Siedlce Prison on 2 September 2005, the applicant had been provided with adequate medical care. The Inspectorate observed that the applicant had continued to suffer from an old bedsore, which had been slow to heal, but that he had had the dressing changed every day. The Inspectorate further observed that the applicant had once refused to have his bedsore removed by surgery. It pointed out that the applicant had had his bladder stones surgically removed and that, in the course of his detention, he had been treated many times on an outpatient basis. Lastly, the Inspectorate explained that Siedlce Prison had been built in 1844 and acknowledged that its cells had not been adapted to the needs of disabled detainees or to the use of wheelchairs. Any conversion or modification of the prison buildings would require the prior authorisation of the Regional Inspector of Historic Monuments (Wojewódzki Konserwator Zabytków). The Inspectorate did not indicate whether any request to that end had been submitted.
On 29 June 2006 the Siedlce district prosecutor refused to investigate the issue of the conditions of the applicant’s medical care in detention. The prosecutor held that the medical care afforded to the applicant had been adequate and that the applicant himself had at times refused to undergo the surgery offered to him. The prosecutor also observed that the Siedlce Prison authorities had requested the applicant’s transfer to Łódź Prison in order that he could receive physiotherapy.
An appeal lodged by the applicant against that decision was dismissed by the Siedlce District Court on 11 December 2006. The court restated the prosecutor’s arguments and observed that in the meantime the applicant had been transferred to Łódź Prison, where he had been given specialist rehabilitation treatment.
The relevant provisions of domestic law and practice concerning medical care and conditions of detention in prisons and remand centres are set out in the Court’s judgments handed down in the cases of Kaprykowski v. Poland (no. 23052/05, §§ 36-39, 3 February 2009); Sławomir Musiał v. Poland (no. 28300/06, §§ 48-61, 20 January 2009); and Orchowski v. Poland (no. 17885/04, §§ 75-85, 13 October 2009). More recent developments are described in the Court’s decision in the case of Łatak v.  (dec. no. 52070/08, §§ 25-54, 12 October 2010).
As for the rules on detaining persons with disabilities, Article 96 of the Code of Enforcement of Criminal Sentences (“the Code”) establishes a “therapeutic regime” under which convicted persons with mental or physical disabilities who require specialist treatment, in particular psychological or medical care, or rehabilitation, can serve their prison sentences.
Furthermore, Article 97 § 1 of the Code provides that, with regard to prisoners serving their penalty under a therapeutic regime, the authorities should be guided, inter alia, by the need to prepare those prisoners for a self-sufficient life. Paragraph 2 provides that the execution of the prison sentence must be adapted to the prisoner’s needs in terms of medical treatment, hygiene and sanitation. Lastly, paragraph 3 provides that convicted persons who no longer require specialist treatment should be transferred to another appropriate prison regime.
On the basis of Article 249 of the Code, on 25 August 2003 the Minister of Justice issued the Ordinance on the code of practice for the organisation and arrangement of pretrial detention (Rozporządzenie Ministra Sprawiedliwości w sprawie regulaminu organizacyjno-porządkowego wykonywania tymczasowego aresztowania) (“the 2003 Ordinance on Pre-Trial Detention”) and the Ordinance on the code of practice for the organisation and arrangement of imprisonment (Rozporządzenie Ministra Sprawiedliwości w sprawie regulaminu organizacyjnoporządkowego wykonywania kary pozbawienia wolności) (“the 2003 Ordinance on Imprisonment”). Both ordinances entered into force on 1 September 2003.
The 2003 Ordinance on PreTrial Detention and the 2003 Ordinance on Imprisonment both state that pretrial detention and detention after conviction must take place in remand centres and prisons respectively. However, both ordinances provide for exceptions to the standard regime of detention.
Paragraph 28 of the 2003 Ordinance on PreTrial Detention and paragraph 26 of the 2003 Ordinance on Imprisonment provide that the governor of a remand centre or a prison may, at the request of or after consultation with a doctor, make necessary exceptions to the arrangements for pretrial detention or imprisonment as laid down in the relevant code of practice, in so far as this is justified by the state of health of the detainee concerned. The provisions apply to detainees with a physical disability.
The detention of disabled persons is not regulated any further by Polish domestic law.
The Recommendation reads as follows:
“The Committee of Ministers, under the terms of Article 15.b of the Statute of the Council of Europe,
Having regard to the European Convention on Human Rights and the case law of the European Court of Human Rights;
...
Stressing that the enforcement of custodial sentences and the treatment of prisoners necessitate taking account of the requirements of safety, security and discipline while also ensuring prison conditions which do not infringe human dignity and which offer meaningful occupational activities and treatment programmes to inmates, thus preparing them for their reintegration into society;
...
Recommends that governments of member states:
- be guided in their legislation, policies and practice by the rules contained in the appendix to this recommendation, which replaces Recommendation No. R (87) 3 of the Committee of Ministers on the European Prison Rules;
...”
Appendix to Recommendation Rec(2006)2
“Basic principles
All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
...
Prison authorities shall safeguard the health of all prisoners in their care.
...
3 Prisoners shall have access to the health services available in the country without discrimination on the grounds of their legal situation.
...

41.1 Every prison shall have the services of at least one qualified general medical practitioner.
2 Arrangements shall be made to ensure at all times that a qualified medical practitioner is available without delay in cases of urgency.
3 Where prisons do not have a full-time medical practitioner, a part-time medical practitioner shall visit regularly.
4 Every prison shall have personnel suitably trained in health care.
...
1 The medical practitioner shall have the care of the physical and mental health of the prisoners and shall see, under the conditions and with a frequency consistent with health care standards in the community, all sick prisoners, all who report illness or injury and any prisoner to whom attention is specially directed.
2 The medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall pay particular attention to the health of prisoners held under conditions of solitary confinement, shall visit such prisoners daily, and shall provide them with prompt medical assistance and treatment at the request of such prisoners or the prison staff.
3 The medical practitioner shall report to the director whenever it is considered that a prisoner’s physical or mental health is being put seriously at risk by continued imprisonment or by any condition of imprisonment, including conditions of solitary confinement.
The medical practitioner or other competent authority shall regularly inspect, collect information by other means if appropriate, and advise the director upon:
...
b. the hygiene and cleanliness of the institution and prisoners;
c. the sanitation, heating, lighting and ventilation of the institution; and
d. the suitability and cleanliness of the prisoners’ clothing and bedding.
1 The director shall consider the reports and advice that the medical practitioner or other competent authority submits according to Rules 43 and 44 and, when in agreement with the recommendations made, shall take immediate steps to implement them.
2 If the recommendations of the medical practitioner are not within the director’s competence or if the director does not agree with them, the director shall immediately submit the advice of the medical practitioner and a personal report to higher authority.
Health care provision
1 Sick prisoners who require specialist treatment shall be transferred to specialised institutions or to civil hospitals, when such treatment is not available in prison.
2 Where a prison service has its own hospital facilities, they shall be adequately staffed and equipped to provide the prisoners referred to them with appropriate care and treatment.
...”