The case originated in an application (no. 29896/14) against Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Serbian national, Mr Mališa Jevtović (“the applicant”), on 6 April 2014.
The applicant was represented by the Belgrade Centre for Human Rights, a non-governmental organisation based in Serbia. The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Nataša Plavšić.
The applicant complained of ill-treatment by prison guards on 11 June 2007, 18 December 2009, and 22 and 24 December 2011, as well as the respondent State’s subsequent failure to carry out an effective official investigation in that regard.
On 25 April 2016 the Government were notified of these complaints and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lived in Belgrade. He is currently serving his sentence in Belgrade-Nova Skela Correctional Institution (Kazneno-popravni zavod Beograd – Nova Skela).
On 18 July 2005 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of having committed acts of sexual violence against a three-year-old girl which had resulted in her death.
On 20 July 2005 he was placed in detention pending trial in Belgrade District Prison (Okružni zatvor u Beogradu).
On 24 November 2009 the Belgrade District Court (Okružni sud u Beogradu) found the applicant guilty and sentenced him to forty years’ imprisonment.
On 24 February 2011 the Belgrade Court of Appeal (Apelacioni sud u Beograd) upheld that judgment.
On 6 October 2011 the applicant was transferred to Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution (Kazneno-popravni zavod Požarevac – Zabela).
On 24 May 2013 the applicant was again transferred, this time to Belgrade-Nova Skela Correctional Institution.
The applicant maintained that he had been ill-treated by prison guards on a continuing basis. He had complained repeatedly of that ill-treatment “but [had] obtained no redress”.
During the applicant’s detention in this facility (from 20 July 2005 until 6 October 2011 – see paragraphs 7 and 10 above) the following incidents took place.
According to official prison documents, on 11 June 2007 the applicant got into a fight with another prisoner. Punches were exchanged. The reason for the animosity between the two was apparently based on the nature of the crime with which the applicant had been charged. Having unsuccessfully ordered them to stop fighting, a prison guard ultimately resorted to physical force in order to separate the prisoners and then used a rubber truncheon because the resistance continued. Once the situation calmed down, following assistance provided by a second prison guard, the use of coercive measures was discontinued. On the same day the prisoners were taken to the infirmary, where the doctor noted injuries to the applicant’s lower back, gluteus, both elbows, left shin and his right knee.
According to official prison documents, on 18 December 2009 the applicant got into a verbal argument with another prisoner. A prison guard asked him to stop but the applicant then attacked the prison guard physically. The latter used force and a rubber truncheon, since he could not contain the applicant otherwise. This prison guard was subsequently assisted by his colleague and the applicant was subdued. The prison guards informed their supervisor about the events, who ordered that the applicant be taken to a doctor. On 29 December 2009 the applicant was examined by a doctor, who noted injuries to his back, gluteus, right thigh and his left shin.
The prison guards involved prepared reports and written statements in respect of the two incidents and lodged disciplinary complaints against the applicant. The prison governor subsequently maintained that the injuries sustained by the applicant had been a consequence of the lawful application of coercive measures.
The applicant contested the official assessment to the effect that the prison guards had properly and lawfully applied force in order to maintain discipline. In so doing he noted that this finding had relied only on the statements of the prison guards themselves. The participants in the fight and the argument, including the applicant personally, or indeed any other witnesses, were never interviewed. Additionally, no video footage recorded by the security cameras was obtained and no disciplinary proceedings were ever brought against the applicant, despite official complaints having been lodged in this regard. The applicant therefore argued that his ill-treatment had been “unprovoked” and that he had in fact been deliberately and severely abused because of the nature of the crime with which he had been charged.
During the applicant’s imprisonment in this facility (from 6 October 2011 until 24 May 2013 – see paragraphs 10 and 11 above) the following incidents took place.
According to official documents, on 22 December 2011 the applicant used his phone in the prison yard in breach of regulations. When he was asked to go to a room and prepare a statement in this regard, he refused to do so and started to swear. The prison guard repeated his order, but the applicant again failed to comply and when the guard tried to take him into the room by force he resisted by holding onto a radiator. Two other prison guards assisted their colleague. Physical force and rubber truncheons were used in order to subdue the applicant. On the same day, the applicant was examined by a doctor who noted extensive bruising on his back. The next day, on 23 December 2011, the applicant was examined once again and the same injuries were established. Disciplinary proceedings were subsequently brought against the applicant and he was sentenced to fifteen days’ solitary confinement.
On 24 December 2011 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Ombudsman (Zaštitnik građana).
On 27 December 2011 the Ombudsman’s team visited the applicant and took his statement. The applicant maintained that on 22 and 24 December 2011 he had been severely beaten by the prison guards, having first been ordered to take his shirt off and face the wall. The team also took statements from the prison governor and the doctors, medically examined the applicant and reviewed official documents.
In his report of 31 January 2012, the Ombudsman found that, quite apart from the incident of 22 December 2011, the applicant had been subjected to ill-treatment amounting to torture two days later, that is to say on 24 December 2011, and that the injuries which he had sustained on this latter occasion had not been registered in any official documents. The prison governor had also not been informed of the incident and the applicant had not been examined by a doctor. The Ombudsman listed numerous injuries all over the applicant’s body, including his head, face, chest, back, shoulders and his limbs, and concluded that the extent of those injuries, as well as the manner in which they had been inflicted, including by means of a rubber truncheon, meant that the applicant had indeed been ill-treated by the prison guards on 24 December 2011, as alleged. The prison doctor, for his part, agreed that the applicant’s injuries established during the visit of the Ombudsman’s team were more extensive than the ones which he had noted on 22 December 2011. In view of the above, the Ombudsman recommended, inter alia, that the prison investigate the events of 24 December 2011 in order to identify and hold responsible the individuals who had abused the applicant.
Following these recommendations, the prison governor ordered some enquiries. Time sheets filled out by the prison guards were reviewed and medical reports were inspected, as was the register documenting the application of coercive measures in respect of the prisoners and the register of the prisoners’ own complaints. Also, numerous prison guards and inmates were interviewed as part of the investigation and video footage from security cameras was obtained. Ultimately, however, the prison administration was unable to identify “with certainty” how the applicant had been injured and who the alleged perpetrators were. No disciplinary proceedings were thus initiated.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a criminal complaint.
On 14 March 2012 the Požarevac public prosecutor’s office (Osnovno javno tužilaštvo u Požarevcu) requested from the investigating judge of the Požarevac Court of First Instance (Osnovni sud u Požarevcu) to carry out certain enquires in order to identify individuals who had allegedly ill-treated the applicant.
In the course of the preliminary investigation, the applicant, a number of prison guards, the prison doctor and an inmate were all questioned. Also, a forensic report was prepared concerning the type and the severity of the injuries sustained by the applicant, as well as the manner of their infliction. The report found, inter alia, that the applicant had been assaulted twice – on 22 and 24 December 2011 – and that the injuries of 24 December 2011 could have been inflicted by one or more individuals. The applicant had been, according to this report, physically and psychologically ill-treated.
When giving evidence before the investigating judge, the applicant described the abuse which he had suffered and alleged that he had been beaten, inter alios, by a prison guard whose identification number had been 1244. The prison governor, however, subsequently informed the investigating judge that there had been no such guard employed by Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution.
The investigating judge also requested video footage from the security cameras in front of the applicant’s cell, but the prison governor stated that there had been no video-surveillance equipment installed at that time.
On 27 February 2013 the Požarevac public prosecutor’s office decided that there were no grounds for the instigation of criminal proceedings at that point, but ordered the police to further investigate the matter and to attempt to identify the perpetrators.
On 1 April 2013 the investigating judge asked the Požarevac public prosecutor’s office to provide her with the case file, since the applicant had asked for an opportunity to face his possible abusers in person for recognition purposes.
On 16 April 2013 the Požarevac public prosecutor’s office provided the investigating judge with the case file.
On 15 May 2013 the Požarevac public prosecutor’s office informed the investigating judge that it had decided that there were no grounds for the institution of a criminal case.
On 27 May 2013 the Ministry of Justice and State Administration (Ministarstvo pravde i državne uprave) sent a letter to the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office (Republičko javno tužilaštvo), requesting a report on the applicant’s case. In so doing, it explained that the European Commission had expressed an interest in this regard.
On 3 June 2013 the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office provided the ministry with the report as requested.
On 7 September 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal.
On 10 July 2013 the Constitutional Court found a violation of Article 25 of the Constitution (see paragraph 45 below), specifically of the applicant’s right to the inviolability of his physical and mental integrity (as regards both its substantive and procedural aspects) in respect of the incidents of 11 June 2007, 18 December 2009, and 22 and 24 December 2011 (see paragraphs 14, 15, 19 and 21-22 above), and awarded him 1,000 euros (EUR) for the non-pecuniary damage suffered in this connection. It further found that the applicant had been subjected to inhuman treatment in respect of all four incidents and that as regards the incidents of 11 June 2007, 18 December 2009 and 22 December 2011, in particular, the force used against him had been justified but excessive. While this treatment, according to the Constitutional Court, had caused the applicant serious suffering, there was no proof that the prison guards had intended to inflict it upon him in order to achieve a certain goal within the meaning of the caselaw of the European Court of Human Rights (see, for example, Aksoy v. Turkey, 18 December 1996, §§ 63 and 64, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1996-VI, as one of the judgments specifically cited by the Constitutional Court in the general principles part of its decision). The Constitutional Court furthermore held that the relevant authorities had also failed to carry out an effective investigation in respect of the said four incidents. Regarding the incident of 24 December 2011 only, the Constitutional Court ordered that the official investigation be expedited. It further explained that in awarding compensation for the non-pecuniary damage suffered by the applicant it had taken into account its own practice in other similar cases, the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights, the “social circumstances” in Serbia itself, and the “very essence” (sama suština) of “compensation for non-pecuniary harm” as such. Lastly, the Constitutional Court ordered that its decision be published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia.
The applicant’s representative was served with the Constitutional Court’s decision on 7 October 2013.
On 19 August 2013 the Court of First Instance dismissed the applicant’s motion of 1 April 2013 aimed at the recognition of his abusers (see paragraph 30 above), stating, inter alia, that all prison staff carried badges with their names and photographs on them and must therefore have been known to the applicant.
On 7 September 2015 the police provided the Požarevac public prosecutor’s office with another report on the steps it had additionally taken in order to collect relevant information. Prison guards and inmates had been interviewed and documentation had been reviewed, but the ultimate conclusion remained that the force used against the applicant had been lawful, necessary and proportionate.
On 8 September 2015 the Požarevac public prosecutor’s office requested that the police re-interview the applicant in order to identify the prison guards in question. They further sought information in respect of any measures taken in response to the Ombudsman’s recommendations (see paragraph 22 above).
On 22 February 2016 the applicant was interviewed once again, this time in the premises of the Požarevac public prosecutor’s office, and repeated the account of his ill-treatment. Specifically that on 24 December 2011, following a visit by his brother who had apparently complained of his earlier abuse, he had been gratuitously assaulted and severely beaten by a number of prison guards and insulted for being a Muslim. The applicant further noted that one of the prison guards who had attacked him had carried identification card no. 1224 rather than 1244 which may have erroneously been attributed to his earlier statement given to the investigating judge (see paragraph 27 above). Lastly, the applicant proposed, inter alia, that he should be given an opportunity to face in person all of the prison guards who had been on duty at the relevant time in order to identify his abusers and that an additional witness, an inmate like himself, should also be interviewed in this regard.
On 23 February 2016, in response to his earlier request, the applicant received official confirmation that in 2011 and 2012 a prison guard with the identification no. 1224 had been employed by Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution.
On 5 April 2016 the applicant supplemented his earlier criminal complaints, identifying by forename and surname one of the prison guards who had allegedly beaten him on 24 December 2011. He also referred to the prison guard carrying identification card no. 1224 and repeated that he had likewise taken part in his abuse. The applicant, lastly, repeated his evidentiary request of 22 February 2016 regarding what the next steps in the investigation ought to be (see paragraph 41 above).
On 4 July 2016 the witness proposed by the applicant (see paragraph 41 in fine above) was interviewed in the Požarevac public prosecutor’s office. He stated that both he and the applicant had been severely beaten without provocation on 22 December 2011. As regard the applicant’s alleged abuse “post 22 December 2011”, the witness, who had been in the cell next to the applicant’s at the time, stated that he had not personally observed the assault, “which [had taken] place on a Sunday”, but had heard commotion and the applicant’s voice and had therefore “concluded that he [had been] beaten”.
Article 25 of the Constitution reads as follows:
“Physical and mental integrity is inviolable.
Nobody may be subjected to torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, nor subjected to medical and other experiments without their free consent.”
Article 137 of the Criminal Code reads as follows:
“1. Whoever ill-treats another or treats another in a humiliating and degrading manner shall be punished with imprisonment of up to one year.
Whoever causes severe pain or suffering to another for such purposes as obtaining from him [or her] or a third person a confession, a statement or information, or intimidating or unlawfully punishing him [or her] or a third person ... shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to five years.
If the offence specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 above is committed by an official acting in an official capacity, the official concerned shall be punished for the offence specified in paragraph 1 with imprisonment from three months to three years, and for the offence specified in paragraph 2 with imprisonment from one to eight years.”
Read in conjunction, Articles 19, 20, 46 and 235 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provided, inter alia, that formal criminal proceedings could be instituted at the request of an authorised prosecutor. In respect of crimes subject to prosecution ex officio the authorised prosecutor was the public prosecutor personally. The latter’s authority to decide whether to press charges, however, was bound by the principle of legality which required that he or she had to act whenever there was a reasonable suspicion that a crime subject to prosecution ex officio had been committed. It made no difference whether the public prosecutor had learnt of the incident from a criminal complaint lodged by the victim or another person, or indeed even if he or she had only heard rumours to that effect.
Article 224 provided, inter alia, that a criminal complaint could be lodged in writing or orally. It also stated that a court of law, should it receive a complaint of this sort, had to immediately forward it to the competent public prosecutor.
Article 61 provided that should the public prosecutor decide that there were no bases on which to press charges, he or she had to inform the victim of this decision, who then had the right to take over the prosecution of the case on his or her own behalf, in the capacity of a “subsidiary prosecutor” (oštećeni kao tužilac) within eight days of receiving notification of that decision.
Articles 64 § 1, 239 § 1, and 242, taken together, provided that when the alleged perpetrator of a crime remained unknown, a subsidiary prosecutor was entitled to request that the investigating judge undertake specific, additional, measures aimed at the establishment of his or her identity prior to deciding on whether or not to seek the institution of a formal judicial investigation. If the investigating judge rejected this request, it was, pursuant to Article 243 § 7, up to the pre-trial Chamber of the same court to rule on the matter.
Article 257 § 2 provided that, once a formal judicial investigation had been completed, the investigating judge had to provide the public prosecutor with the case file. The prosecutor then had to decide on how to proceed within fifteen days, that is to say whether to ask for additional information from the investigating judge, file an indictment with the court, or drop the charges in question.
Article 259 § 2 provided, inter alia, that the provisions of Article 257 § 2 had also to be applied, mutatis mutandis, to a subsidiary prosecutor.
Article 200 of the Obligation Act provides, inter alia, that anyone who has suffered fear, physical pain or mental anguish as a consequence of a breach of his or her reputation, personal integrity, liberty or of his or her other personal rights (prava ličnosti) is entitled to seek financial compensation.
Article 172 § 1 provides that a legal entity (pravno lice), which includes the State, is liable for any damage caused by one of “its bodies” to a “third person”.
In this report the CPT noted as follows:
“41. ... As regards Belgrade District Prison, the delegation received only a few allegations of physical ill-treatment by staff. They referred to truncheon blows inflicted by staff working in Unit 312 and by a special group of officers tasked for rapid intervention, as a form of punishment for making requests considered unacceptable by staff or in the context of resolving inter-prisoner conflicts.
In contrast, at Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution, the delegation received a number of allegations of recent physical ill-treatment, which referred to truncheon blows, kicks and slaps by custodial staff. Most of those allegations came from prisoners held in Pavilion VII; in particular, it was alleged that staff would take prisoners who had made complaints to the basement of that unit and beat them there. More generally, the delegation gained the clear impression that there was an atmosphere of fear in Pavilion VII; many inmates claimed to have been warned by staff that they would be beaten if caught asleep during the day or in case of complaining ...
Further, credible allegations of physical ill-treatment by staff were heard from prisoners held in the remand section of Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution, where the general atmosphere was very tense ...
The CPT recommends that the management of Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution make use of all means at their disposal to decrease tension, in particular at the establishment’s high security unit, Pavilion VII and the remand section. In addition to investigating complaints made by prisoners, this will require the regular presence of the establishment’s senior managers in the detention areas (including in the remand section), their direct contact with prisoners, and the improvement of prison staff training.
In this context, the management of Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution must deliver the clear message to custodial staff that physical ill-treatment of inmates as well as other forms of disrespectful or provocative behaviour vis-à-vis prisoners are not acceptable and will be dealt with severely. A similar message should be given to staff at Belgrade District Prison.
Further, prison staff ... should be reminded that the force used to control violent and/or recalcitrant prisoners should be no more than necessary and once prisoners have been brought under control, there can be no justification for their being struck.
...
During the 2007 visit, the delegation observed that custodial staff in the ... prisons visited were carrying truncheons in full view of inmates. As mentioned in the 2004 report, this is not conducive to developing good relations between staff and prisoners. In their response to this report, the Serbian authorities indicated that truncheons were part of the uniform. The CPT would like to stress that, in its view, prison staff should never carry truncheons in a visible manner inside detention areas; if it is deemed necessary for staff to carry truncheons, they should be hidden from view.
Further, the delegation found wooden sticks and iron rods in staff offices located in pavilions at Požarevac-Zabela and Sremska Mitrovica Correctional Institutions. The CPT recommends that these objects be removed from the offices of custodial staff without delay.
The CPT is concerned by the manner in which the resort to “coercive means” was being documented at the three establishments visited. As already mentioned ..., at [the] Požarevac Zabela Correctional Institution, staff tried to alter the information in the register of the resort to “coercive means” in respect of the past years. Further, there appeared to be discrepancies between the information in the register and the one kept by health-care services, as well as in the individual reports on the use of “coercive means”. In addition, in the establishments visited, neither the registers, nor the reports on the use of “coercive means” gave any information about the type of fixation used or the length of fixation. Finally, in many cases, the description of the incident that led to the resort to “coercive means” was very poor.
In any prison system, prison staff may on occasion have to use force to control violent and/or recalcitrant prisoners. These are clearly high risk situations insofar as the possible ill-treatment of prisoners is concerned, and as such they call for specific safeguards. In particular, a record should be kept of every instance of resort to “coercive means” against prisoners. Moreover, physical force and means of restraint should never be applied as a punishment. A prisoner against whom any means of force have been used should have the right to be immediately examined and, if necessary, treated by a medical doctor. The results of the examination (including any relevant statements by the prisoner and the doctor’s conclusions) should be formally recorded and made available to the prisoner, who in addition should be entitled, if he so wishes, to undergo a forensic medical examination. The CPT recommends that the Serbian authorities take steps to bring the practice in line with the above considerations. In this context, it is also important to ensure that prosecutors and the Ministry of Justice’s Inspectorate are systematically notified of any use of physical force and “coercive means” by prison staff, and that they be particularly vigilant when examining such cases.
As stressed by the CPT in the report on its 2004 [visit], prison health-care services can make a significant contribution to prevention of ill-treatment of detained persons. The examination of medical records at the three establishments visited revealed that the recording and reporting of injuries observed on newly-arrived prisoners remained a problem ...
It is also noteworthy that, at Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution, the delegation was told by the head doctor that an instruction had recently been issued by the Administration for the Enforcement of Penal Sanctions not to record "light traumatic injuries". The CPT would like to receive clarification of this point from the Serbian authorities.”
In this report the CPT noted as follows:
“32. The CPT’s delegation carried out follow-up visits to Belgrade District Prison and Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution, where it focused its attention on the high security and remand sections, as well as the Special Department. A first-time visit was carried out to the Požarevac Correctional Institution for Women.
...
No allegations of physical ill-treatment of prisoners by staff were received at Požarevac Correctional Institution for Women and at the remand section of the Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution. As regards the latter establishment, the atmosphere was visibly better than that observed during the 2007 visit.
However, the delegation did receive some allegations of physical ill-treatment of prisoners by staff at Belgrade District Prison, as well as of verbal abuse. In one recent case, an inmate alleged that he had been taken out of his cell, brought in the stairway – where there was no CCTV coverage – and beaten by custodial staff (punched and kicked) because he had refused to separate two of his co-inmates fighting in the cell. The inmate concerned saw the prison doctor on the following day, who recorded the following information: haematomas in the region of the right shoulder (20 cm x 20 cm, and 30 cm x 30 cm), redness and swelling under the right eye (5 cm x 5 cm). However, the medical record did not mention any cause for the injuries. The inmate lodged a complaint concerning this incident, through his mother. The CPT would like to receive in due course information on the outcome of the investigation carried out following this complaint.
Many allegations of physical ill-treatment of prisoners by staff were heard in the high security unit (Pavilion VII) of Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution; the ill-treatment alleged consisted of truncheon blows and kicks and related to staff responding to minor violations of prison discipline. That said, there seemed to have been a decrease in the number of ill-treatment allegations, coinciding with the appointment of a new prison director and a new head of security department in the spring of 2010.
The Committee recommends that the management of Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution deliver a clear reminder to all the custodial staff that the ill-treatment of prisoners, in any form, is unacceptable and that anyone committing, aiding and abetting or tolerating such abuses will be severely punished. The establishment’s management should demonstrate increased vigilance in this area by ensuring the regular presence of prison managers in the detention areas (including the high security unit), their direct contact with prisoners, the investigation of complaints made by prisoners, and improved staff training. Further, in the context of the prevention and investigation of ill-treatment, consideration should be given to more extensive CCTV coverage, coupled with secure recordings and an adequate policy of storage of the recorded data.
A similar reminder should be given to staff at [the] Belgrade District Prison.
The CPT has already stressed in its reports on the two previous visits to Serbia that the prison health-care services can make a significant contribution to the prevention of ill-treatment of detained persons through the systematic recording of injuries and, if appropriate, the provision of information to the relevant authorities. The examination of medical records at Belgrade District Prison and Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution showed that the recording and reporting of injuries observed on prisoners, both upon admission or during their stay in the establishments, continued to leave much to be desired ...
In addition, inmates told the delegation that medical staff at Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution was reluctant to record such injuries and react to allegations of ill-treatment. The CPT recommends that steps be taken to ensure that medical staff at Požarevac-Zabela Correctional Institution are aware of their responsibilities in this respect.”