The case originated in an application (no. 52722/15) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Syrian national, S.K. (“the applicant”), on 26 October 2015. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Ms I. Biryukova, a lawyer practising in Podolsk. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 26 October and 12 November 2015 the Court indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court that the applicant should not be removed from Russia for the duration of the proceedings before the Court.
On 12 November 2015 the complaints under Articles 2, 3, 5, 8 and 13 of the Convention were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1986. Since February 2015 he has been kept in a detention centre for foreign nationals in the town of Makhachkala, Dagestan Republic, Russia.
The applicant arrived in Russia in October 2011. He was in possession of a visa declaring the purpose of his visit as business. The applicant’s visa was due to expire in October 2012. However, the visa allowed the applicant to stay in Russia for no longer than ninety days in the course of a single visit. As submitted by the Government, he was therefore expected to leave Russia in early 2012.
The applicant did not leave and started to live together with Ms B., a Russian national. In November 2013 they had a child together. In April 2014 they married.
In the meantime, on 15 and 19 February 2013 the applicant was found guilty of an offence under Article 18.10 of the Code of Administrative Offences (CAO), which provided that a foreigner could be punished for unlawful employment activities in Russia.
By judgment of 26 February 2015 the Sovetskiy District Court of Makhachkala found the applicant guilty of an offence under Article 18.8 § 1.1 of the CAO (see paragraph 24 below), of remaining in Russia after the expiry of the visa. It sentenced him to a fine and a penalty of forcible administrative removal (принудительное административное выдворение) from Russia. The District Court held as follows:
“Article 18.8 § 1.1 of the CAO provides for the following penalties: a fine of between 2,000 and 5,000 roubles with or without administrative removal from Russia ...
 The subsidiary penalty of administrative removal from Russian may be imposed with due regard to the information that confirms the actual need to impose such a penalty on the defendant, as well as the information that confirms the proportionality of this penalty as the only acceptable measure for achieving a balance between the public and private interests at stake ...
The defendant has no legal grounds for remaining in Russia. If a fine is imposed, the defendant will add himself to the group of illegal labour immigrants who do everything to avoid compliance with the Russian migration legislation. The penalty of administrative removal is also necessary for the sake of national security, to avoid the spread of various infectious diseases such as HIV, tuberculosis and leprosy, and to ensure the optimal balance of labour resources and in order to support, as a matter of priority, the employment of Russian nationals ...”
In the same judgment the District Court ordered that, while awaiting enforcement of the administrative removal, the applicant be placed in a special detention facility for foreigners in the town of Makhachkala.
Lawyer D. lodged a statement of appeal on behalf of the applicant against the judgment of 26 February 2015. It appears that the applicant raised arguments relating to his family life in Russia; it is unclear whether he raised any argument relating to a risk to his life and physical integrity in the event of enforcement of the penalty of forcible removal.
On 4 March 2015 the Supreme Court of the Dagestan Republic upheld the judgment. The appeal court held as follows:
“Article 18.8 § 1.1 of the CAO provides for the following penalties: a fine of between 2,000 and 5,000 roubles with administrative removal from Russia ...
[The applicant] has committed a violation of the regime applicable for the presence of foreigners in Russia, by way of omitting after 7 October 2012 to leave Russia ...
The court dismisses [the applicant’s] argument relating to his family life in Russia ... The marriage with Ms B. was concluded on 28 April 2014, which was a long time after the commission of the offence by [the applicant] ... The administrative offence record did not contain any information relating to his family life in Russia. No such information was adduced during the proceedings before the first-instance court ...
[The applicant’s] prolonged violation of the migration legislation since October 2012 amounts to abuse of Russia’s hospitality and thus should be treated as a breach of the receiving country’s interests ...”
On an unspecified date the applicant received a copy of the appeal decision.
The penalty of administrative removal was not enforced. According to the Government, the bailiff service instituted enforcement proceedings on 12 March 2015, but they were not pursued on account of an application lodged by the applicant for temporary asylum (see below).
On 5 May 2015 the applicant applied for temporary asylum. He referred to the ongoing intensive military actions in Syria, in particular in his home town of Aleppo. He further argued that given his age, he would be drafted by the governmental forces for active military service, thereby putting his life and physical integrity in danger.
It appears that the applicant engaged lawyer K. to assist him in those proceedings and had a meeting with him in the detention centre. On 2 June 2015 the applicant called the lawyer from the detention centre, complaining of beatings. On the same day, the lawyer was refused access to the applicant in the detention centre, apparently because he should have obtained authorisation for the visit from the regional migration authority. The lawyer wrote to the regional prosecutor’s office complaining of a violation of the applicant’s rights and physical integrity.
On 4 June 2015 the lawyer made a further unsuccessful attempt to gain access to the applicant.
On 6 August 2015 the local migration authority dismissed the applicant’s application for temporary asylum. The applicant sought review of this refusal before the Federal Migration Service (“the FMS”). On 24 September 2015 the FMS upheld its decision, stating as follows:
“In February 2012 there were no large-scale military operations in Syria; there were only localised hostilities between governmental forces and opposition groups. Despite the above, the applicant failed to leave Russia ... At the time he did not apply for asylum and continued to stay in Russia unlawfully until the imposition of the penalty of administrative removal.
The following violations of the migration rules for foreigners should be pointed out:
The applicant arrived in Russia under a business visa, whereas his actual goal was employment. Thus, his declared aim did not correspond to the actual aim for arriving in Russia.
The applicant was unlawfully engaged in employment activities ...
In February 2013 he was twice prosecuted for administrative offences. However, even after this, he did not seek asylum, while neglecting the real possibility of his future deportation from Russia ...
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs points out that Syrian nationals who return to their homeland or who are deported or expelled there may arrive in Damascus and then proceed to other regions that are controlled by governmental forces.”
On 14 October 2015 the applicant, assisted by lawyer M., sought judicial review of the refusal of temporary asylum under the Code of Administrative Procedure (“the CAP”) and asked the Leninskiy District Court of Makhachkala to put in place an interim measure by way of suspending enforcement of the judgment of 26 February 2015. On 16 October 2015 the court refused to deal with the case, concluding that it had to be lodged before a court with jurisdiction in the area of the applicant’s current “place of residence”; his stay in the detention centre did not qualify as a place of residence.
Assisted by Ms Biryukova (who is his representative before this Court) the applicant resubmitted his application for judicial review to the Basmannyy District Court of Moscow. On 27 October 2015 the District Court left the matter without examination because the applicant had not indicated the date and place of his birth; had not specified whether he had a law degree, which was relevant because the case could only be lodged by a person in possession of a law degree; and had not provided evidence that his representative had a law degree. The applicant was required to remedy the above defects by 18 November 2015.
By a judgment of 9 December 2015 the District Court upheld the refusals of temporary asylum. The court held that the applicant was at risk of violence which was no more intensive than for other people living in Syria:
“The grounds for granting temporary asylum on account of humanitarian considerations include the following situations: a grave medical condition for which the foreigner will not receive the requisite medical care in the country of nationality, thus putting his or her life at risk; a real threat to his or her life or liberty on account of hunger, epidemics, emergency situations of environmental or industrial origin or on account of an internal or international conflict that encompasses the entire territory of the state of nationality; a real threat of being subjected to torture or another cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the country of nationality.
Under Article 62 of the Code of Administrative Procedure the parties to the case must prove the circumstances to which they refer as the basis for their claims or objections, unless otherwise provided for by the Code.
Assessing the evidence submitted to it, the court concludes that [the applicant] has not adduced convincing arguments that he is at risk of being persecuted by the authorities or by groups of the population on account of his religion, race or membership of a social group ... Despite the difficult social and political situation in Syria, there are no grounds to consider that his life will be at a higher risk than that of other people living in this country ... According to information from the Federal Migration Authority, people returning to Syria may reach directly the city of Damascus, which is under the control of the government. ...”
The applicant received a copy of the judgment in February 2016 and lodged an appeal. He argued that the first-instance court had not paid proper attention to his argument relating to the risk to his life and physical integrity in the event of his removal to Syria; the migration authority had not refuted his argument while the court had shifted the burden of proof onto the applicant and had placed undue emphasis on the illegality of the applicant’s presence in Russia. His appeal was dismissed by the Moscow City Court on 8 June 2016. The appeal court held as follows:
“The first-instance court considered that the applicant did not fall within the scope of the notion of “refugee” under the Refugees Act ... In view of the applicant’s failure to submit specific facts disclosing that in the event of his removal to Syria he would be exposed to a real threat to his security ... or that he was persecuted in this country, the appeal court agrees with the first-instance court ... The appeal court also notes that the applicant arrived in Russia in 2011 but only sought temporary asylum in 2015.”
Article 18.8 of the CAO punishes various violations of the migration legislation. Until August 2013, Article 18.8 § 1 of the CAO provided that a foreign national who infringed the residence regulations of the Russian Federation, including by entering or living on the territory without a valid document, by non-compliance with the established procedure for residence registration or by failing to leave Russia after expiry of an authorised period of stay, would be liable to an administrative fine with or without administrative removal.
In July 2013 paragraph 1.1 was introduced into Article 18.8 to make the following actions or omissions punishable from August 2013 by both a fine and administrative removal from Russia: the absence of documents confirming the right to stay or reside in Russia; and the failure to leave Russia after expiry of an authorised period of stay.
Article 18.10 provided at the material time that a fine with or without administrative removal could be imposed on a foreign national for unlawful employment activities in Russia.
Pursuant to Article 31.2, a judgment on the merits in respect of an administrative-offence charge is enforceable after it has acquired legal force.
Article 30.12 provides that first-instance and appeal judgments which have become final can be challenged by way of review.
Pursuant to Article 31.6, a judge shall suspend enforcement of his or her judgment in the administrative-offence case where a prosecutor or another public official has lodged a request for review of this judgment under Article 30.12, or in other situations prescribed by the CAO. No suspension is possible if review is being sought by a defendant (Ruling no. 5 of 24 March 2005 by the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia, paragraph 37).
Article 3.10 of the CAO provides that a judge is empowered to require detention of a foreigner in a special detention facility with a view to enforcing the penalty of forcible removal.
The respondent Government submitted several court decisions in support of their argument that the courts in CAO cases were empowered to take cognisance of an argument based on the risk of ill-treatment in order to oppose a penalty of administrative removal:
-  Acting as the reviewing court in a CAO case (apparently concerning offences committed in or before April 2013 when the penalty of removal was not mandatory but could be imposed as an additional sentence together with a fine), the Supreme Court of Russia issued decision no. 19-AD13-6 of 13 December 2013. It reads as follows:
“Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (as interpreted by the United Nations Human Rights Committee) and Article 3 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment provide that a person should not be extradited where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Under Article 3 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (as interpreted by the European Court of Human Rights), inhuman treatment or punishment includes treatment that is usually of a premeditated nature, lasts for hours or where, as a result of such mistreatment or punishment, one has sustained real physical harm or profound physical or mental suffering ...
Pursuant to Article 3 of the Convention against Torture, when assessing the presence or absence of the above circumstances, it is necessary to take into account the general situation regarding observance of human rights in the requesting State and the specific circumstances of the case, which taken together may confirm the presence of serious grounds to believe that the person runs a risk of being subjected to the above-mentioned mistreatment or punishment.
In this connection, courts may take into account the person’s testimony, witness statements, the notes issued by the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs concerning the respect for human rights in the requesting State, that State’s assurances, as well as reports and other documents issued in respect of that State by international intergovernmental organisations ...
A similar position has been expressed by the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia in its ruling no. 11 of 14 June 2012 concerning extradition cases ...
[The foreign national] explained to the first-instance court that he had not returned to his country in due time on account of the ongoing armed conflict there. The case file contains a letter from the Human Rights Ombudsman of the Stavropol Region who indicates that there is an ongoing armed conflict in the country, and that the socio-economic situation there is extremely difficult. Furthermore, the case file contains a letter from the Deputy Chief Bailiff of the Russian Federation dated 30 August 2013; he indicates that all departures for this country are prohibited. ...
The court decision should be amended by way of excluding the penalty of forcible removal from Russia.”
-  An undated judgment from the Moscow Regional Court reads as follows:
“The recommendations issued in October 2013 by the UNHCR indicate that the situation in Syria is likely to remain uncertain in the nearest future. The UNHCR welcomes the fact that certain countries have taken measures with a view to suspending enforcement of removal measures to Syria, including for foreigners who had been refused asylum. Such measures should remain in force until further notice.
[The foreign national] specified that his town of habitual residence had been taken over by terrorists; he was unable to maintain contact with his next of kin. He had not left Russia because he feared for his life on account of the war in Syria; he had lodged an application for refugee status in Russia ...
The court decision should be amended by way of excluding the penalty of supervised removal ...”
-  By a judgment of 13 February 2014 the Leningrad Regional Court held in similar terms as above. It also stated:
“[The Syrian national] has lodged an application for temporary asylum ... The person who has been granted temporary asylum cannot be returned to his country against his will (section 12 of the Refugees Act). The relevant proceedings were pending at the time of the proceedings in the CAO case ... The impugned judgment should be amended by way of excluding the penalty of compulsory removal.”
Federal Law no. 4528-1 of 19 February 1993 (“the Refugees Act”) contains rules concerning two procedures for the protection of foreigners: a refugee status procedure and temporary asylum procedure.
Section 1(1) of the Refugees Act defines a refugee as a person who is not a Russian national and who has sufficiently justified grounds to fear becoming a victim of persecution on grounds of his race, religion, citizenship, membership of a social group or political views.
Pursuant to section 4(1) and (7) of the Refugees Act, a foreigner who has lodged an application for refugee status is provided with a certificate, which is the document that confirms the identity of the person seeking refugee status and permits a request for seeking admission to a temporary stay centre.
The Refugees Act provides the following safeguards to foreigners claiming refugee status in Russia:
“Section 10. Safeguards for personal rights
A person who is seeking refugee status, already has it or no longer has it cannot be returned against his will to the country of his nationality or habitual residence while the circumstances listed in section 1(1) of the Act persist in that country.
Decisions and actions (inaction) by public authorities in relation to enforcement of the Act are amenable to challenge before a higher authority or a court.
Complaints should be lodged within the following time-limit:
(1)  one month of receiving written notification about the decision that has been taken or one month after a complaint has been lodged where no written reply to it is received;
(2)  three months of the date on which the person learnt about the refusal of refugee status.
Prior to the decision on the complaint, the applicant and his family members have rights and obligations as listed in sections 6 and 8 of the Act, in so far as these do not contradict their legal status.
Having received notification on the inadmissibility of the refugee application or on its refusal and having used the right to challenge the above decisions, the person must leave Russia together with his family members within three days of receipt of the notification, where there are no other legal grounds for remaining in Russia ...
Section 13.  Removal (deportation) from Russia
If, having received the notification on the inadmissibility of the application for refugee status or on its refusal, the foreigner does not challenge those decisions while refusing to leave Russia, he must be removed (deported) together with his family members ...
If, having challenged the above decisions the foreigner has no other legal grounds for remaining in Russia while refusing to leave it, he must be removed (deported) ...”
Under section 1 of the Refugees Act, temporary asylum is defined as a possibility for a foreigner to reside in Russia on a temporary basis in accordance with section 12 of the Refugees Act, which reads as follows:
“1.  Temporary asylum is granted in accordance with the procedure established by the Government of the Russian Federation ...
Temporary asylum may be granted to a foreigner if he:
(1) has met the grounds for refugee status but has limited his application to a request for leave to remain in Russia on a temporary basis;
(2) has not met the grounds for refugee status as listed in the Act but humanitarian considerations prevent his removal from Russia.
...
... A person who has been granted temporary asylum cannot be returned against his will to the country of his nationality (his previous habitual residence). ...
Temporary asylum is no longer valid:
(1) when the circumstances giving rise to it have been removed;
(2) if the person has acquired a right to reside permanently in Russia or has acquired Russian citizenship or another nationality;
(3) if the person has left Russia for residence elsewhere.
Temporary asylum shall be revoked if the foreigner:
(1) has been convicted by a final judgment for a criminal offence committed in Russia;
(2) has provided false information or documents that then gave rise to the granting of temporary asylum, or has otherwise violated the present Act;
(3) has been prosecuted for an administrative offence relating to drug trafficking ...
If the foreigner no longer has temporary asylum for one of the reasons listed in subsections 5(2)-(3) and 6(3) above and has no other grounds for remaining in Russia and has been requested to leave Russia, he or she must leave the country within a month.”
The procedure for examining applications for temporary asylum was prescribed by the Russian Government in decree no. 274 of 9 April 2001. Temporary asylum is granted if there are grounds for recognising a foreigner as a refugee or if there are humanitarian grounds requiring the temporary presence of the person in Russia (for instance, on account of his or her state of health) until such grounds no longer exist or the legal status of the person has changed. Temporary asylum is granted for a period of one year; it can be extended each year for the same period at the foreigner’s request. A person who has been granted temporary asylum cannot be returned, against his or her will, to the country of nationality or previous residence.
According to decree no. 274, pending examination of an application for temporary asylum a foreigner is given a certificate indicating that his or her application is being examined (§ 4); such certificate confirms the legality of a foreigner’s presence in Russia during the period when the application is being examined or when a refusal of temporary asylum is being challenged (§ 5).
The Constitutional Court of Russia has held that temporary asylum should be understood as an extraordinary and complementary protective measure; while neither the Refugees Act nor Government decree no. 274 contains an exhaustive list of circumstances that may disclose “humanitarian considerations” and be a sufficient ground for granting temporary asylum in Russia, the relevant public authority does not enjoy unfettered discretion in deciding on temporary asylum; such a decision should take account of the legal nature and intended use of that procedure and the constitutional principle recognising human rights and freedoms as the highest value, as enshrined in Article 2 of the Constitution (decision no. 1317-O-P of 30 September 2010).
Since September 2015 the Code of Administrative Procedure (CAP) has replaced the Code of Civil Procedure as regards various disputes involving public authorities.
Chapter 7 of the CAP provides for “measures of preliminary protection”. Following introduction of a case against the State, the claimant may seek measures of preliminary protection. A court is empowered to grant such measures if:
(1)  prior to resolving the case there is a manifest threat of a violation of the claimant’s rights, freedoms and legitimate interests; or
(2)  the protection of the claimant’s rights, freedoms and legitimate interests will be rendered impossible or difficult without such measures.
Article 85 of the CAP empowers a court to suspend the impugned administrative decision, prohibit specific actions or issue other measures of preliminary protection. Such measures must be related to the impugned claim pending before the court and must be proportionate to such claim.
The 2011 UNHCR Resettlement Handbook states that the 1951 Convention does not require that a person’s departure from his/her country of origin or habitual residence was caused by a wellfounded fear of persecution. Grounds for recognition as a refugee may arise when the individual concerned is already out of the country – in such situations, the person may become a refugee while being in the host country (sur place).
The 2011 UNHCR Handbook and Guidelines on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status under the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees states as follows:
“164.  Persons compelled to leave their country of origin as a result of international or national armed conflicts are not normally considered refugees under the 1951 Convention or 1967 Protocol. They do, however, have the protection provided for in other international instruments, e.g. the Geneva Conventions of 1949 on the Protection of War Victims and the 1977 Protocol additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 relating to the protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts.
However, foreign invasion or occupation of all or part of a country can result  and occasionally has resulted – in persecution for one or more of the reasons enumerated in the 1951 Convention. In such cases, refugee status will depend upon whether the applicant is able to show that he has a ‘well-founded fear of being persecuted’ in the occupied territory and, in addition, upon whether or not he is able to avail himself of the protection of his government, or of a protecting power whose duty it is to safeguard the interests of his country during the armed conflict, and whether such protection can be considered to be effective.”
The Court has also had regard to the UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection No. 12: Claims for refugee status related to situations of armed conflict and violence under Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention and/or 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees and the regional refugee definitions (2 December 2016, HCR/GIP/16/12, in particular paragraphs 10, 17-19, 22 and 32-33); the UNHCR Guidelines on Temporary Protection or Stay Arrangements, February 2014.
According to the Russian Official Statistics Agency, as of 1 January 2013/2014/2015/2016 there were 52/ 1,158/ 1,924/ 1,302 Syrians nationals having temporary asylum in Russia respectively; in 2010-16 two Syrian nationals (in total or per year) received refugee status.
For a number of reports concerning the situation in Syria before and during 2015, see L.M. and Others v. Russia, nos. 40081/14, 40088/14 and 40127/14, §§ 76-81, 15 October 2015.
The Court has had regard to more recent reports and documents such as:
-  UNHCR’s Report “International Protection Considerations with Regard to People Fleeing the Syrian Arab Republic. Update IV” (HCR/PC/SYR/01, November 2015):
“2. Nearly all parts of Syria are embroiled in violence, which is playing out between different actors in partially overlapping conflicts and increasingly involves different regional and international actors. The country is deeply fractured as parties to the conflict, including Syrian military forces, the group “Islamic State of Iraq and AlSham” (hereafter ISIS), anti-government armed groups, and Kurdish forces (People’s Protection Units, YPG), exercise control and influence in different parts of the country. As international efforts to end the conflict in Syria have yet to yield results, the conflict continues unabated with devastating consequences for the Syrian population, including rising civilian casualties, large-scale displacement inside and outside the country, and an unprecedented humanitarian crisis. Tenuous local ceasefires have been brokered in some areas between government and antigovernment forces, resulting in temporary de-escalations of fighting at the local level. ...
The number of persons killed as a result of the conflict since its start in 2011 is estimated to range between 145,000 and over 250,000. The greatest number of casualties has been recorded in the governorate of Rural Damascus, followed by Aleppo, Homs, Idlib, Dera’a and Hama governorates. While men (both fighters and civilians) account for the highest number of deaths, women and children are reported to account for one quarter of all civilian deaths. As a result of the conflict, the deterioration of Syria’s healthcare system has reportedly led to hundreds of thousands of ordinarily preventable deaths from chronic diseases, premature deaths due to normally nonfatal infectious diseases, neonatal problems and malnutrition. In addition, over one million people have reportedly been wounded as a direct result of the conflict, often leading to long-term disabilities, while many more are suffering from the psychological consequences of having been witness to violence, the loss of family members, displacement and deprivation. ...
A particular and deepening feature of the conflict is that different parties to the conflict frequently impute a political opinion to larger groups of people, including families, tribes, religious or ethnic groups or whole towns, villages or neighbourhoods, by association. As such, members of a larger entity, without individually being singled out, become the targets for repercussions by different actors, including government forces, ISIS, and anti-government armed groups, for reason of real or perceived support to another party to the conflict. According to consistent reports, whole communities which are perceived to be holding a particular political opinion or affiliation in relation to the conflict are targeted by aerial bombardments, shelling, siege tactics, suicide attacks and car bombs, arbitrary arrest, hostage-taking, torture, rape and other forms of sexual violence, and extra-judicial executions. The perception of sharing a political opinion or affiliation in relation to the conflict is often based on little more than an individual’s physical presence in a particular area (or the fact that he/she originates from a particular area), or his/her ethnic, religious or tribal background. The risk of being harmed is serious and real, and in no way diminished by the fact that the person concerned may not be targeted on an individual basis. ...
With the conflict in Syria in its fifth year, the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate rapidly. The total number of people in need of humanitarian assistance inside Syria has reached 13.5 million ...
In exceptional cases in which the 1951 Convention inclusion criteria may not be met, consideration needs to be given to broader refugee criteria elaborated in regional refugee instruments, or other forms of international protection, including subsidiary protection, or protection from refoulement derived from universal or regional human rights norms, or based on national legislative standards. ...”
-  United Kingdom: Home Office, Country Information and Guidance - Syria: the Syrian Civil War, 19 August 2016:
“3.1.1  Caselaw has established that it is likely that a failed asylum seeker or forced returnee would, in general, on return to Syria face a real risk of arrest and detention and of serious mistreatment during that detention as a result of imputed political opinion. It noted that the position might be otherwise for someone perceived as a supporter of the Assad regime.
1.2  However, since this caselaw was promulgated in 2012, the situation is now such that actual or perceived Assad supporters may have a well-founded fear of persecution, depending on where they are.
1.3  The humanitarian crisis, which continues to deteriorate, is such that for most returnees removal would breach Article 3 of the ECHR.
1.4  The level of indiscriminate violence in the main cities and areas of fighting in Syria is at such a level that substantial grounds exist for believing that a person, solely by being present there for any length of time, faces a real risk of harm which threatens their life or person ...
1.5  If a person faces a well-founded fear of persecution, they are unlikely to be able to obtain protection from the authorities.
1.6  It is unlikely that a person will be able to reasonably internally relocate to another part of the country, because of the highly limited ability to move, and move safely, from one part of Syria to another, and the unpredictability and scale of violence, and the humanitarian situation faced by the displaced, in areas of proposed relocation ...”
-  On 30 October 2016 the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria mentioned the high number of rockets indiscriminately launched by armed opposition groups on civilian suburbs of western Aleppo in the last fortyeight hours. Credible reports quoting sources on the ground indicated that scores of civilians in west Aleppo had been killed, including several children, and hundreds wounded due to relentless and indiscriminate attacks from armed opposition groups. The Special Envoy reiterated the Secretary General’s condemnation of recent attacks on schools on both sides, as well as the use of heavy airpower on civilian areas that characterised the fighting in Aleppo.