The case originated in an application (no. 64581/16) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Natig Mehman oglu Jafarov (“the applicant”), on 26 October 2016.
The applicant was represented by Mr J. Javadov, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his detention in a metal cage in the courtroom had been in violation of Article 3 of the Convention and that his arrest and pre-trial detention had breached Articles 5, 11 and 18 of the Convention.
On 12 March 2018 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Articles 3, 5, 11 and 18 of the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Baku.
The facts of the case are similar to a large extent to those in the cases of Rasul Jafarov v. Azerbaijan (no. 69981/14, 17 March 2016), Mammadli v. Azerbaijan (no. 47145/14, 19 April 2018), and Aliyev v. Azerbaijan (nos. 68762/14 and 71200/14, 20 September 2018) in that the applicant in the present case was arrested on the basis of similar criminal charges.
The applicant is a co-founder and member of the Board of Directors of the Republican Alternative Civic Movement (REAL). He is a political activist and is known for his critical articles published on Facebook concerning economic and social problems in the country.
On 22 April 2014 the Prosecutor General’s Office instituted criminal proceedings under Articles 308.1 (abuse of power) and 313 (forgery by an official) of the Criminal Code in connection with alleged irregularities in the financial activities of a number of non-governmental organisations. The applicant was questioned as a witness in connection with those proceedings on several occasions.
In the context of those proceedings another member of the REAL Board, Mr Rasul Jafarov, was arrested on charges of illegal entrepreneurship, tax evasion and abuse of power (for further details, see Rasul Jafarov, cited above).
On 18 July 2016 the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan presented a draft Referendum Act, containing twenty-nine amendments to the country’s Constitution. The proposed amendments were intended, in particular, to increase the presidential term of office from five years to seven, to introduce the position of Vice-Presidents and to give powers to the President to order early presidential elections and to dissolve Parliament.
On 26 July 2016 the Government announced that the referendum would be held on 26 September 2016 and that voters would be asked to vote separately on each of the twenty-nine constitutional amendments.
Following that announcement REAL decided to campaign against the amendments to the Constitution and started the process of collecting signatures in order to register a campaign group with the Central Election Commission (CEC). The applicant and Mr T.I. were appointed by REAL as its authorised representatives before the CEC for the purposes of collecting the required signatures and organising the campaign.
On 12 August 2016 the applicant was arrested and charged under Articles 192.1 (illegal entrepreneurship) and 308.2 (aggravated abuse of power) of the Criminal Code. The description of the charges was to a large extent similar to that used in the case of Rasul Jafarov (cited above, § 16), Mammadli (cited above, § 14) and Aliyev (cited above, § 21). The applicant was accused of committing those crimes by failing to register with the relevant executive authority the grants received from the United States of America’s National Endowment for Democracy (NED) under various projects during the period between 2011 and 2014, placing the sums received under the relevant grant agreements in various bank accounts and making payments to himself and other people involved in the projects in the guise of salaries and service fees.
On the same date the Nasimi District Court, relying on the official charges brought against the applicant and the prosecutor’s request for application of the preventive measure of remand in custody, ordered the applicant’s detention for a period of four months. The court justified the application of the preventive measure of remand in custody by reference to the gravity of the charges and the likelihood that if released the applicant might abscond and obstruct the investigation.
Meanwhile, on 15 August 2016, Mr T.I. and another member of REAL were arrested and sentenced to seven days’ administrative detention under Article 310 (failure to comply with a lawful order of a police officer) of the Code of Administrative Offences.
On 15 August 2016 the applicant appealed against the decision of 12 August 2016, claiming that his detention was unlawful. He stated, in particular, that there was no reasonable suspicion that he had committed a criminal offence and that there was no justification for application of the preventive measure of remand in custody. The applicant further complained, relying on Article 18 of the Convention, that the charges brought against him were politically motivated and that the real purpose of his detention was to silence him.
On 17 August 2016 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and found the first-instance court’s decision to be lawful. According to the applicant, during the court hearing he was confined in a metal cage in the courtroom. In support of his allegation he provided a photograph of his confinement.
On the same date the Spokesperson for the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy issued the following statement:
“The arrest of [the applicant], the Executive Secretary of the REAL party in Azerbaijan, comes just six weeks ahead of the referendum on constitutional amendments that his party opposes and campaigns against. His arrest and placement into pre-trial detention of four months come on top of worrying reports of additional arrests of people involved in campaigning.”
On 18 August 2016 a number of international non-governmental organisations published a joint statement, the relevant parts of which read as follows:
“Less than six weeks ahead of a constitutional referendum, the Azerbaijani authorities have unleashed a new wave of repression to silence critical voices ...
On 12 August, prominent Azerbaijani economist and Executive Secretary of the opposition Republican Alternative (REAL) movement [the applicant] was arrested on charges of illegal entrepreneurship and abuse of power, and sentenced to four months of pre-trial detention ...
On 13 August, NIDA civic movement activist [E.G.] was arrested, held incommunicado over the weekend, charged on 15 August with drug possession, and sentenced to four months’ pre-trial detention. Also on 15 August, REAL movement youth activists [T.I.] and [E.Gas.] were arrested and sentenced to seven days of administrative detention each on charges of resisting police. Authorities also harassed civic activist and former political prisoner [B. H.], calling him in for questioning and then subjecting him to a court hearing that dragged out over three days, before fining him 100 AZN on charges of ‘minor hooliganism’...”
On 22 August 2016 the representatives of REAL announced during a press conference that they had decided not to participate in the referendum campaign and to stop collecting the required signatures because of political pressure and, in particular, owing to the arrests of some REAL members, including the applicant, who had been actively involved in the preparation of the referendum campaign on behalf of REAL.
On 3 September 2016 the referendum campaign was officially launched.
On 4 September 2016 the applicant applied to the Nasimi District Court, requesting the substitution of remand with either house arrest or release on bail.
On 6 September 2016 the Nasimi District Court dismissed his application.
On 9 September 2016 the applicant lodged an appeal against that decision.
On the same date the prosecutor in charge of the case applied to the Nasimi District Court and requested it to annul the preventive measure of remand in custody, as the grounds justifying the applicant’s pre-trial detention no longer existed. On the same day the Nasimi District Court granted the prosecutor’s request and ordered the applicant’s immediate release. The applicant withdrew his appeal against the decision of 6 September 2016.
On 26 September 2016 the constitutional referendum took place as planned. According to the official final results, all twenty-nine constitutional amendments were approved by between 83% and 91% of voters.
On 17 August 2017 the prosecuting authorities decided to terminate the criminal proceedings against the applicant.
A detailed description of the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure, as well as of the relevant international reports, may be found in Rasul Jafarov (cited above, §§ 5084).