The applicant complained, invoking Articles 3, 9, 14 and 18 of the Convention, that the authorities had failed to conduct an effective investigation into an attack on him which he believed had been caused by animosity towards him as a Jehovah’s Witness.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Kamenolomnia in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. The applicant was represented by Mr K. Chernychenko and Mr A. Carbonneau, lawyers practising in Lviv and Paris respectively.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
At the relevant time the applicant, who is from Crimea, was living temporarily in Strizhavka, a village in the Vinnytsya District (that is to say the suburbs of the city of Vinnytsya, the centre of the eponymous region) and was working for the Jehovah’s Witnesses organisation there.
On the evening of 26 November 2013 the applicant was attacked on his way home in the street where he lived. According to the applicant, he was returning home after making visits around the village on behalf of the Jehovah’s Witnesses when he was attacked.
According to the applicant, three individuals took part in the attack. From the assailants’ conversation with each other the applicant was able to gather that the ringleader was called Ruslan and the second individual was called Yevgen. Other Jehovah’s Witnesses, who knew the residents of the street where the applicant was attacked, identified Ruslan as Ruslan I. and Yevgen as Yevgen I., who both lived in houses near the site of the attack (see paragraph 10 below). The third person who had been present at or nearby the site of the incident was subsequently identified as A.D., Yevgen I.’s father-in-law. At the time in question Yevgen I. was an inspector at the Vinnytsa city traffic police office; according to the applicant, he had previously served as a neighbourhood police officer in the village where the attack occurred. According to the applicant, A.D. had previously served in correctional institutions.
The applicant believes that the attack was motivated by religious hatred. In his submissions before the Court he described the sequence of events in the following terms. Ruslan I. and A.D. stopped the applicant. They smelled of alcohol. Ruslan I. hit the applicant on the head, while A.D. urged him on. The applicant thought that he had been mistaken for someone else. Accordingly, he said that he was a Jehovah’s Witness, but the attack did not stop. Ruslan I. continued hitting him, knocked him to the ground and kicked him. The applicant tried to escape but Ruslan I. pushed him against the fence. A.D. blocked his escape. Then Yevgen I. joined the attack urging: “Let’s finish him off!” He then held the applicant, shouting: “Get out of here – all of you!” (Убирайтесь отсюда, чтобы вас тут больше не было). The applicant interpreted the plural reference in that statement as referring to all the Jehovah’s Witnesses in the village. Ruslan I. left to get a bat, returned and started hitting the applicant with it on his head and legs. The applicant eventually managed to break off and ran away.
The applicant was admitted to hospital that same evening and was treated there until 10 December 2013. He was diagnosed with a broken nose, concussion, injuries to the brow, ear, lip and knees and bruising around an eye. The nose and head injuries were sutured. On 24 January 2014 a panel of forensic medical experts classified those injuries as “minor bodily injuries”, as defined in the domestic regulations – meaning that they had not been life-threatening at the time of infliction but rendered the applicant unfit to work for a period of between six and twenty-one days. The experts concluded that the injuries could have been inflicted either with a fist or with another blunt object.
At 10 p.m. on 26 November 2013 the police questioned the fellow Jehovah’s Witnesses who had accompanied the applicant to the hospital. On the basis of their knowledge of the people who lived on the street where the attack had taken place they identified “Ruslan” and “Yevgen” as being possibly Ruslan I. and Yevgen I. (see paragraph 7 above).
On 27 November 2013 the police interviewed the applicant in the hospital, He said that, from the conversation that he had overheard between the attackers he had learned that the first names of two of them were Ruslan and Yevgen. He said that he did not know why he had been attacked and that when he had asked the attackers why they were hitting him they had not responded.
On 28 November 2013 the police questioned Yevgen I. He stated that on the day of the incident he had seen his neighbour, Ruslan I., attack a stranger. Ruslan had said that the stranger was a “sex maniac” (маньяк) who was wandering around the village disturbing women and children and that he had intended to teach him a lesson. Yevgen had told Ruslan to leave the man alone; Ruslan I. had complied and had gone back to his house. Then Yevgen I. had gone home himself. However, on his way home he had noticed that Ruslan I. had returned and was pursuing the stranger.
On 3 December 2013 the police questioned Mr L., a fellow Jehovah’s Witness and, apparently, the applicant’s roommate and the first person who had spoken to him after the attack. L. recounted to the police the account of events the applicant had given him immediately after the incident. The applicant had told L. that he had been beaten up by “an unknown man” (незнайомий йому чоловік) named Ruslan. He had first punched him and had then gone into a house and got a bat with which he had continued to hit the applicant. Another unknown man had held the applicant, preventing him from escaping, and yet another man had stood nearby. After the first man had gone into the house to get the bat the second one had asked the applicant where he was from and what he was doing in the village. After hearing the response, the second man had told the applicant to get out.
On 6 December 2013 A.D. was questioned by the police and stated that on the night of the incident he had seen Ruslan I. beating up a stranger. A.D. had told his son-in-law, Yevgen I., and Yevgen had gone to see was going on. He had then returned in two to three minutes and but had said nothing about the incident.
On 11 December 2013 the police questioned the applicant. He gave a brief statement to the effect that at about 7 p.m. on 26 November he had been attacked by residents of the village on his way home. The applicant had later learned that the assailants had been Ruslan I., Yevgen I. and A.D. It was his understanding that the attack had been religiously motivated because when he had told them “You are probably mistaken, I am a Jehovah’s Witness – a person who has done nothing wrong” (Ви напевне помилилися, я є Свідком Єгови – людиною, яка не спричинила нічого поганого) they had started saying “Get out of here, do not preach here.” Those people had injured the applicant in the head. The applicant stated that he was only prepared to give evidence to an investigator of the regional prosecutor’s office, since law-enforcement officers had been involved in the crime.
On 5 and 12 December 2013 and 30 January 2014 two other neighbours were questioned and stated that they had seen Ruslan I. fighting with a stranger and Yevgen I. trying to stop the attack and pull Ruslan I. off.
On 30 December 2013 the prosecutor in charge of supervising the investigation filed a report with his superior, the Vinnytsya district prosecutor. The report noted that the prosecutor considered the applicant’s statement of 11 December to be too unspecific in respect of the respective role of each of the attackers and had invited him for additional questioning on 12 December, but that the applicant’s lawyer had informed the prosecutor on 24 December that the applicant was refusing to give a statement as he did not trust the local authorities because Yevgen I. was a police officer, and insisted that the investigation be conducted by the regional prosecutor’s office.
On 24 January 2014 the police formally charged Ruslan I. in absentia with aggravated hooliganism, an offence under Article 296 § 4 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 36 below).
On 30 January 2014 the police questioned Ruslan I.’s mother, who said that her son had left on 27 November 2013 to go and work in Russia and that he had told her that he had beaten up a man. Ruslan I.’s brother stated that he knew nothing about the incident or where his brother was.
On 10 February 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Vinnytsya District Court challenging police investigator, S., who had conducted the investigation in respect of his case. He stated that the investigator appeared to be using his position to try and exonerate Yevgen I., who had been one of the attackers and who was a police officer.
On 17 February 2014 the Vinnytsya City Court ordered that Ruslan I. be arrested.
On 24 February 2014 a wanted notice was issued in respect of Ruslan I., and the search for him was entrusted to the Vinnytsya District Police Department.
In February 2014 the police investigator filed two reports with his superiors informing them that he had been unable to reach the applicant at his declared address in Strizhavka, and that the applicant was receiving medical treatment in Crimea and was refusing to cooperate, insisting that the investigation only be conducted by the regional prosecutor’s office.
On 28 February 2014 the police investigator examined the crime scene and drew up a report to that effect.
The investigation was suspended on the same day pending a search for Ruslan I.
According to two police reports filed in March 2014 the police questioned Ruslan I.’s family as to his whereabouts and tried to find additional witnesses; both efforts were to no avail.
On an unspecified date the Border Guard Service informed the police, in response to a police request dated 12 February 2014, that Ruslan I. had crossed Ukraine’s border with Russia at 11 p.m. on 27 November 2013 and on 25 February 2014.
On 20 June 2014 the prosecutor’s office informed the applicant that it did not consider that there was proof that Yevgen I. or A.D. had been involved in the attack on him.
On 17 March 2017 the police questioned Ruslan I.’s brother concerning his whereabouts. The brother stated that he did not know where Ruslan was and that he had not spoken to him in three years.
On 13 April 2017 the Ukrainian authorities issued an international arrest warrant in respect of Ruslan I.
On 7 June 2017 Ruslan I. was arrested in Moscow.
On 12 June 2017 the Ukrainian authorities requested Ruslan I.’s extradition from Russia.
On 14 December 2017 the investigation was resumed. On the same day Ruslan I., who in the meantime had either been extradited or returned to Ukraine voluntarily, was questioned by the investigator. The Court has not been informed of the results of that questioning.
On 19 December 2017 a bill of indictment charging Ruslan I. with the offence of aggravated hooliganism was filed with the Vinnytsya District Court.
The applicant submitted, as proof of Yevgen I.’s involvement in the attack, the transcript of a wiretapped conversation between Yevgen I. and a certain G., a Jehovah’s Witness who apparently knew both the applicant and Yevgen I. The provenance and accuracy of the transcript cannot be verified. According to the transcript, the subject of the conversation was the possibility of settling amicably the situation created by the attack on the applicant. In the course of the conversation Yevgen I. denied having attacked or held the applicant. He affirmed that Ruslan I. had been drunk and standing by his house when the applicant had been passing by; Ruslan I., being drunk, had said that the applicant was a “sex maniac” (маньяк) because he had been wearing a long leather trench coat and importuning women and children. When Yevgen I. had seen Ruslan attack the applicant, he had tried to stop him and reason with him, but to no avail.
Article 296 of the Code criminalises “hooliganism” (хуліганство – sometimes also translated as “disorderly acts”), which it defines as “a serious breach of public order motivated by flagrant disrespect for society, combined with particular effrontery or exceptional cynicism”. Paragraph 4 of the Article provides that, if combined with the use of an instrument adjusted specifically or constructed beforehand to inflict bodily harm, hooliganism is punishable by imprisonment for between three and seven years.