The case originated in an application (no. 53645/10) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Musa Ateşoğlu (“the applicant”), on 2 July 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr O. Gündoğdu, a lawyer practising in Kars. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 29 November 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1985 and lives in Kars.
On 27 April 2002 the applicant, who was seventeen years old at the time, was arrested by police officers in Kars, on suspicion of robbery. On the same day, he was examined by a doctor at the , and no signs of injury were reported.
At the police station, the applicant was allegedly forced to make self-incriminating statements. During his interrogation, the applicant claims that the police officers pulled his ears and he was beaten and subjected to falaka (beating on the soles of his feet).
On 29 April 2002, following the complaint of the applicant’s representative, the Kars Public Prosecutor went to the police station to see the applicant. According to his report, there were several widespread bruises on the soles of the applicant’s feet and oedema behind his ears. The public prosecutor also noted that the applicant had stated that he had been illtreated and that he could identify the police officers who had illtreated him. The same day, the applicant identified the four police officers who had illtreated him. Following his interrogation by the public prosecutor, the applicant was released.
The applicant was subsequently taken to the  for a medical examination. According to the doctor’s report, there were several scars on his left arm, bruises and oedema behind his left ear, and bruises on both of his palms and on the soles of his feet. It was noted that his injuries would heal in five days.
On 1 May 2002 the Kars Public Prosecutor initiated criminal proceedings against four police officers, accusing them of ill-treating the applicant under Article 245 of the former Criminal Code. The applicant joined the proceedings as a civil party.
On 9 May 2002 the Kars Criminal Court declared that it lacked jurisdiction, holding that the proceedings should be initiated before the Assize Court on account of torture under Article 243 of the former Criminal Code.
The proceedings therefore resumed before the Kars Assize Court. At the end of the trial, on 15 June 2010 the Kars Assize Court, on the basis of the evidence in the case file, found the police officers guilty of inflicting torture pursuant to Article 243 of the former Criminal Code. The court found it established that the police officers had intentionally ill-treated the applicant to extract a confession. It accordingly sentenced each of the police officers to one year imprisonment under Article 243 of the former Criminal Code, and banned them from public service for six months. Having regard to the good attitude of the police officers during the trial, the court then reduced their sentence to ten months’ imprisonment and five months’ ban from public service. It subsequently suspended the pronouncement of the judgment in accordance with Article 231 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The suspension of the pronouncement of a judgment is regulated by Article 231 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271), the relevant paragraphs of which read as follows:
“...
(5)  If the accused, who had been tried on the charges against him, was sentenced to a judicial fine or to imprisonment of less than two years, the court may decide to suspend the pronouncement of the judgment ... The suspension of the pronouncement of the judgment entails that the judgment does not have any legal consequences for the offender.
(6)  Suspension of the pronouncement of the judgment may be decided provided that;
a)  the offender has never been found guilty of a wilful offence,
b)  the court is convinced, taking into account the offender’s personal traits and his behaviour during the proceedings, that there is little risk of any further offence being committed,
c)  the damage caused to the victim or to society is repaired by way of restitution or compensation.
...
(8)  If the pronouncement of the judgment is suspended, the offender will be kept under supervision for the following five years.
...
(10)  If the offender does not commit another wilful offence and abides by the obligations of the supervision order, the judgment of which the pronouncement has been suspended will be cancelled and the case discontinued.
(11)  If the offender commits another wilful offence or acts in violation of the obligations of the supervision order, the court imposes the sentence. Nevertheless, the court may evaluate the offender’s situation and may decide that a certain part of the sentence, up to half of the total sentence, will not be executed. If the conditions so permit, the court may also suspend the execution of the imprisonment or commute it to other optional measures.”