The case concerns the applicant’s continued detention and the conditions in which he was detained despite being seriously ill.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Bucharest. He was represented by Mr N. Olteanu, a lawyer practising in Bucharest.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms O. Ezer from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant suffers from various medical disorders, including brain damage following several strokes, hemiparesis, prostate adenoma, as well as impaired hearing and severe psycho-organic syndrome (a progressive disease comparable to pre-senile dementia). The applicant, who was at the time of the lodging of the application 64 years of age, is obliged to use a wheelchair and requires permanent assistance, as well as continuous medical care.
In 2004 the applicant was sent for trial before the domestic criminal courts, accused of having committed several crimes in connection with drug trafficking. In the final judgment of 28 April 2009, the High Court of Cassation and Justice convicted the applicant for involvement in international drug trafficking and sentenced him to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
The medical reports drawn up pending trial, specifically on 12 June 2006 and 3 November 2006 by a board from the National Institute of Forensic Medicine (hereinafter “the NIFM”), concluded that the prison medical network was capable of providing adequate medical care to the applicant, who had been suffering from brain damage following several strokes in 2005, hemiparesis, severely high blood pressure, as well as impaired hearing (severe for the right ear and moderate for the left ear), severe psycho-organic syndrome and a minor depressive episode.
The applicant was placed in Rahova Prison starting with 25 February 2011; between 11 and 31 March 2011 he was hospitalised in Jilava Prison Hospital. Upon his return from the hospital, the applicant, who had to use a wheelchair, refused to be placed in the medical wing of Rahova Prison on account of the fact that it was situated on the first floor, which would make it more difficult for him to get outside for fresh air as there were no ramps available; therefore he was placed in a regular cell.
In between 25 February 2011 and 7 August 2012, the applicant spent 350 days out of 529 in prison hospitals.
On 1 November 2011 the Argeş Commission for the Medical Assessment of Adults with Disabilities issued a certificate, finding that based on the relevant domestic law, the applicant’s state of health had not necessitated a personal assistant. This assessment was confirmed by a higher commission on 1 March 2012, the certificate stating that the applicant did not have any functional deficiency.
On 7 August 2012 the applicant was released based on the judgment given on the same date (see paragraphs 25-27 below).
In October 2012 he suffered an ischemic stroke, which was treated in a public hospital in Bucharest.
The applicant remained out of prison until 5 January 2015, when his reimprisonment was ordered in execution of the judgment of 4 December 2014 (see paragraph 33 below). Subsequently, on 7 January 2015 the applicant was transferred to Jilava Prison Hospital.
The applicant challenged his reimprisonment, in view of the fact that the judgment of 4 December 2014 was not final and therefore not enforceable.
His application was allowed and he was consequently released on 9 January 2015.
On 26 February 2015 the said judgment became final, once it had been confirmed on appeal by the Bucharest Court of Appeal (see paragraph 35 below). The applicant was consequently reimprisoned on 9 March 2015.
Lastly, he was placed on and off in Mioveni (Colibaşi) Prison Hospital for a duration of one year and eleven months, until his release on 20 September 2017 (see also paragraph 21 below). During that time, he was also placed in Rahova Prison for a period of two and a half months, Jilava Prison Hospital for some three and a half months (several non-consecutive periods), Rahova Prison Hospital for about two months (several nonconsecutive periods), Giurgiu Prison (thirteen days) and Colibaşi Prison for some two and a half months (non-consecutive periods).
The Government further indicated that while the applicant had been held in Colibaşi Prison Hospital, medical assistance had been provided also by a team of inmates who had not been allocated individually, but rather collectively. Moreover, in March 2017, while in Jilava Prison Hospital, the applicant had been helped by another inmate, V.I., who had been appointed as “his personal assistant”, according to the minutes drafted on 28 April 2017. The minutes showed that V.I. had also been assistant to two other inmates hospitalised in the same prison hospital.
The Government submitted that since 9 March 2015, the applicant had been placed in prison cells (for a total of 115 non-consecutive days) or rooms in prison hospitals where he had at his disposal a minimum 4.22 sq. m, with the exception of a period of thirteen days in Giurgiu Prison (between 29 January and 11 February 2016), when the personal space afforded to the applicant had been 3.06 sq. m.
The Government also submitted that while in Giurgiu Prison, the applicant had not been held in a room fit for physically disabled persons; however, the prison had access ramps both outside and inside the detention wings. The same was true for all prison hospitals, which were equipped so as to ensure the mobility of physically disabled inmates.
Following the finding by the Court of a violation of Article 6 of the Convention in his case concerning the unfairness of the criminal proceedings (Potoroc v. Romania [Committee], no. 59452/09, 14 February 2017), the applicant applied for the review of the decision sentencing him to imprisonment.
On 20 September 2017 the High Court of Cassation and Justice allowed his application and reviewed the sentence, quashing it. The applicant was consequently released on the same day (see paragraph 16 above). The court referred its decision to release the applicant to, inter alia, the medical report issued on 12 February 2013 (see paragraph 29 below), which had revealed that the applicant’s state of health had been serious enough and that unpredictable complications could appear in time, as well as on the criterion of the applicant’s good behaviour, which allowed the court to assume that his release would not constitute a public threat.
Without re-examining the applicant, who was “no longer capable of communicating”, as noted by the court, the High Court decided on 11 April 2018 to acquit the applicant based on the in dubio pro reo principle.
On 18 May 2012 the applicant applied to the Argeş County Court for an interruption of his prison sentence (întreruperea executării pedepsei) on health grounds, pursuant to Articles 453-55 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter “the CCP”, see paragraph 43 below). He argued that since he had been imprisoned, his already serious health problems had visibly worsened, to the point where he was confined to a wheelchair and at the mercy of his cellmates. He relied on Article 3 of the Convention, submitting that his state of health was incompatible with detention.
The medical report of 4 July 2012, delivered by the Argeş Forensic Unit at the court’s request, recommended that the applicant be hospitalised in Colibaşi Prison Hospital, where he could receive adequate medical treatment; the board concluded that adequate care for the applicant’s health problems was available in the prisons in-house medical wings, more specifically in a specialist unit under medical supervision.
The board also mentioned that it could not guarantee that the medical treatment would in fact be provided to the applicant by the prison healthcare system.
By judgment of 7 August 2012 the Argeş County Court allowed the application on account of the applicant’s “dreadful” (deplorabilă) state of health, witnessed by the court itself, and confirmed by the abovementioned medical report.
The court noted the medical report’s conclusion that adequate treatment for the applicant’s ailments was available in the prison healthcare system. However, it considered that humanitarian considerations meant that such care would be better provided outside the prison system, in view also of the fact that the applicant’s release did not represent a public threat.
According to the court’s decision, the applicant was to be released until his health improved. This judgment was immediately enforced and the applicant was released from prison (see paragraph 10 above).
This decision was appealed against by the prosecutor’s office by the Piteşti Court of Appeal.
A new medical report commissioned by the appellate court was drawn up on 12 February 2013 by the Argeş Forensic Unit. The board concluded that the applicant’s state of health was serious enough and that unpredictable complications could appear in time, including with reference to a prostate neoplasm, detected during a medical examination. It was also noted that the applicant needed permanent care and supervision, consequently Colibaşi Prison could not provide adequate medical care; however, the National Prison Service (hereinafter “the NPS”) had a network of hospitals in which the applicant could find appropriate care.
In a final judgment of 4 September 2013 the Piteşti Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal and confirmed the lower court’s conclusions. As evidenced by the medical documents on file and witnessed by the court itself, the applicant was in a deplorable state of health and needed constant assistance, as he was confined to a wheelchair. In view, however, of the seriousness of the crime committed, the court imposed on the applicant specific restrictions and obligations to be respected following his release, such as a ban on his bearing arms or approaching any of the persons involved with him in the criminal proceedings, a ban on changing residence without prior permission from the court as well as the obligation to appear before the relevant authorities charged with his supervision whenever if called.
On 2 December 2013 the Department for the Execution of Criminal Sentences by the Bucharest County Court lodged an application with that court for an assessment of the applicant’s state of health, in particular to check whether his state of health had improved so as to make the interruption of the execution of his sentence unnecessary (see paragraph 27 above).
The medical report of 13 October 2014 commissioned by the court and drawn up by a board of ten experts from the NIFM concluded that adequate health care could be provided to the applicant by the NPS’s hospital network, in particular by a prison hospital unit specialising in chronic illnesses; it was noted that the applicant needed a personal assistant for current activities and that he had had a mild depressive episode; the prostate neoplasm had been diagnosed as a benign hypertrophy of the prostate; lastly, the medical criteria justifying an interruption of the prison sentence had not been met, the previous interruption having probably been granted on other grounds.
On 4 December 2014 the Bucharest County Court found, based on these medical conclusions, that adequate medical care for the applicant was available in the prison hospitals network, having regard also to the fact that the NPS had confirmed that it was able to provide the applicant with a personal assistant. The court further considered that once the medical care or the medical treatment became inadequate or insufficient, the applicant could at all times apply anew for an interruption of his prison sentence.
The applicant was imprisoned on 5 January 2015 in execution of the judgment of 4 December 2014 (see paragraph 12 above).
The appeal against this judgment lodged by the applicant was dismissed on 26 February 2015 by the Bucharest Court of Appeal, in view of the fact that the medical report of 13 October 2014 (see paragraph 32 above) was evidence of a scientific nature, whose veracity could not be called into question, and therefore its conclusions were the only ones which could be used by the court in its assessment of the application. Furthermore, the seriousness of the crime committed by the applicant was severe enough to justify the need to have him serve his sentence in prison.
On 28 January 2016 the applicant lodged another application for an interruption of his prison sentence on health grounds under Articles 589-92 of the CCP (see paragraph 44 below). He pointed out that since he had not been able to receive his treatment in any prison or prison hospital, his state of health had seriously deteriorated, including complications such as hearing impairment, confinement to bed, bouts of confusion.
The medical report commissioned by the court on the applicant’s condition was drawn up on 25 April 2016 by a board of the NIFM. It concluded that the prison healthcare system could provide the necessary treatment for the applicant’s serious ailments and that frequent hospitalisation was necessary in the light of that aim. The report also indicated the applicant’s need for constant assistance in his everyday activities.
On 2 June 2016 the Argeş County Court dismissed the applicant’s application, basing its decision on the conclusions of the last medical report. The court furthermore considered that the fact that the applicant needed a personal assistant at all times did not constitute sufficient reason for the interruption of the prison sentence, in so far as since his reimprisonment, he had had the benefit of such assistance at all times.
The applicant appealed. He argued that he had not been granted the benefit of a personal assistant; moreover, since he had been placed in a room located on the first floor, he could no longer get out for fresh air, as he was confined to the room the whole time.
On 27 September 2016 the Piteşti Court of Appeal dismissed his appeal as ill-founded, in so far as the medical conclusions did not justify an interruption of the applicant’s prison sentence.
On 7 September 2016 the applicant applied to be transferred from Colibaşi Prison to Colibaşi Prison Hospital, as his state of health did not allow him to serve his sentence in prison.
His application was allowed by the Argeş County Court on 17 October 2016. The court found that in view of the applicant’s very precarious state of health, which rendered Article 3 of the Convention applicable, the prison could not provide to him all that was necessary so as not to put his life in danger. The applicant was to be transferred to the prison hospital.
The relevant provisions of Articles 453 and 455 of the old CCP (in force before 1 February 2014), setting out the procedure on how to apply for an interruption of the prison sentence are described in the case of Dorneanu v. Romania (no. 55089/13, § 34, 28 November 2017).
In Articles 589 and 592 of the CCP in force since 1 February 2014 the parts referring to the said procedure have been slightly amended. In their relevant parts, they provide as follows:
Article 589
“1. Enforcement of a life prison sentence or detention may be suspended in the following cases:
a) where it is noted, on the basis of an expert medical assessment, that the convicted prisoner is suffering from an illness that cannot be treated in the medical network of the NPS and which makes the immediate enforcement of the penalty impossible, if the specificity of such an illness does not allow for its treatment under constant guard in the medical network of the Ministry of Health, and if the court decides that the enforcement suspension and the fact that the convict is released is not a threat for the public. In such cases, sentence enforcement is suspended for a limited duration;
...
An application for suspension of enforcement of a sentence to life imprisonment or detention may be submitted by the public prosecutor [or] by the prisoner in question ...”
Article 592
“Enforcement of a sentence to life imprisonment or detention may be interrupted in the cases and under the conditions set out in Article 589 ...”