The case originated in an application (no. 15529/12) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr János Krisztián Balázs (“the applicant”), on 5 March 2012.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Muhi, a lawyer practising in Érd. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that the authorities had failed in their obligation to conduct an effective investigation into a racist attack against him, in breach of Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 3 of the Convention.
On 1 September 2014 this complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the case. In addition, third-party comments were received from the European Roma Rights Centre, which had been given leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1991 and lives in Szeged.
On 21 January 2011 around 4 a.m. the applicant and his girlfriend Ms D.L. were about to leave a club in Szeged, when three men in their twenties, unknown to them, started to insult them. The three men made degrading comments about the applicant’s Roma origin and about the physical appearance of his girlfriend.
Subsequently a fourth person, Mr E.D., appeared, presenting himself as a police officer. (In fact, he was a penitentiary officer.) When Mr E.D. was about to leave, the applicant questioned him about his attitude using offensive and vulgar language, upon which Mr E.D. turned back and got into a fight with the applicant, which ended due to the intervention of three persons, the applicant’s acquaintances.
Following the fight, Mr E.D. called the police. Two officers arrived. The applicant, Mr E.D. and Ms D.L. were then escorted to the local police station. They were released the day after. Although both the applicant and Mr E.D. had visible injuries, only Mr E.D. underwent a medical examination. According to the medical findings, he had bruises on his temple and a haematoma around his right eye.
On 23 January 2011 the applicant was examined by a general practitioner, who found that he had bruises on his chest, back, neck and face.
On 1 February 2011 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the Szeged Public Prosecutor’s Office against Mr E.D. He submitted that the three who had insulted him had shouted at him “Dirty gypsy, do you need a cigarette? Here is money!” and thrown cigarettes and money at him. He also maintained that Mr E.D., who presented himself as a police officer upon his arrival at the scene, had asked the others whether “[they] could not handle a dirty little gypsy” and, turning to him, had called him a gypsy. He also gave a description of the injuries he had suffered.
Furthermore, the applicant explained that the day after the incident he had identified Mr E.D. on a social network. He had extracted some of his posts and submitted them to the Prosecutor’s Office.
In these posts, Mr E.D. commented that the night before he “had been kicking in the head a gypsy lying on the ground when [he] was overcome by three of his buddies”. In reply to favourable posts by other users, Mr E.D. posted an Internet link to a video clip containing a widely known excerpt from a feature film with overtly intolerant and explicitly racist language. He added that the list of the types of people loathed by the character speaking in the clip could be completed with “some other types of rubbish living among us”.
On 7 February 2011 the Public Prosecutor’s Office opened a criminal investigation against Mr E.D. for the offence of “violence against a member of a group” within the meaning of section 170 (1) of the Criminal Code.
On 17 March 2011 the two police officers who had arrived at the scene were questioned, as well as Ms D.L. The latter corroborated the applicant’s version of the events. The testimony of the police officers’ did not contain any account of the incident; they had arrived at the scene only after the fight.
The applicant’s three acquaintances, whose intervention had ended the fight, were not questioned, their identity remaining unknown to the prosecution. The applicant was questioned about their contact details, however the only information he could provide were their nicknames.
In parallel, the Szeged Public Prosecutor’s office initiated an ex officio investigation into the same facts on charges of disorderly conduct (garázdaság). On 5 July 2011 Mr E.D. was questioned as a suspect, where he stated that the applicant had provoked him. He admitted to having pushed the applicant away in self-defence, but claimed that he had neither hit nor insulted him. He maintained that he had made no statement concerning the applicant’s Roma origin and that the fight had not taken place because the applicant’s Roma origin but because he had been attacked by the latter. As regards his comments on a social network, Mr E.D. stated that he had posted them for no particular reason and specified that “in fact [he] had not been kicking the boy’s head ... had [he] done so the [applicant] would have suffered more serious injuries”.
In a decision of 20 July 2011 the Public Prosecutor’s Office discontinued the investigation into the offence of “violence against a member of a group”, considering that there was no evidence substantiating that Mr E.D. had attacked the applicant out of racial hatred. Relying on the applicant’s complaint, Ms D.L.’s testimony, Mr E.D.’s statement given as a suspect in the parallel proceedings and the medical evidence, the Public Prosecutor’s Office concluded that it could not be established who had provoked the fight and whether there was a causal link between the insults directed against the applicant and the fight.
The applicant filed a complaint against the discontinuation on 26 July 2011.
On 8 August 2011 the applicant’s lawyer was given the opportunity to study the case-file. On the same day she requested Mr E.D. to be heard as a suspect, or at least as a witness; she also requested a confrontation (szembesítés) between the applicant and Mr E.D. This request was dismissed on the ground that Mr E.D. had already been heard as a suspect in the parallel proceedings on charges of disorderly conduct, and the records of his testimony were attached to the investigation file and used as documentary evidence.
On 16 August 2011 the applicant also challenged this decision and requested that further investigative measures to be taken.
On 8 September 2011 the Csongrád County Regional Public Prosecutor’s Office upheld the first-instance decision, considering that:
“Accepting the background of the incident, as recounted by the victim and Ms D.L., although it is likely that the action had racist motives, it cannot be proven sufficiently for establishing criminal responsibility – that is, unequivocally and beyond any doubt – that Mr E.D. ill-treated the applicant precisely because of his Roma origin. The racist motive cannot be established, in particular, since before the incident Mr E.D. had intended to leave the scene and only turned back because of the victim’s reproach, and the only information about the start of the fight originates in the contradictory statements of the victim and Mr E.D. Neither the victim nor Ms D.L. could provide further details as to the question whether after having turned back, Mr E.D. made any further racist comments before or during the fight. The Facebook post attached to the criminal complaint only reveals that Mr E.D. had insulted an unnamed and unidentifiable person of Roma origin the night before. It cannot be established unequivocally and beyond doubt, either from the post or from the subsequent messages, that [the insult] took place precisely because of the victim’s Roma origin.
Based on the above reasons and considering all available information and evidence in their entirety, Mr E.D.’s racist motive is probable at the maximum, but cannot be established beyond doubt.”
As regards further investigative measures, the Prosecutor’s Office stated that given the fundamental contradictions between the statements of Mr E.D., the applicant and Ms D.L., a confrontation between them had no prospects of success. Furthermore, Mr E.D. had given a detailed account of the facts in his testimony given as a suspect in the parallel proceedings, which rendered futile his further questioning.
On 11 May 2012 Mr E.D. was convicted of disorderly conduct by the Szeged District Court for having got into a fight with the applicant and was placed on one-year probation.
The Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, provided, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“(1) Whoever uses violence against another because that other person belongs to a national, ethnic, racial or religious group, or forces that person by violence or threats to do or not to do something or to tolerate any conduct commits a felony and shall be punishable with imprisonment of up to three years.”
“(1) Any person who displays an apparently anti-social and violent conduct aiming to incite indignation or alarm in other people is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not exceeding two years, insofar as the act did not result in a more serious criminal offence.”
“(2) Criminal proceedings may only be initiated upon the suspicion of a criminal offence and only against a person reasonably suspected of having committed a criminal offence.”
.  A resource guide entitled Preventing and responding to hate crimes, published by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) (Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights) in 2009 contains the following relevant passages:
“The most common flaw in the investigation of hate crimes is the refusal or failure of law enforcement bodies to identify a criminal act as a hate crime. Therefore, for police officers and for NGOs who receive complaints or interview victims, it is essential to have some criteria by which to evaluate whether a case might be a hate crime.
Hate crime indicators are objective facts that signal that a case may involve a hate crime. If such indicators exist, the incident should be recorded as a possible hate crime and should trigger further investigation about the motive for the crime. The existence of such indicators does not prove that the incident was a hate crime. The proof of hate motivation will come only after a thorough and complete investigation, with a result confirmed by a court.
Hate crime indicators can be useful for NGOs, as they form an objective and consistent factual basis upon which to advocate with police or other governmental agencies for treating incidents as possible hate crimes.
National experts and law enforcement agencies have developed guidelines by which to identify hate crimes, including detailed lists of hate crime indicators. While these may vary, the most common indicators are listed below.
The perception of the victim(s) is a primary indicator of bias motivation. These perceptions are based on the victim’s own experience with prejudice, the circumstances of the attack, their identification of the attackers and many other factors. Sometimes, witnesses’ perceptions can also provide strong indicators of the apparent motive of the perpetrator.
In some OSCE countries, such as Canada and the United Kingdom, any reported crime which a victim, witness or police officer believes to have been hate motivated must be recorded and investigated as a potential hate crime.
Perpetrators of hate crimes frequently make their prejudices clear before, during or after the act. The crucial evidence in most hate crimes consists of the words or symbols used by the perpetrators themselves. Those who commit hate crimes generally want to send a message to their victims and to others and these messages, from shouted epithets to graffiti, are powerful evidence of motivation.
Although hate crimes are most commonly thought of as involving attacks on members of minorities, this is not always the case. Depending on local circumstances, some hate crimes involve minority-upon-minority attacks, and sometimes minority on majority — this usually happens in places where members of a minority in a larger territory are the majority locally. Some circumstances that may be indicative of a hate crime include:
•• The “race”, religion, ethnicity/national origin, disability status, gender, or sexual orientation of the victim differs from that of the offender;
•• The victim is a member of a group that is overwhelmingly outnumbered by members of another group in the area where the incident occurred;
•• The victim is a member of a community that is concentrated within particular areas and was attacked upon leaving that area;
•• The incident occurred during an incursion by members of a majority group into an area that is predominately populated by members of minorities (this is a pattern reflecting the historical experience of pogroms, in which attacks were carried out on a minority population that was largely confined to a particular district neighbourhood);
•• The victim is a member of a minority who is attacked by a group from members of a different population group; and
•• There is historical animosity between the group of which the victim is a member and that of the offender.
Characteristics of a victim that may be indicators of hate crime include:
•• The victim is identifiable as “different” from the attackers and, often, from the majority community, by such factors as appearance, dress, language or religion;
•• The victim is a prominent figure, such as a religious leader, rights activist or public spokesperson, in a community that has faced ongoing discrimination; and
•• The victim was in the company of or married to a member of a minority group.
The characteristics, behavior and background of alleged offenders can also yield several potential indicators of hate motivation. For example:
•• Statements, gestures or other behavior before, during or after the incident displaying prejudice or bias against the group or community to which the target or victim belongs;
•• Clothing, tattoos or insignia representative of particular extremist movements, e.g., the use of swastikas or other Nazi insignia or paramilitary style uniforms;
•• The offender’s behavior (such as making Nazi salutes or attending rallies or protests organized by hate groups) suggests possible membership in a hate organization; and
•• The offender has a history of previous crimes with a similar modus operandi and involving other victims from the same minority group or other minority groups
...
Other indicators of hate crimes include:
•• Previous similar incidents have occurred in the same area in which members of the same group were targeted;
•• The victim or victims had received previous harassing or threatening mail or telephone calls based on membership in their group; and
•• A previous incident or crime was reported that may have sparked a retaliatory hate crime against members of the group presumed responsible.
In investigating hate-motivated incidents and crimes, it is important to take into account all possible motives. For example, an incident in which a person is singled out for attack because of his or her identity may still be a hate crime even if the person is also robbed in the course of the incident. A question will arise as to whether the crime was motivated in whole or in part by prejudice and hatred; in some countries, if there is any mixed motive it will not be treated as a hate crime.
In many reported cases, individuals who have been targeted for attacks because of prejudice and hatred have also been victimized in other ways. The fact that they also had items of value stolen in the course of these attacks – a cell phone or money – is sometimes used to argue that the incident was not a hate crime. An important consideration is whether the particular individual was selected as a target because he or she was identified as a member of a particular ethnic, religious or other group.”
.  The Report of the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance covering the fifth monitoring cycle, issued on the 19 March 2015, contains the following passages:
“53. Racist and homo/transphobic violence fall under Criminal Code Article 216 (violence towards members of a community). According to information provided by the authorities, between 2009 and 2013, there were 191 reported cases of alleged hate motivated violence; 94 of these resulted in convictions with 33 prison sentences handed out. The authorities informed ECRI that 54% of the victims of these offences were Roma, 8.5% were Jews and 17% involved violence against the Hungarian majority...
Racist violence against Roma has been described as one of the most important problems faced by Hungary today. This is committed both by extremist groups and by individuals motivated by racial hatred. Between January 2008 and September 2012, there were 61 separate attacks against Roma and/or their property, with the use of Molotov cocktails, hand grenades and guns. The attacks took nine lives, including two minors and left dozens injured.”
Relevant extracts from the thematic situation report of the European Union Fundamental Rights Agency (“FRA”) entitled “Racism, discrimination, intolerance, and extremism: learning from experiences in Greece and Hungary” read as follows:
Relevant extracts from the Report by Nils Muižnieks, Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights, following his visit to Hungary from 1 to 4 July 2014, read as follows: