The case originated in an application (no. 21503/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vladimir Nikolayevich Kozlov (“the applicant”), on 10 March 2004.
The applicant was represented by Ms Y. Liptser and Mr R. Karpinskiy, lawyers practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights and Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been detained in inhuman and degrading conditions in remand prison no. IZ-77/3 in .
On 27 June 2008 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in .
On 11 September 1996 Mr Z., the applicant's business partner, was killed.
In 1997 Mr Zh. and 17 other persons were charged as an organised group with numerous counts of robbery and murder, including the murder of Mr Z. and the planning of the murder of Ms A., Mr Z.'s girlfriend.
On 9 April 1997 the applicant was arrested. He was charged with aiding and abetting the murder of Mr Z. and the planning of the murder of Ms A. The applicant remained in custody pending investigation and trial. His case was joined to the case of Mr Zh. and the others. The applicant's numerous requests to disjoin the cases were rejected both by the prosecutor and the court.
On 24 March 1999 the preliminary investigation was completed and the case file was transferred to the Moscow City Court for consideration.
On 6 April 1999 the Moscow City Court scheduled the trial for 20 April 1999.
The trial lasted from 6 April 1999 until 18 July 2001. The court held 82 hearings. On 36 occasions the court adjourned the proceedings on account of the illness of some of the defendants, a quarantine in place in their detention facilities or their lawyers' failure to appear. The proceedings were interrupted twice on account of a security threat in the courthouse. On six occasions the proceedings were adjourned on account of clashes in the judge's schedule, his illness or the authorities' failure to transport the defendants to the court house.
On 18 July 2001 the Moscow City Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to eleven years' imprisonment.
From 20 July 2001 until 15 October 2002 the defendants studied six volumes of the minutes of the court hearings.
On 10 September 2003 the Supreme Court of the  heard the case on appeal. The court upheld the applicant's conviction in substance and reduced his sentence to ten years' imprisonment.
From 26 November 1997 to 17 August 2001 the applicant was detained in Lefortovo remand prison. He was held in a cell measuring
On 17 August 2001 the applicant was transferred to remand prison no. IZ-77/3 where he was detained until October 2003.
According to the applicant, the cell where he was detained measured 33 square metres and was equipped with twenty-four bunk beds. The minimum number of inmates detained with the applicant at any one time was twenty-three. In August 2001 the cell housed forty inmates; that number had increased to forty-seven by the end of the year. The inmates took turns to sleep due to the lack of beds. By the beginning of 2003 twenty-three inmates were kept in the cell. The cell did not have any ventilation. It was stiflingly hot in the summer and very cold in the winter. Most of the inmates smoked and the applicant, a non-smoker, was exposed the tobacco smoke of others. The cell was infested with cockroaches and lice. Disinfection of the cell was performed once every three months and was to no avail. The television and the light were constantly on. Window panes were installed only in late 2002. The toilet was elevated from the floor by 0.5 metres. It was separated from the living area of the cell by a partition measuring one metre in height. The person using the toilet could be seen by both the inmates and the guards watching the inmates through the peep-hole in the door. The dinner table was some four metres away from the toilet. On several occasions HIV-infected inmates were placed in the cell. The applicant was allowed to take a 20-minute shower once a week. On one occasion between December 2001 and January 2002 the applicant did not have the opportunity to take a shower for three weeks. He was allowed to be outside for approximately one hour per day. The meals were of poor quality.
According to the Government, at all times the applicant was afforded at least 4 sq. m of living space. In particular, the Government provided the following data concerning the cell measurements:
Each cell had a window measuring 0.89 by 0.94 metres. The windows were equipped with vents which could be kept open to let additional fresh air in. The ventilation system functioned properly. Upon arrival at the remand prison, the applicant was provided with two bed sheets, a mattress, a blanket, a pillow, a pillow case, a towel, and cutlery. Each cell had a water heater and a potable water tank. The remand prison was equipped with a central water supply, sewage system, ventilation and lighting. In the day the lighting was on from 6 am to 10 pm. At night lower-voltage bulbs were used to maintain lighting for surveillance and safety reasons. The inmates were allowed to watch TV between 6 am and 10 pm. The use of the TV during the night-time was prohibited. The average temperature in the cells did not fall below +180C during the winter and did not exceed +200C during the summer. Window panes were installed for autumn and winter.
Each cell had a toilet, a sink, a table and benches. The toilet was separated from the living area of the cell by a one-metre-high partition and a screen to ensure the privacy of the person using the toilet. The applicant could take a shower once a week for at least fifteen minutes.
During the time of the trial, that is from 6 April 1999 to 18 July 2001, on the days of the court hearings the applicant was held in custody at the courthouse.
The cells at the courthouse measured 2 sq. m. Each time the applicant had to share the cell with two or three other persons. The ventilation system did not function properly and the cells were very hot in the summer. The applicant was not provided with food at all.
At the courthouse the applicant was detained in a cell measuring 1.95 by 1 metres. There was a bench in the cell. The cell was equipped with ventilation, lighting, and central heating. The metal door had a peephole. The average temperature in the cell was between 18 and 200C. The applicant was allowed to use the bathroom upon arrival and before departure or before the start of the court hearing, if necessary. He was provided with food and hot water.
According to the applicant, numerous newspapers and television channels covered his arrest and the circumstances of Z.'s murder before the trial was over.
A documentary made by Mr D. about the case was shown at least six times by one of the nationwide TV channels. The film featured footage of the applicant and Z. aboard a sea cruiser.
On 7 March 2002 the prosecutor's office dismissed the applicant's request for criminal proceedings to be instituted against Mr D.