The case originated in an application (no. 10597/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Mikhail Aleksandrovich Valyuzhenich (“the applicant”), on 5 February 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Valeyev, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his confinement in a metal cage during the criminal proceedings against him had amounted to degrading treatment and rendered the proceedings unfair, and that he had not had an effective domestic remedy in respect of the first grievance.
On 26 November 2014 notice of the above complaints was given to the Government under Articles 3 and 13 and Article 6 §§ 1, 2 and 3 (b) and (c) of the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1985 and is currently detained in St Petersburg.
He was suspected of involvement in large-scale drug dealing.
On 2 February 2011 he was arrested. He remained in custody pending the investigation and trial.
On 6 October 2011 the Sovetskiy District Court of Kazan (“the District Court”) received the case file and set the trial date for 19 October 2011.
On 19 March 2012 the District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to nine and a half years’ imprisonment.
During the trial, which consisted of sixteen hearings, the applicant was confined in a metal cage in the courtroom. There was no desk inside the cage, only a wooden bench, which made it impossible for him to take notes during the hearings. Armed security guards remained beside the cage dock. The applicant’s lawyer could only approach him with the court’s permission. Any conversations between them had to take place in the presence of the guards.
On 10 August 2012 the Supreme Court of the Tatarstan Republic upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal. The applicant participated in the hearing by videoconference. He was placed behind a floor-to-ceiling metal partition on the premises of the remand prison SIZO-3 of the Tatarstan Republic where he was detained and communicated with the judges via a video link.
For a summary of relevant domestic law and practice and relevant international material and practice, see Svinarenko and Slyadnev v. Russia ([GC], nos. 32541/08 and 43441/08, §§ 53-66 and §§ 70-76, ECHR 2014 (extracts)).
Remand prisons are equipped with videoconferencing systems within the framework of the Federal Targeted Programme “The Development of the Judicial System in Russia for 2013-2020”.
In accordance with the Programme, on 18 April 2014 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, the Administrative Office of Courts at the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation and the Federal Prison Service concluded an agreement concerning their use of videoconferencing systems. Annex 2 to that agreement provided for the installation of metal partitions in remand prisons equipped with videoconferencing systems to secure the videoconferencing equipment while inmates participated in court hearings via a video link.