The case originated in an application (no. 14437/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Vladimir Modârcă (“the applicant”), on 20 April 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Tănase, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Pârlog.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been held in inhuman and degrading conditions and deprived of medical assistance, that he had been unlawfully detained and that the courts had not given relevant and sufficient reasons for his detention, that he had had no access to the relevant parts of his criminal file in order effectively to challenge his detention pending trial and that he had been prevented from holding confidential meetings with his lawyer.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 16 September 2005 a Chamber of that Section decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in Chişinău.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant worked as the Head of the Architecture and Planning Department of the Municipal Council of Chişinău, one of the branches of the Chişinău Mayor's Office. Between 24 September 2004 and 23 February 2005 he was held in the remand centre of the Centre for Fighting Economic Crime and Corruption (CFECC). On 23 February 2005 he was transferred to the Remand Centre No. 3 of the Ministry of Justice in Chişinău (“prison no. 3”, which was subsequently re-named “prison no. 13”). The applicant suffers from “diffuse osteoporosis, discopathy at L3L4L5S1, hernia of the L5-S1 disc, radiculopathy at L5-S1 and sciatic pain”.
On 23 September 2004 the CFECC opened a criminal investigation against the applicant under Article 327(2)(c) of the Criminal Code for abuse of power in connection with the privatisation of a plot of land. On 24 September 2004 he was taken into custody by CFECC officers.
On 27 September 2004 the Buiucani District Court issued an order for his detention pending trial for 30 days. The reasons given by the court for issuing the order were as follows:
“The criminal case was opened in accordance with the law, on the basis of Article 327 § 2 of the Criminal Code. [The applicant] is suspected of committing a serious offence punishable under the law by deprivation of liberty for more than two years; the evidence presented to the court was obtained lawfully and the investigating judge was shown relevant evidence that [the applicant] was indeed a danger to society, was liable to reoffend if at large and to destroy evidence, abscond from justice, obstruct the normal progress of the criminal investigation and influence evidence and witnesses”.
The applicant claimed that his lawyer had requested access to certain documents from the criminal file in order to challenge the grounds of his detention pending trial but had been denied access.
In his appeal against his detention pending trial, the applicant submitted, inter alia, that he was ill and required medical treatment in order to prevent a worsening of his state of health and that no evidence had been submitted to the court about the danger of his absconding or influencing witnesses. He submitted that he had a family and permanent residence in Chişinău, a job and no previous convictions. On 1 October 2004 the Chişinău Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the Buiucani District Court of 22 November 2004. The court gave similar reasons for detaining the applicant pending trial, adding that his state of health was not incompatible with detention.
On 8 October 2004 the prosecution initiated a new criminal investigation in respect of the applicant under Article 327 of the Criminal Code for abuse of power in connection with the granting of a construction permit to a private company in breach of a municipal decision. The two cases against the applicant were joined on 3 January 2005.
The applicant requested replacement of his detention pending trial with house arrest. On 19 October 2004 the investigating judge of the Buiucani District Court rejected that request. Recalling general provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code regarding preventive measures, including detention and house arrest, he found that the applicant and his lawyer had not requested that the detention order be rescinded and replaced with alternative measures. The judge went on to find that his detention pending trial continued to be necessary because:
“... the circumstances which formed the basis for detention remain valid; [the applicant] is liable to obstruct the normal progress of the criminal investigation and the establishment of the truth, to influence witnesses and abscond from justice.”
On 24 October 2004 the case file was submitted to the trial court.
On 26 October 2004 the Chişinău Court of Appeal found that on 24 October 2004 the 30 days of detention pending trial ordered by the lower court had expired and that it was primarily for the trial court to examine any matters concerning the applicant's detention pending trial. The lawyer's request for access to certain elements of the case file against the applicant was allegedly again refused.
On 1 November 2004 the applicant requested that the charges against him be dropped as unfounded and that the order for his detention pending trial be rescinded or replaced by a personal guarantee from three well-known citizens.
On 2 November 2004 the Centru District Court rejected these requests as unfounded. It found that the grounds for detention remained valid and that there was no reason to believe that the applicant could not be given medical assistance in the remand centre of the CFECC. The applicant appealed twice but the appeals were not examined, the courts finding that no appeal lay against such decisions in the course of preliminary proceedings.
On 15 November 2005 the court ordered the replacement of the applicant's detention with house arrest.
The applicant's lawyer asked for permission to hold confidential meetings with his client. They were offered a room where they were separated by a glass partition and allegedly had to shout to hear each other. It appears from the video recording submitted by the Government that in the lawyer-client meeting room of the CFECC detention centre, the space for detainees is separated from the rest of the room by a door and a window. The window appears to be made of two plates of glass. Both plates have small holes pierced with a drill. Moreover, there is a dense green net made either of thin wire or plastic between the glass plates, covering the pierced area of the window. There appears to be no space for passing documents between the lawyer and his or her client.
Having refused to meet under such conditions on several occasions, the applicant requested the Buiucani District Court to oblige the authorities in the CFECC remand centre to allow confidential meetings. On 13 October 2004 the court rejected that request as unfounded, finding that no rights of the applicant had been violated and that the meeting had taken place “in the conditions of the remand centre of the CFECC and in conformity with Article 187 of the Criminal Procedure Code”.
On 1 November 2004 his lawyer again requested the court to oblige the remand centre authorities to allow confidential meetings with his client. On 2 November the Centru District Court granted this request.
On 4 November 2004 the applicant's lawyer presented that decision to the CFECC authorities and asked for a separate room in order to meet with his client in confidence. However, they had to meet in the same office separated by a glass partition.
On 16 November 2004 the applicant's lawyer again requested the Centru District Court to oblige the CFECC authorities to allow confidential meetings with his client. On 19 November 2004 he informed the Prosecutor General of his and his client's inability to meet on five separate occasions between September and November 2004 because of the lack of confidentiality, and of the applicant's hunger strike in protest against this situation, a strike which he had ended only when the court had granted his request for confidential meetings on 2 November 2004. He referred to a strike by the Moldovan Bar Association in April-May 2003 in protest at the lack of confidentiality of meetings with clients. Moreover, the prosecutor in charge of his case supported his request for confidential meetings.
On 23 November 2004 the Centru District Court found that its decision of 2 November 2004 had not been enforced and ordered the Head of the CFECC to pay a fine to the State.
On 26 November 2004 the applicant's lawyer again requested the Centru District Court to oblige the CFECC authorities to allow confidential meetings. In its decision of 3 December 2004 the court cited a letter from the remand centre authorities declaring that no recording devices had been installed in the meeting room. The court also found that the glass partition did not prevent confidential discussion and that it was necessary to protect the applicant's health and safety and prevent “any destructive action aimed at impeding determination of the truth”. The court ordered the CFECC to allow confidential meetings in the same meeting room as before. It did not set aside its decision of 2 November 2004.
According to the applicant, in early February 2005 he held discussions with his lawyer in the meeting room about certain documents relevant to his case and told him the whereabouts of those documents. When the lawyer went to pick up the relevant documents, CFECC officers were already at the address. During the same period, he was allegedly asked by the CFECC authorities to refrain from using impolite words about them, words which he had used in a discussion with his lawyer in the meeting room. The Government have not commented on these allegations.
According to the applicant, he had not been given any medical assistance while he was detained in the CFECC remand centre, in the absence of any medical personnel there. He complained in several of his habeas corpus requests of the possible worsening of his state of health as a result of his detention. Moreover, the medical assistance given in Prison no. 3 had been inadequate and he had had to rely on medication sent to him by his wife.
The applicant's doctor had recommended that he receive osteopathic treatment once every three months and during flare-ups in pain, that he avoid cold and damp and be given balneotherapy every six months.
According to the applicant, the cell in which he had been detained between 23 February 2005 and 15 November 2005 in prison no. 3 provided an area of 10m2 for four detainees. Since more than half that surface was occupied by bunk beds, a table, a sink and a toilet, the free space left amounted to 4.78m2 or 1.19m2 per detainee. The cell had very limited access to daylight since the window was covered with three layers of metal netting. It was not properly heated or ventilated. The applicant and other detainees had to bring their own clothing and bed linen and to repair and furnish the cell. Moreover, the State allocated approximately EUR 0.28 per day for purchasing food for each detainee (representing 35-40% of the sum required for food, as estimated by the authorities), and the food was inedible. Water and electricity were only provided on a schedule and were unavailable for certain periods, including during the entire night. Detainees had to refrain from using the toilet during such periods in order to limit the smell. On bath day there was virtually no running water in the cell throughout the day. The toilet was situated right across the table and smelt bad. Finally, the area for daily walks was situated just under the exhaust opening of the ventilation system in the part of the remand centre where detainees with tuberculosis were treated, creating a real danger of infection. The Government have not commented on this latter allegation.
According to the Government, the conditions of the applicant's detention were appropriate, as shown on a videotape of the cell and other parts of the prison. The cell was in a good hygienic state and was properly furnished, ventilated and heated and was designed to accommodate persons whose previous functions exposed them to the threat of violence from other detainees. One hour daily walk and a weekly visit to the shower facility were allowed. Moreover, the applicant had been visited regularly by various doctors from a prison hospital and received all the necessary assistance. Finally, the Government submitted medical evidence demonstrating that the doctor's recommendation regarding osteopathic treatment had not been followed during the year prior to the applicant's arrest.
The relevant domestic law and practice have been set out in Boicenco v. Moldova, no. 41088/05, § 64-71, 11 July 2006. In particular, as regards the exhaustion of domestic remedies, the Government relied on the following.
The Government referred to Article 53 of the Constitution, Article 1405 of the Civil Code and Law No. 1545 on compensation for damage caused by the illegal acts of the criminal investigation organs, prosecution and courts, as well as to the case of Drugalev v. the Ministry of Internal Afairs and the Ministry of Finance, mentioned in Boicenco, cited above, §§ 68-71).
The relevant part of Article 66 of the Code of Criminal Procedure reads as follows:
“...
(2) The accused ... has the right:
...
(21) to read the materials submitted to the court in support of [the need for] his arrest;”
Between 1 and 3 December 2004 the Moldovan Bar Association held another strike, refusing to participate in any proceedings regarding persons detained in the remand centre of the CFECC until the authorities had agreed to provide lawyers with rooms for confidential meetings with their clients. The demands of the Bar Association were refused (see Sarban v. , no. 3456/05, § 126, 4 October 2005).
On 26 March 2005 the Moldovan Bar Association held a meeting at which the President of the Bar Association and the applicant's lawyer informed the participants that they had taken part, together with representatives of the Ministry of Justice, in a commission which had inspected the CFECC detention centre. During the inspection they had asked that the glass partition be taken down in order to check that there were no listening devices. They pointed out that it would only be necessary to remove a number of screws and proposed that all the expenses linked to the verification be covered by the Bar Association. The CFECC authorities rejected the proposal.
The applicant referred to the case of Paladi (decision of 20 September 2005), in which a complaint about the insufficiency of medical assistance in a prison hospital and a request to receive such assistance in a specialised hospital had not been examined for almost three months, despite an express invocation of Article 3 of the Convention.
On 24 October 2003 the Parliament adopted decision no. 415-XV, regarding the National Plan of Action in the Sphere of Human Rights for 2004-2008. The plan includes a number of objectives for 2004-2008 aimed at improving the conditions of detention, including the reduction of overcrowding, improvement of medical treatment, involvement in work and reintegration of detainees, as well as the training of personnel. Regular reports are to be drawn up on the implementation of the Plan. On 31 December 2003 the Government adopted a decision on the Concept of reorganisation of the penitentiaries' system and the Plan of Action for 2004-2013 for the implementation of the Concept of reorganisation of the penitentiaries' system, both having the aim, inter alia, of improving the conditions of detention in penitentiaries.
At an unspecified date the Ministry of Justice adopted its “Report on the implementing by the Ministry of Justice of Chapter 14 of the National Plan of Action in the sphere of human rights for 2004-2008, approved by the Parliament Decision no. 415-XV of 24 October 2003”. On 25 November 2005 the Parliamentary Commission for Human Rights adopted a report on the implementation of the National Plan of Action. Both those reports confirmed the insufficient funding of the prison system and the resulting failure to fully implement the action plan in respect of the remand centres in , including prison no. 3 in Chişinău. The first of these reports mentioned, inter alia, that “as long as the aims and actions in [the National Plan of Action] do not have the necessary financial support ... it will remain only a good attempt of the State to observe human rights, described in Parliament Decision no. 415-XV of 24 October 2003, the fate of which is non-implementation, or partial implementation.”
In its report of the visit on 20-30 September 2004, the CPT found that (unofficial translation):
“55. The situation in the majority of penitentiaries visited, faced with the economic situation in the country, remained difficult and one recounted a number of problems already identified during the visits in 1998 and 2001 in terms of material conditions and detention regimes.
Added to this is the problem of overcrowding, which remains serious. In fact, even if the penitentiaries visited did not work at their full capacity – as is the case of prison no. 3 in which the number of detainees was sensibly reduced in comparison with that during the last visit of the Committee – they continued to be extremely congested. In fact, the receiving capacity was still based on a very criticisable 2m2 per detainee; in practice often even less.
The follow-up visit to prison no.3 in Chişinău does not give rise to satisfaction. The progress found was in fact minimal, limited to some current repair. The repair of the ventilation system could be done due primarily to the financial support of civil society (especially NGOs), and the creation of places for daily walk was due to support by the detainees and their families.
The repair, renovation and maintenance of cells is entirely the responsibility of detainees themselves and of their families, who also pay for the necessary materials. They must also obtain their own bed sheets and blankets, the institution being able to give them only used mattresses.
In sum, the conditions of life in the great majority of cells in Blocks I-II and the transit cells continue to be miserable. ...
Finally, despite the drastic reduction of the overcrowding, one still observes a very high, even intolerable, level of occupancy rate in the cells.
... everywhere the quantity and quality of detainees' food constitutes a source of high preoccupation. The delegation was flooded with complaints regarding the absence of meat, dairy products. The findings of the delegation, regarding both the food stock and the communicated menus, confirm the credibility of these complaints. Its findings also confirmed that in certain places (in Prison no.3, [...]), the food served was repulsive and virtually inedible (for instance, presence of insects and vermin). This is not surprising, given the general state of the kitchens and their modest equipment.
Moldovan authorities have always emphasized financial difficulties in ensuring the adequate feeding of detainees. However, the Committee insists that this is a fundamental requirement of life which must be ensured by the State to persons in its charge and that nothing can exonerate it from such responsibility. ...”
Resolution (73) 5 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe concerning the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 19 January 1973), in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“93. An untried prisoner shall be entitled, as soon as he is imprisoned, to choose his legal representative, or shall be allowed to apply for free legal aid where such aid is available, and to receive visits from his legal adviser with a view to his defence and to prepare and hand to him, and to receive, confidential instructions. At his request he shall be given all necessary facilities for this purpose. In particular, he shall be given the free assistance of an interpreter for all essential contacts with the administration and for his defence. Interviews between the prisoner and his legal adviser may be within sight but not within hearing, either direct or indirect, of a police or institution official.”
Recommendation Rec(2006)2 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the European Prison Rules (adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 11 January 2006 at the 952nd meeting of the Ministers' Deputies), insofar as relevant, reads as follows:
“23.1 All prisoners are entitled to legal advice, and the prison authorities shall provide them with reasonable facilities for gaining access to such advice. ...
4 Consultations and other communications including correspondence about legal matters between prisoners and their legal advisers shall be confidential. ...
6 Prisoners shall have access to, or be allowed to keep in their possession, documents relating to their legal proceedings.”