The case originated in an application (no. 8971/10) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Nodar Gogaladze (“the applicant”), on 7 December 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr Z. Rostiasvili and Ms I. Brelidze, lawyers practising in Tbilisi. The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Meskhoradze of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been subjected to ill-treatment following his arrest, and that the investigation into the matter had been ineffective.
On 12 March 2015 notice of the complaints under Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention concerning the alleged illtreatment and the related investigation was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1986.
At around midnight on 13 February 2008 the applicant was arrested by the Borjomi police officers on suspicion of attempted rape of a minor. According to the arrest and search of person report, the applicant had scratches on his right wrist and elbow at the time of the arrest.
Following the applicant’s arrest a drug test was performed by the drug specialist at an unspecified time, and the applicant was placed in a temporary detention centre. According to the external-visual-examination report drawn upon the applicant’s placement there at 1.30 a.m. on the same day, he had scratches on his right wrist and elbow. The report – signed by the applicant – indicated that the scratches had been the result of him falling down before his arrest, and that he had no complaints in respect of the police.
According to the material available before the Court, the applicant was questioned as a suspect between 11.35 a.m. and 12.45 p.m. on 13 February 2008. He denied any wrongdoing. The applicant was questioned again between 5.20 and 6.30 p.m. on 14 February 2008 as an accused. He denied having coerced the minor but admitted to some aspects of the sexual contact between them.
At an unspecified time on 14 February 2008 a prosecutor visited the applicant in the temporary detention centre to inquire why he had not signed the document containing charges against him. The interview was attended by the applicant’s lawyer. The applicant explained his refusal to sign the document in question by the fact that he disagreed with the charges brought against him. The record of the interview with the prosecutor was signed by the applicant and his lawyer.
On 13 and 15 February 2008 an ambulance was called for the applicant. According to the reports, the applicant was diagnosed with neurosis. He was given relevant medication.
On 15 February 2008 the applicant was transported to the Borjomi Regional Court for a hearing regarding the measures of restraint to be used against him pending the investigation. The external-visual-examination report drawn up by a duty officer and signed by the applicant upon the latter’s transfer indicated that “no injuries [had been] received during the placement in the cell.” It also noted that the applicant had had no complaints in respect of the staff of the temporary detention centre.
On 15 February 2008 the first-instance court ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention for two months. The applicant was transported from the courtroom to Tbilisi prison no. 5.
Upon arrival at Tbilisi prison no. 5 on 15 February 2008, the applicant was examined by a doctor who drew up a medical report, stating that the applicant had a bump on his head and red-skin maceration (მაცერაცია) on the bridge of his nose (“the medical report”). The medical report indicated that the applicant had no complaints in respect of the police. On the same day, the doctor, the investigator, and the officer on duty at Tbilisi prison no. 5 drew up a report repeating the observations of the doctor. Both documents stated, without further details, that according to the applicant he had received the injuries “as a result of feeling unwell during his placement at the temporary detention centre.” Neither of the documents bore the applicant’s signature.
On 20 February 2008 the applicant was transferred to Tbilisi prison no. 8. During the external visual examination, a doctor of that prison found a bump on the applicant’s head and red-skin maceration on his nose.
On 7 March 2008 an investigator interviewed the applicant in Tbilisi prison no. 8 in relation to the doctor’s findings (see paragraph 14 above). According to the investigator’s report, which was signed by the applicant, the latter had received the injuries “when he had felt unwell” in the temporary detention centre and had no complaints.
On 1 April 2008 a prosecutor interviewed the applicant in the presence of his lawyer. According to the applicant’s account, he was physically and verbally assaulted by police officers at the police station, upon his arrest. Specifically, five police officers inflicted blows to his head there, including in the office of the drug specialist where a drug test was being performed. He did not remember telling anyone about the beating.
On 4 April 2008 following the applicant’s allegations of illtreatment, a criminal investigation was opened by the Akhaltsikhe Regional Prosecutor’s Office into possible abuse of power.
On 18 May 2008 a prosecutor questioned two police officers who had arrested the applicant. According to them, the applicant had reportedly been beaten by the uncle of the victim of attempted rape (“the victim’s uncle”). They further noted that at the time of the arrest the applicant had had scratches on his hand. The police officers stated that no physical or verbal ill-treatment had been inflicted upon the applicant.
On 3 June 2008 the applicant was granted victim status in respect of his allegation of ill-treatment. According to the applicant’s statement given on that date, on 13 February 2008 police officers had insulted him and hit him on the head in the car transporting him to the police station. The ill-treatment had continued at the police station as the police officers had told the applicant to tell the truth about the incident. He had received numerous blows to the head. He had then been placed in a cell at the temporary detention centre. That very night he had started experiencing headaches and dizziness. He had vomited, and an ambulance had been called. The paramedics had not asked about his injuries but had given him some medication. The ambulance had been called again on 15 February 2008 as he had been feeling unwell. A prosecutor had met with him during his time at the temporary detention centre. The applicant had not told him about the ill-treatment out of fear of the police who had threatened to subject his family members to the same treatment that he had been accused of. He had eventually changed his statement, admitting to certain aspects of the crime with which he had been charged owing to the threats coming from the police officers. Upon his placement in Tbilisi prison no. 5, his injuries had been noted by a doctor conducting his external visual examination. However, out of fear of the police officers who had previously threatened him and his family, he had explained those away by stating that he had fallen at the temporary detention centre. As regards the scratches on his right hand, he had stated that he had got them in a forest, two days before the arrest.
On 10 May 2010 the applicant repeated his statement of 3 June 2008 but specified that he had had his nose injured in the drug specialist’s office as a result of a blow to his head, as he had been sitting at a table, looking down, and a police officer had slammed his head against the table. He was then placed at the temporary detention centre. On 1 October 2013 the applicant was questioned again and he repeated his statement of 10 May 2010.
On 9 June 2008 the victim’s uncle was questioned. He confirmed having slapped the applicant before his arrest but noted that he could observe no injuries on him.
On 15 June 2008 the specialist who had carried out a drug test at the police station on 13 February 2008 stated that he had not observed any injuries on the applicant’s face and that the applicant had not been ill-treated while in his office. He asserted that he had taken three photographs of the applicant at the end of the latter’s examination which could confirm the absence of any injuries on the applicant’s face. The photographs had been intended to be sent to the Ministry of Interior.
On 24 August 2008 the neighbor of the victim of attempted rape stated that he saw the victim’s uncle slap and kick the applicant as a result of which the latter fell down and either his nose or his lips were bleeding.
On 26 August 2008 an inspector of the temporary detention centre stated that the applicant had had no injuries during his detention in the cell other than the scratches on his hand.
On 7 October 2008 a prosecutor from the Akhaltsikhe district prosecutor’s office ordered a forensic medical examination in respect of the applicant.
On 9 October 2008 the forensic medical examination was carried out by a State forensic expert based on the applicant’s medical records (“the first forensic examination”). The resulting report referred to the injuries as described in the medical report drawn up at Tbilisi prison no. 5 (see paragraph 13 above), noting that the exact location of the bump on the head had not been specified. The expert concluded that the injuries had been inflicted by a blunt object, and they could have been inflicted during the period indicated by the applicant. The expert stated that a panel was to be convened to determine whether the injuries could have been self-inflicted, and if they could have caused the headaches and dizziness of which the applicant had complained.
On 11 December 2008 the prosecutor who had met the applicant in the temporary detention centre was questioned. According to him, he had visited the applicant because the latter had refused to sign the indictment. He had asked the applicant if he had had any complaints but he had had none. Nor had he had any signs of ill-treatment. The applicant had merely asserted that he had been innocent. The applicant’s lawyer had attended the meeting.
On 16 and 17 January 2009 two investigators were questioned. According to them, on 15 February 2008 they transported the applicant from the temporary detention centre to the Borjomi Regional Court and from that court immediately to Tbilisi prison no. 5, and stayed with the applicant at all times throughout that period. They did not inflict any injuries upon him. Nor did they notice any signs of injuries on the applicant prior to their discovery during the examination at Tbilisi prison no. 5. The investigators noted that the applicant had explained that he had received those injuries as a result of falling in the temporary detention centre and had no complaints.
On 17 February 2009 the prosecutor ordered a forensic medical examination by a panel of experts. Two questions were presented to the panel: whether the material presented before the experts had been sufficient to assess the injuries inflicted at the relevant time, and if the injuries in question could have caused the headache, nausea, and dizziness of which the applicant had complained.
Between 24 February and 20 March 2009 the expert examination was carried out by a panel of experts (“the second forensic examination”). According to the resulting report, owing to the lapse of time since the infliction of the injuries and the absence of neurological examinations of the applicant done at that time, it was impossible to establish the link between the applicant’s injuries and the headaches, nausea, and dizziness that the applicant had been complaining of.
On 30 October 2009 the applicant received a response from the regional prosecutor’s office to a query of 26 October 2009 that he had lodged, stating that the investigation was ongoing.
On 2 and 8 July 2014, after several years of inactivity, the investigator questioned police officers who had been present at the police station where the applicant had been brought following his arrest. The only injuries they had identified were the scratches on the applicant’s hand.  They denied having physically or verbally ill-treated the applicant.
On 15 July 2014 the applicant’s lawyer at the time of his arrest and the first judicial hearing concerning his pre-trial detention stated that she had met the applicant in the temporary detention centre, where the applicant had not had any visible injuries and had expressly denied being ill-treated. Nor had he had any signs or complaints during the pre-trial hearing of 15 February 2008.
On 15 July 2014 the inspector that had been on duty in Tbilisi prison no. 5 and the doctor who had assessed the applicant upon his entry in that prison confirmed that the applicant had had a red-skin maceration on the bridge of his nose, and a bump on his head, without specifying the latter’s exact location. They noted that the applicant had not had any complaints and had noted that the injuries had been received while he had felt unwell at the temporary detention centre.
On 15 July 2014 an investigator who had interviewed the applicant in Tbilisi prison no. 8 on 7 March 2008 (see paragraph 15 above) stated that the purpose of the interview had been the medical report of 20 February 2008 (see paragraph 14 above). According to him, on the day of the interview there had been no visible signs of injuries, and the applicant had explained that he had received those “while he [had] felt unwell at the temporary detention centre”.
On 23 July 2014 the investigating authorities questioned the secretary of the Borjomi Regional Court, who stated that she had not noticed any injuries on the applicant during his pre-trial hearing of 15 February 2008, and that he had not raised any complaints.
On an unspecified date the investigating authorities obtained medical records relating to the ambulance service provided to the applicant on 13 and 15 February 2008. The record of 13 February 2008 noted neurosis as a diagnosis. The record from 15 February 2008 stated that the applicant had had vegetative neurosis and contained information regarding the medication that had been prescribed.
On 9 September 2014 the paramedics who had visited the applicant in the temporary detention centre on 13 February 2008 (see paragraphs 10 and 19 above) stated that they had neither noticed any injuries on the applicant’s face nor had the applicant made any complaints to that end.
As is apparent from the case-file material submitted to the Court by the Government, on 29 January 2016 the investigation was closed by a prosecutor on the grounds of the absence of a crime. It does not appear that the applicant appealed against the decision, which was amenable to a one-time appeal before a higher-ranking prosecutor. The decision of the latter was final and not subject to an appeal before a court.
The relevant legal provisions concerning the obligation of authorities to investigate allegations of ill-treatment in force at the material time are set out in the following judgments: Mikiashvili v. Georgia, (no. 18996/06, § 54, 9 October 2012) and Dvalishvili v. Georgia, (no. 19634/07, § 28, 18 December 2012).