The case originated in an application (no. 731/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksey Viktorovich Konakov (“the applicant”), on 14 November 2006.
The applicant was represented by Ms O.A. Sadovskaya, Mr A.I. Ryzhov, Mr D.V. Yegoshin and Mr S.V. Podyzov, lawyers of the Committee Against Torture, an NGO based in Nizhniy Novogorod. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged that he had been ill-treated by the police and that there had been no effective investigation into the matter.
On 2 December 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1982 and lives in Yoshkar-Ola, the Mari El Republic.
At about noon on 12 March 2006 the applicant was apprehended by four men in plain clothes on the street near a shop, “K”. The men did not introduce themselves. One of them punched the applicant in the stomach. Two others handcuffed him, dragged him into their car and took him to the Mari El Department of the Federal Drug Control Service (“the Drug Control Service”). He was taken to an office on the third floor, where the officers beat him for three or four hours. According to the applicant, they kicked him in the head and body. One of them forced him on to the ground, sat on his back and hit him in the kidney area. They tied his hands behind his back with a rope and hung him upside down, attempting to approach his hands to his head. They punched him in the ears and spine, hit him in the spine with their heels, twisted his leg and also attempted to strangle him with their hands. Then they put a gas mask on him and blocked the air vent, urging him to confess.
At about 7 p.m. that day the applicant was questioned by an investigator.
On the same date the police searched the applicant’s flat in his presence. They found no drugs in the flat. On several occasions, both on the premises of the Drug Control Service and during the search, the applicant complained that he was feeling ill and asked for an ambulance to be called, but his requests remained unanswered.
On 12 March 2006 the applicant was arrested by officers D., M. and V. of the Drug Control Service, who had received information about his involvement in drug trafficking.
The applicant resisted arrest and attempted to escape. The drug control officers used force against him (see, for the officers’ accounts, paragraphs 25-29 below).
At 5.50 p.m. an arrest record was drawn up in respect of the applicant. He was advised of his right not to incriminate himself, as well as his right to legal assistance.
At 6.10 p.m. on the same date the Yoshkar-Ola Town Prosecutor and the applicant’s father were notified of the applicant’s arrest.
At 11.30 p.m. the applicant was transferred to a cell in the temporary detention facility (“IVS”) of the Ministry of the Interior of the Mari El Republic. He was examined by a detention facility doctor in the presence of two IVS officers and M., the Drug Control Service officer. The applicant complained to the doctor of acute kidney pain.
According to the register of medical examinations of persons admitted to the IVS (entry no 194), the following injuries were detected on the applicant upon admission:
“... abrasions on his right cheek, haematoma on the right ear, a bruise on the left ear lobe, multiple bruises on the right shoulder and the right side of the neck, a haematoma on the right elbow, an oedema and an abrasion on the left wrist, an abrasion on the right wrist.”
On the same date officer B. recorded the injuries on the applicant’s body (акт о наличии телесных повреждений). The applicant made a hand-written “explanation” to the effect that his injuries had been inflicted by the drug control officers during his “sadistic” questioning.
On 13 March 2006 the applicant was charged with drug trafficking and questioned as a suspect in the presence of a lawyer. He did not confess. He specified during the interview that he had been beaten and insulted by drug control officers on 12 March 2006. He submitted that they had not introduced themselves, had beaten him up in their car and had then taken him to the premises of the Drug Control Service, where he had been illtreated again with a view to extracting a confession. He provided the same description of the events as in paragraph 6 above. In reply to a question from his lawyer, the applicant said that he would be able to identify the persons who had beaten him, and requested a medical examination.
On 14 March 2006 the applicant was released from custody against an undertaking not to leave the town.
On 13 March 2006 the applicant’s lawyer requested that a forensic examination of the applicant be carried out. On 14 March 2006 the investigator ordered the applicant’s medical examination (медицинское исследование).
According to forensic medical examination report no. 899 of 15 March 2006, compiled by an expert from the Republican Centre of Forensic Medical Examinations, the applicant had multiple bruises on his neck, jaw, chest, right ear, right side of the back, as well as bruises on the upper abdomen (left side), which could have been inflicted by a solid blunt object from five to seven and from seven to nine days before the examination, respectively.
According to the report, the applicant also had the following injuries:
“-  bruises on the face, right postaural area, upper third of the posterior surface of the neck, right occipital region, right hip, right forearm, [which] could have been caused by blunt solid objects with a limited surface area, such as hands or other objects, two to four days prior the [present] examination;
-  a surface bruise on the occipital region (right side) and the upper third of the posterior surface of the neck, [which] could have been caused by a blunt solid object with a limited surface area, such as a booted foot, two to four days prior to the examination;
-  abrasions on the lower third of the right forearm, interior surface, affecting the right wrist joint, [which] could have been caused by solid objects of a limited surface area, that is handcuffs, one to three days prior to the examination;
-  a bruise on the right ear auricle, [which] could have been inflicted one to three days prior to the examination by a solid blunt object of a limited injuring surface, such as part of a hand, for example, the palm;
-  abrasions on the lumbar region, [which] could have been caused by a solid blunt object of a limited surface area, one to three days before the examination.”
The expert noted that she had been unable to establish the mechanism with which the above injuries had been inflicted with more precision and specified that the traumas had not caused harm to the applicant’s health.
When questioned by lawyers of a local human rights protection organisation on 7 and 17 April 2006, the applicant’s relatives and Ms Sh., the applicant’s neighbour, testified that they had seen the applicant on the morning of 12 March 2006 in good health.
On 13 March 2006 the applicant complained to a local prosecutor that he had been ill-treated.
At some point, no later than 18 March 2006, a deputy prosecutor of the Yoshkar-Ola prosecutor’s office opened a “preinvestigation inquiry” into the applicant’s complaint under Article 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (проверка по заявлению о преступлении). He interviewed the three drug control officers, Mr D., Mr M. and Mr V., who had arrested him, and investigators N. and P. He also took “explanations” from the applicant.
The three officers testified that they had arrested the applicant on the street at about 2 p.m. and had then taken him to the investigator. Officer V. stated that the applicant had been taken to the premises of the Drug Control Service at about 2.30 p.m. and had then been transferred to investigator N.
All three officers stated that they had introduced themselves and informed the applicant that he was under arrest. The applicant had resisted arrest. Notably, he had pushed the officers, shouted and used coarse language, attempted to hit the officers and to escape. Officer M. specified that at some point the applicant had fallen – and started rolling – on the ground. As a result, the officers had had to use “physical force” or “wrestling techniques”, and had had to handcuff the applicant.
Officer V. testified that, once he had been taken to the premises of the Drug Control Service, the applicant had been interviewed by investigator N. – V. had entered N.’s office at one point and had seen N. putting questions to the applicant. No physical force or psychological pressure had been used against the applicant after his arrest, since there had no longer been any need for it.
Investigator N. stated on 20 March 2006 that a decision to arrest the applicant had been taken at about 2 p.m. on 12 March 2006. When the applicant arrived at offices of the Drug Control Service, he was already handcuffed. The police officers who accompanied him explained that the applicant had resisted arrest. On an unspecified date N. submitted a supplement to his statement specifying that the applicant had been brought to the premises of the Drug Control Service at about 2 p.m. and placed in office no. 314. N. had not seen any injuries on the applicant. He had informed the applicant of the suspicions against him and invited him to cooperate with the authorities. V. had also been present. They had not used physical or psychological pressure against the applicant. At about 4 p.m. N. had transferred to applicant to investigator P.
On 18 March 2006 investigator P. stated that the applicant had been brought to his office at 5.50 p.m. on 12 March 2006. P. had compiled an arrest record in respect of the applicant. He had not seen any injuries on his face. A search of the applicant’s flat had then been conducted. During the search the applicant had complained to his parents that he had been beaten by the drug control officers, and P. had noticed bruises on one [unspecified] side of the applicant’s face. On 13 March 2006 the applicant had requested a medical examination, and P. had granted that request. Neither he nor any of the other drug control officers had exercised any kind of physical or psychological pressure on the applicant.
The applicant maintained his account of the events (see paragraphs 68 above), referred to the medical reports (see paragraphs 14 and 19-21 above) and insisted that he had been in good health before the arrest.
On 23 March 2006 the deputy prosecutor of the Yoshkar-Ola prosecutor’s office refused to open criminal proceedings in respect of the police officers for lack of any indication of a crime. He referred to the above “explanations” submitted by the applicant and officers D., M., V. and N., as well as the medical report of 15 March 2006. The deputy prosecutor observed that the applicant had sustained injuries both before and during the arrest on 12 March 2006. He concluded that the injuries sustained during the arrest had resulted from the use of handcuffs and physical force. The deputy prosecutor further found that the police officers had acted lawfully during the applicant’s arrest. The applicant had actively resisted arrest and, as a result, the officers had used physical force on him as provided for under Article 13 of the Police Act. They had not had to give the applicant prior notification that physical force would be used against him, since such notification “had been inappropriate” (предупреждение являлось неуместным) in the circumstances. As regards the allegations of illtreatment on the premises of the Drug Control Service, the prosecutor held that they were unfounded, because “the issue of the applicant’s confession was not a matter of principle for the investigating authority in view of the guarantees of Articles 49 and 51 of the Constitution”. The prosecutor concluded that the applicant’s complaint in this connection rather constituted part of his defence strategy aimed at avoiding responsibility for the criminal offences with which he was charged.
On 14 April 2006 the applicant appealed against the deputy prosecutor’s decision to the Yoshkar-Ola Town Court. He maintained his account of the events, arguing, in particular, that the arrest record had not contained any information on the use of force against him during the arrest. In addition, the decision of 23 March 2006 contained neither a reference to any document pertaining to the use of physical force and handcuffs during the arrest, nor any details as to why a prior warning about use of force had been deemed “inappropriate”. He argued that the police officers had not had – and could not have had – any information that he had been potentially dangerous. He further maintained that his multiple injuries had been sustained when he had already been handcuffed. He pointed out that he had not been provided with any medical assistance and his relatives had not been informed of the arrest in a timely manner. He further noted that witnesses who had seen him before and after his arrest (for instance, during the search of the flat) had not been identified and questioned. The applicant’s submissions that he could identify both the scene of the illtreatment and the officers allegedly involved in it had remained without assessment.
On 19 April 2006 the Yoshkar Ola Town Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the prosecutor’s decision as lawful. The court noted that the applicant had not objected to the contents of the arrest record on 12 March 2006. The court endorsed the prosecutor’s findings that the police had been obliged to use force and handcuff the applicant because he had resisted arrest. The court accepted that they had acted in accordance with Article 13 of the Police Act, which permitted police officers to use force in such cases, and that a warning about the intention to use physical force had been inappropriate. The court found that the deputy prosecutor had reasonably assessed the circumstances and examined the applicant’s allegations in a sufficiently detailed manner. Furthermore, the court noted that the preliminary investigation into the applicant’s criminal case had been completed. It found that the applicant had, in fact, attempted to challenge the unlawful investigative methods, and it was for the first-instance court dealing with his criminal case to assess the admissibility of evidence.
On 26 April 2006 the applicant appealed against the decision. He submitted, in particular, that neither the prosecutor nor the first-instance court had established in which way he had resisted the police; the authorities had not specified the nature of the orders he had allegedly resisted; the respective decisions contained no details about his allegedly violent behaviour; the police officers had not provided medical assistance to him; and the arrest record contained no information about the use of force, contrary to the domestic law requirements. He further argued that the prosecutor’s and the court’s findings had been based solely on the police officers’ testimonies and that no assessment of his injuries had been made. He maintained that the authorities had omitted to question several witnesses, including eyewitnesses to the arrest and the search.
On 29 May 2006 the Supreme Court of the Mari El Republic upheld the decision on appeal. The court found that all those who had participated in the applicant’s arrest had been questioned, and their submissions had received a due assessment by the lower court. It transpired from the inquiry that the applicant had attempted to hit and push the police officers and to escape. The lower court’s findings had been sufficiently detailed and had been made in accordance with the domestic law.
On 10 December 2012 Mr Sh., one of the IVS officers on duty on 12 March 2006, gave written explanations to a local police officer within unspecified proceedings. He confirmed that on 12 March 2006 the applicant had been brought to the IVS and examined in the presence of a Drug Control Service officer and an IVS officer on duty, Mr B. The injuries listed in paragraph 14 above had been detected on the applicant on arrival. The applicant had specified that those injuries had been inflicted by the drug control officers.
On 31 May 2006 the Yoshkar-Ola Town Court convicted the applicant of drug dealing and sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment. The court noted, inter alia, that there was no reason not to trust the police officers’ statements.
The applicant appealed, arguing, in particular, that he had been illtreated by drug control officers. On 17 July 2006 the Supreme Court of the Mari El Republic upheld the judgment on appeal, having summarily dismissed the applicant’s arguments as ill-founded.
The Police Act (no. 1026-I of 18 April 1991, as amended, in force at the material time) provided that the duties of the police included the prevention and suppression of criminal and administrative offences and the protection of public order and public safety (section 2).
Section 11(7) of the Police Act provided that in discharging their duties, the police had the power to arrest persons suspected of a criminal offence.
The police were entitled to use physical force, special equipment or a weapon only in the circumstances specified in the Police Act and in accordance with the rules prescribed by that Act. Police officers had to undergo specific training and be periodically tested for their fitness to act in conditions requiring use of physical force, special equipment or a weapon (section 12(1) and (2)) When using physical force, special equipment or a weapon, the police officer had to:
-  warn the person concerned of his intention to use physical force, special equipment or a weapon and give him or her sufficient time to comply with his order, except in cases where a delay in using physical force, special equipment or a weapon might create an immediate danger for the life and health of citizens and police officers or have other serious consequences, or where a warning was impracticable (является неуместным) or impossible in the circumstances;
-  endeavour to minimise the damage caused by the use of physical force, special equipment or a weapon, to the extent possible depending on the nature and seriousness of the offence, the dangerousness of the person who had committed it and the degree of resistance offered;
-  ensure that anyone who was injured as a result of the use of physical force, special equipment or a weapon received first aid and that their relatives were informed without delay;
-  inform a prosecutor of any use of physical force, special equipment or a weapon involving injuries or death (section 12(3)).
Abuse of the power to use physical force, special equipment or a weapon was punishable by law (section 12(4)).
Police officers were entitled to use physical force, including martial arts, to stop a criminal or administrative offence being committed, arrest persons who had committed a criminal or administrative offence or to overcome resistance to a lawful order, if non-violent methods were insufficient to ensure the discharge of police duties (section 13).
Section 14 of the Police Act, as in force at the material time, set out an exhaustive list of circumstances in which special means, including rubber truncheons, handcuffs and firearms, could be used. Handcuffs сould only be applied to overcome resistance offered to a police officer, to arrest an individual caught in the act of committing a crime and attempting to escape, and to escort arrestees to police stations, to transport and protect them if their behaviour indicated that they were likely to try to escape, cause harm to themselves or other individuals or offer resistance to police officers (section 14(1) (2), (3) and (5)).
For a summary of relevant provisions of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation, see, in so far as relevant, Ryabtsev v. Russia (no. 13642/06, §§ 42-52, 14 November 2013, and Lyapin v. Russia (no. 46956/09, §§ 99 et seq., 24 July 2014).