The case originated in an application (no. 63409/11) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Roman Vitalyevich Grigoryan, an Azerbaijani national, and Ms Larisa Petrovna Sergeyeva, a Ukrainian national (“the applicants”), on 7 October 2011.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were initially represented by Mr A. Koval, a lawyer with HIAS Kyiv/Right to Protection, a non-governmental organisation based in Kyiv, who lodged the application on behalf of both applicants. Following communication of the case, Ms K. Halenko, a lawyer with the same organisation, represented Mr Grigoryan alone. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that they had been detained unlawfully and illtreated whilst in detention for reasons arising out of ethnic prejudice and that there had been a failure to effectively investigate their allegations of illtreatment.
On 17 September 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The Government of Azerbaijan, having been informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 §§ 1 and 4), did not indicate that they wished to exercise that right.
Mr Grigoryan and Ms Sergeyeva were born in 1981 and 1975 respectively and live in Kyiv. The former is an ethnic Armenian, and at the time of the incident had had refugee status in Ukraine since 1997. It appears that at the relevant time they were unmarried life partners.
At some time after 11 p.m. on 6 April 2010 the applicants and two of their acquaintances, Mr Y. K. and Ms Y. Yu., were travelling in a taxi driven by N. K. They were returning from a picnic in the course of which alcohol had been consumed. According to the taxi driver, the applicants’ level of intoxication was “above average”.
According to the applicants, the police stopped the car and asked the Mr Grigoryan to get out. According to their acquaintances and the taxi driver, a police car drew up beside the taxi at traffic lights in Kurbasa Street in Kyiv and Mr Grigoryan opened his passenger-side window, leaned out, waved his hands and either started singing or said something to the officers in the police patrol car. The acquaintances could not hear what he said because loud music was playing in the taxi. According to the police, Mr Grigoryan, while leaning out of the car window, made obscene gestures and swore at them. The police asked him to get out of the car and show his identification, which he eventually did. According to the taxi driver, Mr Grigoryan initially refused to get out of the car and the officers tried to extricate him by force, but in his submissions before the Court he did not allege that any excessive force had been used on this occasion. Indeed, in his submissions it is suggested that he was fully cooperative, got out of the car voluntarily and identified himself. Ms Sergeyeva also got out of the car and joined the discussion, after which the applicants, without putting up any resistance, got into the police car and were taken to a police station.
On arrival at the police station the patrol officers handed over the applicants to police Major A., the station’s duty officer.
According to the Government, immediately upon the applicants’ arrival at the police station, Major A. drew up arrest and administrative offence reports in respect of both applicants. The reports state that they were drawn up at 11.50 p.m. on 6 April 2010. According to the reports, the applicants were arrested for and accused of “petty hooliganism” (“дрібне хуліганство”), namely swearing in the street in an intoxicated state and refusing to desist despite the police officers’ warnings, by which conduct public order had been disturbed. On the pre-printed part of the report forms, the grounds for arresting them are cited as the need to stop the commission of the offence and to draw up a report (see relevant provisions of the Code of Administrative Offences in paragraph 34 (i) and (iii) below). According to the applicants, the reports were given to them to sign only the next morning immediately prior to their release.
It is evident from subsequent findings made by the authorities (see paragraph 32 below) that, while the administrative reports were being drawn up, Mr Grigoryan continued yelling, swearing and attempting to hit the officers. To stop this, his arms were twisted behind his back and he was bound. The police report on the “tying up” procedure states that he remained tied up for ten minutes, from 11.55 p.m. to 12.05 a.m. According to him, at around 12.30 a.m. on 7 April 2010 three officers entered his cell. They shouted insults referring to his Armenian ethnic origin (“банобак”, “черножопый”, “чурка”), threw him on the ground, and tied his hands and right leg together behind his back. They also kicked and throttled him. According to the applicant, he was left lying bound on the floor until about 4.30 a.m.
In the course of the subsequent investigation, Major A. explained that Mr Grigoryan was initially released after remaining bound for ten minutes but at around 1 a.m. he again started hitting the door of his cell with hands, feet and torso. The police then overcame his resistance and tied him up for another thirty minutes.
According to Ms Sergeyeva, she was able to hear Mr Grigoryan being beaten from her cell and this caused her distress. She pulled a glass lampshade from the ceiling, damaging the wiring, and threw it against the cell’s barred door, shattering it. Several officers then entered the cell, bound her and left her tied up for half an hour, according to the official report on the “tying up” procedure. She alleged that while tying her up, the officers also hit her, spat on her, called her an “Armenian whore” and threatened to rape her.
Reports on the tying up of both applicants were drawn up by Major A. on pre-printed forms. The pre-printed forms state that the tying up procedure was used to stop unruly conduct (“буйство”) and prevent selfharm by an intoxicated individual.
According to the taxi driver, he accompanied the applicants to the police station and waited for them until about 2 a.m. At some point, apparently waiting outside the building, he heard the applicants’ voices inside, shouting and asking somebody not to hit them.
At 4.30 a.m. on 7 April 2010 the applicants were transferred to the central police station of the Svyatoshynskyy District (hereinafter “the district”), arriving there at 5.20 a.m. There, a senior district police official ruled on their case, imposing fines equivalent to about EUR 4.70 on each of them. The fines were paid the same day.
Between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m. the applicants signed the aforementioned administrative offence reports (see paragraph 10 above), without adding any objections, and were released. The release record relating to Mr Grigoryan includes a handwritten note reading “I will not do this again” (“больше не буду”). According to the applicants, they signed without objection because the police threatened that if they did not cooperate, the fine would be replaced with fifteen days’ administrative detention (see paragraph 33 below).
Later the same day forensic medical expert N. examined the applicants at their request and drew up a report noting that they had numerous bruises on their faces and bodies, which could have been inflicted on 7 April 2010. In particular Mr Grigoryan had haematomas in the following areas: forehead, left cheekbone, right shoulder, jaw, right side of the neck, clavicle, left hypochondrium, stomach, right elbow, right shoulder-blade area, popliteal spaces (back of the knees), and ankles. The expert also observed bloating and bluish colour on his right hand and two parallel left-to-right abrasions on his forehead and chin.
When questioned by the prosecutor’s office in the course of the subsequent pre-investigation enquiries, the expert expressed the opinion that the above injuries suffered by Mr Grigoryan were the result of at least twenty impacts by blunt objects. The expert believed that they could not have been caused by falling over and that the injuries on Ms Sergeyeva’s upper limbs could be explained through her having been tied up.
.  On 8 April 2010 Ms Sergeyeva complained to the prosecutor’s office about what she described as unlawful arrest and beatings by the police. She presented an account of events essentially consistent with the applicants’ account set out in paragraphs 7 to 17 above. However, it appears that she did not cite any indications of ethnic prejudice on the part of the police.
.  On 12 April 2010 Mr Grigoryan lodged a similar complaint. He stated in particular that on arrival at the police station he had immediately been put in a cell. Ms Sergeyeva had been shouting and demanding an explanation as to why they were being detained. He had started hitting the cell door, also wishing to receive an explanation. The police officers had entered, tied him up and continued hitting him for about thirty minutes while uttering insults referring to his ethnic origin (see paragraph 11 above).
. From 13-15 April 2010 the district prosecutor interviewed the applicants, the arresting officers, Major A. and two other officers involved in the events at the police station.
On 16 April 2010 the district prosecutor decided not to institute criminal proceedings against Major A. and two other officers involved in the events at the police station in view of the lack of a corpus delicti in their actions. The prosecutor’s office relied essentially on the police officers’ statements, according to which the applicants had been tied up in order to stop their disorderly behaviour at the police station and although the applicants had offered resistance, only the force necessary to control them and to bind them had been applied.
.  On 21 April 2010 the Kyiv prosecutor’s office overruled the decision not to institute proceedings on the grounds that not all possible enquiries had been made. In particular, it pointed out that other arrestees who might have been at the police station at the time should have been interviewed and the applicants should have been asked whether they had signed the administrative offence reports and about any comments they might have made on them.
.  On 30 April 2010 the district prosecutor’s office again refused to institute proceedings, adding that the applicants had been interviewed and had confirmed that they had drunk alcohol that night and had signed the administrative offence reports. There had been no other arrestees at the police station that night.
.  On 26 May 2010 the applicants complained to the Prosecutor General’s Office that the investigation was not progressing. They alleged that they had been victims of crimes falling within the provisions of Articles 161 (discrimination), 365 (exceeding power or authority) and 371 (knowingly illegal arrest or detention) of the Criminal Code.
.  On 25 August 2010 the Kyiv prosecutor’s office overruled the decision of 30 April 2010 on the grounds that the arresting officers had not been interviewed concerning the grounds for the arrest, the enquiry had not examined the allegation that ethnic prejudice had motivated the ill-treatment and, furthermore, no medical specialist had been interviewed to clarify the possible origins of the recorded injuries.
.  On 9 September 2010 the district prosecutor again refused to institute criminal proceedings. He found that the grounds for arrest had been that Mr Grigoryan had made obscene gestures towards police officers and that the second applicant had sworn at them. Referring to the results of additional interviews with the arresting officers, the prosecutor found that allegations of racial discrimination or insults were unfounded. The prosecutor’s office also repeated the statements of the applicants’ acquaintances who were in the taxi with them at the time of arrest and who made statements in the course of the internal police inquiry (see paragraphs 7 above and 32 below). The prosecutor added that, although he had managed to interview Mr Grigoryan, Ms Sergeyeva could not be interviewed because she was apparently suffering from an acute episode of her chronic schizophrenia. Finally, the prosecutor’s office quoted the results of an interview with the medical expert regarding the origins of the applicants’ injuries (see paragraph 19 above).
.  On 20 December 2010 the Kyiv prosecutor’s office overruled the decision of 9 September 2010.
.  On 30 December 2010, 8 April and 30 September 2011 the district prosecutor’s office again refused to institute criminal proceedings, giving essentially the same reasons. On 17 March, 18 August and 12 December 2011 respectively the Kyiv Svyatoshynsky District Court declared those decisions premature.
On 30 July 2012 the district prosecutor again refused to institute proceedings.
On 23 April 2010 Ms Sergeyeva asked the chief of Kyiv police to investigate the legality of the police officers’ actions. Her complaint contained no reference to alleged ethnic prejudice on the part of the police. On 25 May 2010 the personnel inspectorate of the city police department drew up a report on the internal inquiry ‒ following which it was discontinued ‒ concluding that there were contradictions between the applicants’ and the officers’ accounts. It forwarded the evidential material gathered in connection with the inquiry to the prosecutor’s office to be taken into consideration in the context of the pre-investigation enquiries. It would appear that this report contains the only coherent official account of the events of the night of 6 to 7 April 2010.
Article 173 of the Code defined “petty hooliganism” as “swearing in public, offensive behaviour or other similar actions which amount to a breach of the peace or disturb public order” and made it punishable by a fine ranging from three to seven times the non-taxable minimum income (at the time from approximately EUR 4.70 to EUR 11) or by retention of twenty per cent of earnings for one to two months. If in the circumstances of a particular case the above measures were deemed insufficient, taking into account the character of the perpetrator, administrative detention for up to fifteen days could be imposed.
Article 260 of the Code provided that persons could be arrested where necessary in order to: (i) stop the commission of an administrative offence if other preventive measures were ineffective; (ii) establish a person’s identity; (iii) draw up an administrative offence report, unless this could be done on the spot; (iv) ensure timely and orderly examination of the case and execution of decisions in administrative offence cases.
Article 267 of the Code provided that arrest in connection with an administrative offence could be challenged by the arrestee before the superiors of the arresting official, a prosecutor or the courts.
.  Article 288 of the Code provided that an appeal could be lodged against a decision in an administrative offence case that had been issued by a police official, such appeal being brought before the administrative superior of the deciding official or a court.
.  Article 161 § 2 of the Code provides for up to five years’ imprisonment as punishment for “intentional acts aimed at inflaming ethnic, racial or religious hostility and hate, or attacking ethnic dignity or insulting citizens in connection with their religious beliefs, as well as the direct and indirect limitation of rights or the conferring of direct or indirect privileges on the basis of race, skin colour, political, religious or other beliefs, sex, ethnic or social origin, property status, place of residence, language or other characteristics”, where such acts are combined with violence.
Article 371 § 1 of the Code makes the knowingly illegal arrest of a person punishable by a ban on occupying certain positions for up to five years or a restriction of liberty (namely detention in a semi-open penal institution) for up to three years.
Section 13 of the Act provides, inter alia, that police officers are entitled to apply measures of physical coercion in order to stop the commission of offences and to overcome resistance to lawful police orders if such resistance is accompanied by force directed against police officers or other individuals, provided that other means have been tried but have failed to enable the police to fulfil their duties.
Section 14 of the Act provides, inter alia, that police officers are entitled to bind individuals’ hands and feet in order to protect themselves and others from attacks and other actions endangering life or health, or in order to arrest offenders or in respect of persons in detention if those individuals resist police officers, or if there are reasons to believe that they may escape or cause damage to others or themselves, or in order to overcome resistance to police officers.
The relevant passages of the fourth report on Ukraine by the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI), adopted on 9 December 2011 and concerning the fourth monitoring circle covering the period from January 2008 to June 2011, read:
“43. While incidents of desecration of cemeteries have continued to be reported in Ukraine, most racist incidents reported to the authorities or – more often – to civil society consist of physical attacks committed against foreign students, migrants, refugees, asylum seekers, Roma and other persons of non-Slavic appearance, including Africans, Central and South-East Asians and persons from the Middle East or the Caucasus. Such attacks clearly target people based on their appearance and most commonly occur in Kyiv and other major urban centres where there is a significant number of foreign students or migrants. Violent racist attacks are often committed by groups of skinhead youths, who are not necessarily members of structured right-wing organisations but may belong to a skinhead subculture. Such attacks are frequently severe, resulting in serious wounding by beating, knifing or shooting. Some observers also indicate that racist attacks tend to increase during electoral periods, when the political climate is less stable.
...
In its third report, ECRI urged the Ukrainian authorities to investigate any allegations of police misconduct and harassment towards persons coming within ECRI’s mandate, in particular asylum seekers, refugees, foreign students and members of the Roma community, and to ensure that any law enforcement officials found guilty of such conduct were punished. ECRI further recommended that an independent body empowered to receive complaints against police officers be established and that they receive initial and on-going training on human rights in general and issues pertaining to refugees and asylum seekers as well as racism and racial discrimination in particular.
ECRI is deeply concerned by reports of frequent misconduct by police officers in their contacts with persons belonging to vulnerable groups. ECRI has received particularly serious allegations of abuses by police with respect to Roma...
...
ECRI urges the authorities to intensify their efforts to put a stop to racist or racially discriminatory misconduct by the police. It again urges them to investigate any allegations of misconduct by police and other law enforcement officials towards persons coming within ECRI’s mandate – in particular members of the Roma community, asylum seekers, refugees and migrants – and to ensure that any law enforcement officials found guilty of such conduct are duly punished.
Racial profiling also occurs. Individuals are targeted for identity checks in public places such as markets and railway stations, notably on the basis of their skin colour or their “non-Slavic” appearance. While the authorities emphasise that such cases are rare, this is not the perception of persons belonging to the groups concerned, who report that they are regularly harassed by the police. Such practices shake the confidence of ethnic minorities and non-nationals in the police, who are perceived by these vulnerable groups as a threat rather than as the guarantors of their rights. As noted elsewhere in this report, this contributes to significant under-reporting of racist attacks against persons coming within ECRI’s mandate, meaning that justice is not done in individual cases and creating a sense of impunity for the perpetrators. ECRI notes with interest that the authorities have been implementing joint activities with international partners since 2009 to review the relevant legal framework in place and provide training to law enforcement officers on combating racism and xenophobia; it stresses the importance of following up on these activities by enacting any legislative changes identified as necessary. It also emphasises that more vigorous efforts are needed to combat racial profiling, first because it directly discriminates against the persons concerned and second because its consequence is to expose members of minority groups to a greater risk of racist attacks...”
The Council of Europe’s Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities published an opinion on 5 April 2013 regarding Ukraine’s compliance with that Convention. It concerned the third monitoring cycle and was based on the Ukrainian Government’s report submitted in May 2009 and the Committee’s visit to Ukraine in January 2012. The relevant parts of the opinion concerning the need to combat racism and discrimination read:
“16. Inter-ethnic hostilities and racially-motivated offences appear to be increasing at a time when the dissolution of the [State Committee for Nationalities and Religions] has left an institutional vacuum also as regards the fight against racism and discrimination in Ukraine. Western Ukraine and the Crimea appear to be particularly affected by an increase in inter-ethnic as well as inter-religious tension, which frequently appears to be fuelled by local media as well as some politicians. Allegations of police misconduct and harassment against some minority groups in particular continue to be frequently reported and there is a need for the Ministry of the Interior to expand further its training and awareness-raising activities conducted by its Human Rights Monitoring Department. An independent complaints mechanism should also be established to ensure that police misconduct is effectively investigated and followed-up.”
The United States State Department’s Report on the Human Rights Situation in Ukraine in 2010 contains the following relevant passages:
“The constitution and law prohibit discrimination based on race, skin color, and ethnic and social origin. Mistreatment of minority groups and harassment of foreigners of non-Slavic appearance remained a problem, although NGO monitors reported that hate crime incidents continued to decrease.
Incitement to ethnic or religious hatred is a criminal offense; however, human rights organizations stated the requirement to prove actual intent, including proof of premeditation and intent to incite hatred, made its legal application difficult. Police and prosecutors generally prosecuted racially motivated crimes under legal provisions dealing with hooliganism or related offenses. Article 161 of the criminal code criminalizes deliberate actions to incite hatred or discrimination based on nationality, race, or religion, including insulting the national honor or dignity of citizens in connection with their religious and political beliefs, race, or skin color.
The government acknowledged that racism and ethnically motivated attacks were a problem; however, some officials continued to minimize its seriousness, maintaining that xenophobia was not a problem and that violent attacks were isolated incidents.
No official statistics were available on the number of racially motivated attacks. However, the Diversity Initiative monitoring group, a coalition of international and local NGOs headed by the IOM mission in Kyiv, reported four attacks involving four victims during the first nine months of the year. This number compared with 26 attacks during 2009 and 63 in 2008. The attacks involved a Kuwaiti and three African asylum seekers and foreign students. The attacks occurred in Kyiv, Simferopol, and Odesa; none was fatal.
According to the Diversity Initiative, police did not initiate criminal cases in any of the four attacks they documented during the year.
According to the PGO, during the year prosecutors forwarded to court two criminal cases based on Article 161. SBU investigators continued pretrial investigation in one case. During the first nine months of the year, two persons were found guilty of violating Article 161, compared with four in 2009 and three in 2008.
In December 2009 then president Yushchenko signed into law amendments to the criminal code that increased penalties for hate crimes. Accordingly, premeditated killing on grounds of racial, ethnic, or religious hatred carries a 10- to 15-year prison sentence. Parliament also established a fine from 3,400 to 8,500 hryvnias ($425 to $1,060) or up to five years in prison for hate crimes.
Advocacy groups asserted that police occasionally detained dark-skinned persons and subjected them to far more frequent and arbitrary document checks; at times victims of xenophobic attacks were prosecuted for acting in self-defense.”