The case originated in three applications (nos. 44240/12, 52783/13 and 76021/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Fedor Vladimirovich Yakovlev (“the applicant”), on 15 May 2012, 1 July 2013, 14 October 2014, 14 April and 17 September 2015.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 23 November 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning the conditions of the applicant’s detention, the alleged unlawfulness of his detention, the alleged unfairness of the administrative proceedings against him, the alleged violation of the double jeopardy principle, and mandatory fingerprinting, and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Sochi.
On 19 October 2011 the District Administrative Commission found the applicant in violation of the regional administrative legislation for storing a dismantled vehicle in a public area and ordered him to pay a fine in the amount of 3,000 Russian roubles (RUB).
On 23 April and 22 May 2012 the Lazarevskiy District Court of Sochi and the Krasnodar Regional Court respectively upheld the Commission’s decision of 19 October 2011.
On 15 January 2015 the applicant lodged an application for review of the judgments in his case with the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation. On 1 April 2015 the Supreme Court returned the application to the applicant, advising him to lodge an application for review with the Regional Court.
On 28 October 2011 O. complained to the police, alleging that on 23 October 2011 the applicant, while drunk, had used foul language in public and had ignored a request to stop his antisocial behaviour.
On 2 and 14 November 2011 the police summoned the applicant to the police station.
On 25 November 2011 the applicant came to the police station. He was informed of O.’s complaint against him. The applicant challenged the veracity of O.’s allegations. Police officer Siz. informed the applicant that they would draw up an administrative offence record and advised the applicant of his rights.
On the same date the justice of the peace of judicial circuit no. 93 of the Lazarevskiy District of Sochi found the applicant guilty of disorderly conduct (Article 20.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences) and sentenced him to ten days’ administrative detention. The justice relied on the administrative record prepared by the police and written statements made by O. and Zh. describing the events of 23 October 2011.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged an appeal against the judgment of 25 November 2011.
On 1 December 2011 the District Court scheduled the appeal hearing for the same date. The applicant chose not to attend the hearing and informed the court that it could proceed with the hearing of his case in his absence. The court appointed M. Siz. to represent the applicant as counsel in the appeal proceedings.
On the same date the District Court reviewed the material in the case file and upheld the judgment of 25 November 2011 on appeal.
From 25 to 30 November 2011 the applicant was detained at the police station. According to the Government, the applicant did not have ID with him and could not be transferred to a detention centre to serve his sentence.
According to the applicant, he was detained in a metal cage which was not equipped with a bed or a toilet. Nor was he provided with a mattress or a blanket. There were no amenities in the cell and the applicant was unable to brush his teeth or wash his hands. The temperature in the cell was approximately 5o to 6oC. The cell measured 10 sq. m and housed twelve inmates. It was dirty and infested with mosquitoes and bedbugs.
According to the applicant, on 12 January 2013 he called the police to enquire as to the progress of the investigation in response to his previous complaints. Some time later, someone rang his doorbell. When he opened the door, he saw a group of police officers. They demanded that the applicant withdraw his complaints. They threatened to beat him and arrest him. Then they grabbed him and pulled him out of the flat into the street. The applicant was wearing only his underwear. The policemen put him into a police car. He hit his head against the window pane. The pane fell out and the applicant lost consciousness. The policemen kicked him and hit him with clubs. At the police station the officer on duty refused to register the applicant and told the others to take him to hospital. In town hospital no. 1 the policemen continued the beatings. They told the medical practitioner that they had arrested the applicant, who had been wearing only his underwear and had been throwing stones at passers-by and threatening them, and that he was suffering from a mental disorder.
According to the Government, on 12 January 2013 the police arrested the applicant, who was in an inebriated state and was using foul language and disrupting the peace. The policemen had to use force against the applicant to take him to the police car. In the car, the applicant broke the rear windows trying to escape. Police officer M. opened the rear door of the car and the applicant hit him in the chest. M. fell down and hit his head and back against the asphalt. The applicant tried to escape but was stopped by the police officers, who handcuffed him and took him to the police station. At the police station the officers drew up an administrative offence record.
On 12 January 2013 the police drew up an administrative offence record, according to which the applicant had committed the administrative offence of disorderly conduct. The record indicated that the applicant, while in an inebriated state, had disturbed the peace, used foul language and refused to comply with the legitimate order of a police officer.
On 15 January 2013 the District Court found the applicant guilty of disorderly conduct and sentenced him to two days’ administrative detention. The court appointed Gus. to represent the applicant as counsel. It heard the applicant and reviewed the written material in the case file. The court relied on the written statements of the eyewitnesses Ryab., Pob. and Uv., who had witnessed the applicant’s altercation with the police, and those made by police officers Mir., Gv. and Tl. A request by the applicant to confront the witnesses in court was dismissed.
The applicant appealed, maintaining his innocence. He contested the factual circumstances of the case and alleged a violation of his right to confront the witnesses testifying against him.
On 5 February 2013 the Regional Court upheld the judgment of 15 January 2013 on appeal. The parties did not attend the hearing and the judge considered it possible to proceed with the examination of the case in their absence.
On an unspecified date the applicant was charged with having assaulted police officer Mir. G. represented him as counsel in the course of the criminal proceedings.
On 28 August 2013 the District Court found the applicant guilty of assault on a law-enforcement officer and sentenced him to seven months’ imprisonment. The court established that the applicant had assaulted police officer Mir., who had been trying to put an end to the applicant’s disorderly conduct.
On 25 December 2013 the Regional Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal.
On 17 January 2013 the applicant complained to the district investigative committee that on 12 January 2013 he had been beaten up and ill-treated by the police officers.
On 27 January 2013 the deputy head of the district investigative committee refused to institute a criminal investigation into the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment by the police. The applicant did not appeal.
On 22 January 2014 the police arrested the applicant in the prosecutor’s office. According to the police record, the applicant was in an inebriated state and was bothering the employees and refusing to leave the prosecutor’s office.
On 23 January 2014 the justice of the peace of judicial circuit no. 95 of the Lazarevskiy District of Sochi found the applicant guilty of disorderly conduct and sentenced him to fifteen days’ administrative detention.
On 27 February 2014 the District Court upheld the judgment of 23 January 2014 on appeal.
On 17 April 2014 the Deputy President of the Regional Court reviewed the judgment of 23 January 2014 and upheld it.
On 19 January 2015 the police arrested the applicant on charges of disorderly conduct. According to an employee of the District Court, the applicant, while in the courthouse, refused to confirm the receipt of summonses and used foul language when addressing the employees of the court. The police officers escorted the applicant to the police station for the purposes of preparing an administrative record and registered him at the police station at 7.30 p.m. At 9.30 p.m. the police decided to extend the applicant’s detention “in order to prepare administrative materials”.
On 20 January 2015 the District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to fifteen days’ administrative detention. The court heard the applicant and his lawyer and reviewed the material in the case file, including the administrative arrest record prepared by the police and the written statements made by Ab., Mat. and Yak., who had witnessed the incident of 19 January 2015. The applicant appealed.
On 28 January 2015 the Regional Court scheduled the appeal hearing for 3 February 2015 and sent a summons to the applicant.
On 3 February 2015 the Regional Court held an appeal hearing in the applicant’s absence and upheld the judgment of 20 January 2015 on appeal.
According to the applicant, from 19 to 20 January 2015 he was detained at the police station in a metal cage. He did not receive any food or water. The cell was dirty and infested with insects. The applicant was allowed to use the toilet no more than three times a day. The officer on duty advised him to use a plastic bottle should he have further needs.
According to the Government, the applicant was detained alone in a cell at the police station. The cell measured 10 sq. m and was equipped with wooden benches. The pillows and blankets were distributed upon the inmates’ request. The cell was cleaned once a day. The toilet was located on the floor below. The officer on duty escorted the inmates to the toilet in response to their needs. The applicant was provided with meals in accordance with the applicable legislation.