The case originated in an application (no. 549/17) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Deivis Urbonavičius (“the applicant”), on 20 December 2016.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms I. Abramavičiūtė, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms L. Urbaitė.
On 1 June 2018 the complaint under Article 3 about the refusal of the prison authorities to purchase and use a medical device recommended by the applicant’s doctor was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1970 and is currently detained in Alytus Correctional Facility.
The applicant was arrested on 3 June 2012 and transferred to Kaunas Remand Prison on 4 June 2012. On 5 June 2012 he was examined by a doctor (see paragraph 15 below). During that examination, the applicant did not indicate that he needed any special devices.
On 26 November 2012 the applicant consulted a doctor and indicated that he had sleep apnoea and he wished to acquire a continuous positive airway pressure (hereinafter “CPAP”) device for its treatment.
On 15 March 2013 a report was issued by a medical expert, indicating that the use of a CPAP device was the most effective way to treat sleep apnoea and that the applicant’s condition was deteriorating because he had not been using a CPAP device. It also indicated that there was a risk of complications if the sleep apnoea was not treated properly.
Between 12 and 17 September 2013 the applicant was hospitalised in the Prison Hospital. A doctor recommended that he continue using a CPAP device following his discharge from the hospital.
On 19 September the applicant asked the prison administration to allow him to use a CPAP device. On 3 October 2013 the administration of Kaunas Remand Prison responded that under domestic law such a device was not among the items that could be given to detainees by their spouses or close relatives (see paragraph 14 below), but indicated that such an item could be purchased from the prison shop. The applicant then asked the Kaunas Remand Prison Administration to allow his relatives to give him the device. On 29 October 2013, this request was also refused, on the grounds that there were no indications in the applicant’s medical history or in the document issued by the Prison Hospital that the applicant needed the device (see paragraph 16 below).
On 20 October 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint before the domestic courts, which he specified on 19 February 2015. He asked the court to award him 86,800 euros (EUR) in compensation for non-pecuniary damage suffered in the period between 4 June 2012 and 20 October 2014. The applicant stated that while he had been detained in Kaunas Remand Prison, he had asked the prison administration to allow him to have a CPAP device to treat his sleep apnoea, as recommended to him by a doctor in the Prison Hospital (see paragraph 8 above). The applicant stated that the prison administration had refused to allow him to have such a device, and he had been experiencing serious health issues.
On 12 October 2015 the Kaunas Regional Administrative Court allowed the applicant’s complaint in part and awarded him EUR 1,100 in respect of non-pecuniary damage. The court stated that the prison administration had failed to provide the applicant with the same level of healthcare available to persons who were not detained. It was clear from the case file that the applicant had twice asked the prison administration to allow him to purchase and use a CPAP device. The refusal of permission by the Kaunas Remand Prison Administration had been unfounded because there had been a recommendation issued by a doctor. The court held that the applicant had a right to compensation in respect of nonpecuniary damage suffered from 3 October 2013 (when his request was refused by the prison administration – see paragraph 9 below) until 20 October 2014 and thus decided to award the applicant EUR 1,100 in this regard. The court also noted that there was no information in the case file to indicate that the applicant had not received appropriate healthcare in Kaunas Remand Prison. It stated that although the recommendation issued by the specialist contained a reference to possible complications, there was no information in the applicant’s case file to show that the inability to use a CPAP device had had any negative consequences for his health.
The applicant appealed against the decision of the Kaunas Regional Administrative Court. On 4 October 2016 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the first-instance decision in its entirety.
On 12 July 2017 the applicant asked the Prison Department for a transfer to Alytus Correctional Facility from Vilnius Correctional Facility, where he had been transferred on 20 March 2015. The applicant submitted that he had been serving his sentence in premises for disabled persons but that he could be transferred to the standard dormitory-type premises. On 2 August 2017 the applicant’s request was allowed and he was transferred to Alytus Correctional Facility on 21 August 2017 where he was able to continue using his CPAP device.
In accordance with Article 24 § 1 of the Law on Pre-trial Detention, detainees have a right to receive one postal or hand-delivered package of clothing, bedding (except for blankets, mattresses and pillows) or footwear every three months, as well as an unlimited amount of small packages containing newspapers, envelopes, postage stamps and writing paper. Under Article 24 § 2, one postal package cannot exceed ten kilograms, and packages handed to the detainee cannot exceed fifteen kilograms each.
Under Article 45 § 1 of the Law on Pre-trial Detention, medical treatment provided to persons in pre-trial detention has to be equivalent to that provided to persons who are not detained. In accordance with Article 45 § 3, it is obligatory to perform a health check on all persons newly transferred to a remand prison. Under Article 45 § 4, if a detainee is in need of emergency medical aid and it is not possible to provide it in the Prison Hospital, such aid can be provided in other State or municipal healthcare institutions. The supervision of a detainee has to be ensured.
In accordance with the Rules on Purchase, Possession and Recording of Medical Products in Detention Facilities, approved on 24 April 2012 by Order No. V-156 of the head of the Prison Department, detainees and convicted inmates wishing to purchase, or to accept from other persons who are not detained, medicine or medical products, that have been prescribed or recommended by a doctor, have to submit a written request to the relevant facility (rule 42). The head of the facility may allow the purchase of the medical products if the detainee or convicted inmate has enough funds and if he or she has a prescription or recommendation from a doctor (rule 43). The purchase of medical products is organised by a pharmacist or other responsible person (rule 45). Medical products received from persons who are not detained are transferred to the healthcare service of the detention facility or to a hospital unit where the patient is treated (rule 46).