The case originated in four applications (nos. 31044/12, 80505/13, 22461/14 and 74251/14) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Bulgarian nationals, Mr Stoyan Stoyanov Petrov, Mr Iliyan Petrov Mihaylov, Mr Iordan Stoyanov Petrov and Mr Lazar Petkov Kolev (“the applicants”), on 11 May 2012, 3 December 2013, 6 March 2014 and 18 November 2014 respectively.
The second, third and fourth applicants were represented before the Court by Mr M. Ekimdzhiev and Ms S. Stefanova, lawyers practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 16 October 2015 the complaints concerning the excessively restrictive regime and inadequate material conditions of detention under which the applicants have been serving their sentences were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants are serving either life sentences or a lengthy period of imprisonment in different prisons in Bulgaria.
The applicant was sentenced to twenty years imprisonment in November 2011. As it transpires from documents in the file, pursuant to an order of the prison governor referring to section 248(1)(1) of the 2009 Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act (see paragraph 18 below), on 29 July 2011 the applicant was placed in isolation in Burgas Prison, in a permanently locked cell without the possibility to take part in collective activities. The applicant described, and the Government did not comment on, the conditions under which he had been detained there as follows. He was kept in isolation since 29 July 2011, without running water and toilet in his cell. He had to use the same bucket to relieve himself and as a chair at meal times as he ate in the cell. The heating was insufficient in winter and the temperature was excessively high in the cell in summer. There was poor ventilation and poor natural light in his cell. Also, the light in his cell was kept on during the entire night, the cell was infested with rats and cockroaches, and the latter sometimes also reached his food. On an unspecified date before July 2016 the applicant was transferred to Varna Prison and he has not complained about the conditions there.
The applicant was sentenced to life imprisonment in a final decision by the Supreme Court of Cassation of 10 November 2005. He complained about the conditions under which he has been serving his sentence since 12 July 2007 when he had been transferred to Plovdiv Prison. He described, and the Government did not comment on, the conditions under which he had been detained there as follows. There has been no running water or toilet in his cell which measured about 6 square metres. He has had to use a bucket to comply with the needs of nature in his cell; he has also been taking his food in the cell. The cell was overly humid, which was not mitigated by the fact that he has had to hang his clothes to dry there after washing them. The ventilation was poor, which aggravated the repugnant smell coming out of the sewers situated close to his cell. In the summer the temperatures were very high and in the winter the heating was switched off at around 6 p.m. as a result of which it became very cold in his cell.
In addition, between 2007 and 2011 he had been kept under the very impoverished and restrictive “special regime”, alone in a cell. According to the applicant, while his regime was formally changed from “special” to the lighter “strict” one on 6 June 2011, in reality the restrictions and inadequate conditions in which he has been detained did not change. He has been handcuffed systematically upon leaving his cell.
The applicant was sentenced to whole-life imprisonment on 26 July 2004 in a final judgment of the Supreme Court of Cassation. He complained about the “special regime” and inadequate material conditions of detention in which he has been serving his sentence since 24 January 2012 in Varna Prison. The period of detention of this applicant before that date was subject to examination in an earlier Court’s judgment in which it found a violation of Article 3 on account of the excessively strict prison regime and poor conditions of detention (see Iordan Petrov v. Bulgaria, no. 22926/04, § 128, 24 January 2012).
The applicant submitted that he has been serving his sentence in isolation from the surrounding world, namely in a permanently locked cell. He has not been involved in any collective activities or provided with work and has been denied contact with prisoners who are serving sentences lighter than life imprisonment. Every time he was taken out of the high security zone, he has been hand-cuffed. The authorities have not carried out meaningful assessments of the need to keep him serving his sentence under the “special regime”. Thus, their assessments did not involve an analysis of his psychological and physical state, or of his attitude and demonstrated willingness to change, and were not conducted by specially-trained personnel.
As to the material conditions in which he has been kept since 24 January 2012, the applicant submitted that, although a toilet had been installed in his cell in August 2012, it stands at about 45 cm from his bed. As the toilet has not been separated from the rest of the space, he has had the intrusive feeling of living in a toilet. Given that the prison administration has been refusing to provide hygienic products for cleaning the toilet, such as brushes and washing products, the toilet has been unusable. The overall hygiene in the cell and the common spaces has been extremely poor, with cockroaches and rats roaming about.
On 10 June 2011 the first instance court sentenced the applicant to a whole-life sentence, which was confirmed by the appellate court on 27 June 2013. The Supreme Court of Cassation upheld the whole-life imprisonment sentence in a final judgment of 21 May 2014.
The applicant submitted, and the Government did not comment on, that he has been kept in a permanently locked cell in Pazardzhik Prison, isolated from the rest of the prison population and only allowed to communicate with other life prisoners during the one-hour daily physical exercise he took outside his cell. There has been no running water or toilet in his cell which measures less than 6 square metres. The hygiene in the cell has been very poor and there have been cockroaches and bed bugs, and the prison administration has done nothing to get rid of them. As there is no table in his cell the applicant has been eating over a newspaper spread over his bed. While the natural light which reached the cell has been extremely weak, the artificial light has been kept on throughout the night. The temperature in the cell was inadequate, fluctuating between extremes in the summer and winter.
The law related to the regime of prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment (with or without parole) and the findings of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the CPT) up until 2012 have been set out in detail in Harakchiev and Tolumov v. Bulgaria (nos. 15018/11 and 61199/12, §§ 114-146, and §§ 165-174, ECHR 2014 (extracts)).
In particular, the CPT noted in its report on its visit to Varna Prison in 2010, among other things, that life prisoners there had been accommodated in multiple-occupancy cells which were dilapidated and unhygienic, that access to the communal toilet was limited to three times a day and that none of them had work, as well as that the activities offered to them consisted of occasional individual and group work (e.g. anger management) and English classes (twice a week), in addition to daily hourly outdoor exercise and access to a tennis table that could be used for half an hour twice a week.
In their Action Plan of December 2014, submitted to the Council of Europe’s Department for the Execution of Judgments of the Court in the context of the execution of the Court’s 2012 judgment in the case of the third applicant (see paragraph 8 above), the Bulgarian Government stated that he had been accommodated in a renovated cell, measuring 6 square metres in the high-security area of Varna Prison and that there was a toilet in the cell, a clean bed and a mattress. A year later, in its report on their visit to Varna Prison in 2015, the CPT observed that most parts of that prison were unfit for human accommodation and represented a serious health risk both for inmates and staff. Despite the repeated criticism, no progress had been observed as regards the implementation of the CPT’s recommendations made after its earlier visits. The CPT concluded that, in its opinion, the material conditions alone in the prison could be seen as amounting to inhuman and degrading treatment.
The relevant domestic law in respect of conditions of detention before the 2017 amendments to the Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act 2009 (“the 2009 Act”) has been set out in Neshkov and Others v. Bulgaria (nos. 36925/10 and 5 others, §§ 92-139, 27 January 2015). The 2017 amendments of the 2009 Act have been set out in the Court’s inadmissibility decision in the case of Atanasov and Apostolov v. Bulgaria (nos. 65540/16 and 22368/17, §§ 15–28, 27 June 2017).
In addition, at the relevant time, namely in 2011 (see paragraph 5 above), section 248(1)(1) of the 2009 Act provided that accused and individuals on trial were to be kept in permanently locked cells without the right to take part in collective activities, when the crime for which they were being tried was punishable with imprisonment of over 15 years or with life imprisonment.