The case originated in an application (no. 14344/13) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a national of Uzbekistan, Mr Bakhtiyor Alimov (“the applicant”), on 14 February 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Yılmaz, Ms S. N. Yılmaz and Mr B. Çetinkaya, lawyers practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 24 March 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Gaziantep.
In 2010 the applicant and his family left Uzbekistan to escape the oppression they faced on account of their religious beliefs. After spending some time in Kazakhstan, in 2010 they entered Turkey by legal means.
Subsequent to their arrival in Turkey, the applicant and his wife made a request for asylum. The applicant’s wife was granted a residence permit in the city of Gaziantep pending her asylum request, but the applicant was not able to obtain one as he could not pay the requisite fee for the permit. The applicant, therefore, resided illegally in Gaziantep.
On 5 April 2011 the applicant and his family travelled from Turkey to Ukraine to seek medical treatment for his wife. The applicant was subjected to a fine of 900 Turkish liras (TRY) by the Turkish border police on account of his illegal residence in Turkey. He was also banned from entering the country for five years.
On 4 May 2012 the applicant and his family attempted to re-enter Turkey through Sabiha Gökçen Airport in Istanbul. The applicant, however, was not permitted entry, and he was placed in the detention facility at the airport for “inadmissible passengers” pending his repatriation to Ukraine.
On 5 May 2012 the applicant lodged an objection to his repatriation and lodged a new asylum request.
On 13 May 2012 the Ministry of the Interior (“the Ministry”) requested the offices of the Istanbul and Gaziantep governors to notify the applicant that he would be accommodated at the airport detention facility pending a decision on his asylum request. According to a note dated 21 May 2012 addressed by the Istanbul governor’s office to the Ministry, the applicant was notified as requested. The note did not, however, indicate when the relevant notification had been made.
On 30 May 2012 the Ministry rejected the applicant’s asylum request. The applicant was notified of this decision on 31 May 2012. He was also informed on that date that he could lodge an objection to the Ministry’s decision within seventy-two hours, that he would be deported in the event of the dismissal of his objection and that he would continue to be accommodated in the airport detention facility in the meantime.
On 1 June 2012 the applicant lodged an objection to the Ministry’s decision.
On 10 July 2012 the applicant was transferred from Sabiha Gökçen Airport to the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre in Istanbul (“the Kumkapı Removal Centre”).
The applicant was kept in the Kumkapı Removal Centre until 15 August 2012. On that date, he was granted a temporary residence permit pending his asylum request.
There is no information in the case file regarding the outcome of the applicant’s asylum request.
The applicant claimed that the detention facility at Sabiha Gökçen Airport where he had been kept for sixty-eight days between 4 May and 10 July 2012 had been a room of about 20 square metres and that, while the numbers had fluctuated, the room had accommodated up to fifteen people at times. There had been no furniture in the room suitable for sleeping on, but only five chaises longues, which had been impossible to rest on. The applicant further claimed that throughout his detention, he had not been allowed to leave that room, nor had he had any contact with the outside world, including with a lawyer. He had also been denied any access to natural light and fresh air, as the room in question had had no windows. According to the applicant, the detention facility had been designed for holding inadmissible passengers for short periods and had been unsuitable for long-term detention. All other passengers in his situation had either been released or repatriated after one or two days of detention at most.
The applicant claimed that the Kumkapı Removal Centre had been severely overcrowded at the time of his detention. He had had to share a dormitory room of approximately 35 square metres with thirty to forty-five other people, who had been provided with only fifteen bunk beds to sleep on. He had had to spend all his time in that humid and smoke-filled room without being able to engage in any social activities and had not been allowed access to outdoor exercise throughout his detention. The applicant further alleged that the overcrowding of the removal centre had led to hygiene problems. The building had been infested with insects and there had been frequent outbreaks of contagious diseases. The quality and quantity of the food provided had also been fairly poor.
The Government claimed that the room in which the applicant had been held at Sabiha Gökçen Airport had measured 53.73 square metres. The room had been equipped with five beds for men, as well as a ventilation system, a television, a toilet and a shower. The room had had a padded sitting area for rest and sleep, and had been cleaned every day. The Government submitted that during the applicant’s stay between 4 May and 10 July 2012, the number of detainees had never exceeded five. They did not, however, submit any documents in support of that submission, such as a list of the detainees kept in the detention facility during the relevant period. Nor did they submit any photographs of the detention facility, despite the Court’s request to that effect.
The Government stated that the Kumkapı Removal Centre’s capacity had been reduced from 560 to 300, in line with recommendations made by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”), following its visit in June 2009. Accordingly, the number of detainees during the period of the applicant’s detention had never exceeded 300. They did not, however, submit the registers recording the occupation rates during the period in question.
The Government stated that the detainees had been accommodated on three floors at the removal centre: the first two floors had been reserved for male detainees, and the third floor for females. The information provided as to the number and size of the rooms was, however, inconsistent. While the Government claimed in their observations that there had been five dormitory rooms on each floor, measuring 50, 69, 76 and 84 square metres respectively, the information note prepared by the Ministry and appended to their observations indicated that there had been only four rooms on the first floor, measuring 50, 58, 76 and 84 square metres, and five rooms on both the second and third floors, measuring 50, 58, 69, 76 and 84 square metres. The Government stated that they were not able to provide information as to the exact number of people that the applicant had shared a room with, because detainees had been left to make their own choice of rooms. They submitted, however, that there had been fifteen to twenty beds in each room.
The Government further submitted that there had been a cafeteria measuring 69 square metres on each floor, where breakfast, lunch and dinner had been served daily. The detainees had had the right to outdoor exercise in suitable weather conditions, as well as the right to engage in sports and watch television. The detainees had had access to medical care in cases of emergency and a doctor had visited the removal centre once a week. As for hygiene standards in the facility, there had been six cleaning staff working full time at the removal centre, and the building had been disinfected at certain times.
In support of their claims, the Government submitted, inter alia, photographs of two of the dormitory rooms, both of which appeared well-lit and fairly clean, as well as of the hallway and the cafeteria on one of the floors reserved for male detainees. Although the total number of beds cannot be ascertained from the photos, it can be determined that there were at least twentytwo beds (that is to say eleven bunk beds) in both rooms. It is further observed that there were two rows of bunk beds positioned against the walls in both rooms, leaving a narrow corridor in the middle of the room. While some of the bunks were touching each other, others were separated by big metal lockers. No other furniture, such as tables and chairs, was present in the rooms; there were blankets on the beds in only one of the rooms and the other room had no bedding at all. A television was available on each floor in the cafeteria. Moreover, a metal situp bench and an exercise bike were shown in the photograph of the hallway. No photos of the toilets or the showers were provided.
The Government also submitted an outdoor photo of some detainees in the removal centre’s courtyard. There were no men amongst these detainees – only women and children.
A description of the relevant domestic law and practice at the material time can be found in the cases of Abdolkhani and Karimnia v. Turkey (no. 30471/08, §§ 29-45, 22 September 2009), and Yarashonen v. Turkey (no. 72710/11, §§ 21-26, 24 June 2014).
At its meeting of 8 December 2011 the Human Rights Inquiry Committee of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey established a subcommittee to look into the problems encountered by refugees, asylum seekers and irregular migrants in Turkey, including the conditions in which they were detained pending their deportation. For that purpose, on 10 and 11 May 2012, that is a couple of months before the applicant’s detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, two members of parliament (“MPs”) visited the removal centres in Edirne, Kırklareli and Istanbul, including the Kumkapı Removal Centre.
The visit report indicated that the Kumkapı Removal Centre had a total capacity of 300 detainees (200 male and 100 female). However, at the time of the delegation’s visit (11 May 2012), the removal centre had accommodated 297 male, ninety-seven female and seven minor detainees. The number of beds varied according to the rooms and the hygiene standards in the toilets and bathrooms were unsatisfactory. There was a big cafeteria in the removal centre, with sufficient amenities, as well as the possibility to purchase food and basic provisions. The detainees had freedom of movement inside the centre and also had access to television in the cafeterias. They also benefited from the sports equipment provided in the corridors.
The delegation was particularly critical of the fact that the detainees were authorised to go outdoors only once a week, when weather conditions permitted. It recommended measures allowing the detainees daily outdoor exercise, at their own convenience.
The standards of the CPT in respect of the conditions of detention of foreign nationals (see the “7th General Report on the CPT’s Activities” (CPT/Inf (97) 10 [EN]), published on 22 August 1997) provide, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“25.  CPT visiting delegations have met immigration detainees in a variety of custodial settings, ranging from holding facilities at points of entry to police stations, prisons and specialised detention centres. As regards more particularly transit and ‘international’ zones at airports ... the CPT has always maintained that a stay in a transit or ‘international’ zone can, depending on the circumstances, amount to a deprivation of liberty within the meaning of Article 5 (1)(f) of the European Convention on Human Rights, and that consequently such zones fall within the Committee’s mandate.
...
Point of entry holding facilities have often been found to be inadequate, in particular for extended stays. More specifically, CPT delegations have on several occasions met persons held for days under makeshift conditions in airport lounges. It is axiomatic that such persons should be provided with suitable means for sleeping, granted access to their luggage and to suitably-equipped sanitary and washing facilities, and allowed to exercise in the open air on a daily basis. Further, access to food and, if necessary, medical care should be guaranteed.
...
In the view of the CPT, in those cases where it is deemed necessary to deprive persons of their liberty for an extended period under aliens legislation, they should be accommodated in centres specifically designed for that purpose, offering material conditions and a regime appropriate to their legal situation and staffed by suitablyqualified personnel.
Obviously, such centres should provide accommodation which is adequatelyfurnished, clean and in a good state of repair, and which offers sufficient living space for the numbers involved. Further, care should be taken in the design and layout of the premises to avoid as far as possible any impression of a carceral environment. As regards regime activities, they should include outdoor exercise, access to a day room and to radio/television and newspapers/magazines, as well as other appropriate means of recreation (e.g. board games, table tennis). The longer the period for which persons are detained, the more developed should be the activities which are offered to them.”
In the “2nd General Report on the CPT’s Activities” (CPT/Inf (92) 3 [EN]), published on 13 April 1992, the CPT noted the following:
“46.  Overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the CPT’s mandate. All the services and activities within a prison will be adversely affected if it is required to cater for more prisoners than it was designed to accommodate; the overall quality of life in the establishment will be lowered, perhaps significantly. Moreover, the level of overcrowding in a prison, or in a particular part of it, might be such as to be in itself inhuman or degrading from a physical standpoint.
...
Specific mention should be made of outdoor exercise. The requirement that prisoners be allowed at least one hour of exercise in the open air every day is widely accepted as a basic safeguard (preferably it should form part of a broader programme of activities). The CPT wishes to emphasise that all prisoners without exception (including those undergoing cellular confinement as a punishment) should be offered the possibility to take outdoor exercise daily. It is also axiomatic that outdoor exercise facilities should be reasonably spacious and whenever possible offer shelter from inclement weather.”
In June 2009 the CPT visited six removal centres for foreigners in different provinces in Turkey, including the Kumkapı Removal Centre in Istanbul (which it referred to as the “Istanbul-Kumkapı Detention Centre”) where the applicant would be detained in 2012. The relevant extracts from its visit report, dated 16 December 2009, read as follows:
“Istanbul-Kumkapı Detention Centre, which was opened in March 2007, is the largest detention facility for immigration detainees in Turkey, with an official capacity of 560 places (for 360 male and 200 female detainees). At the time of the visit, the centre was accommodating 124 foreign nationals.
...
As regards material conditions in the detention centres visited, the delegation noted a sharp reduction in the number of detained persons during the two preceding weeks in several establishments visited (in particular at Istanbul-Kumkapı and Edirne-Tunça), where apparently up to 50% of all detainees had been released. This had obviously had a beneficial effect on the living conditions prevailing in the establishments at the time of the visit.
...
At Istanbul-Kumkapı, material conditions in the new detention facility were generally much better than those found in the past in the former detention facilities in Istanbul [footnote: Though some improvements were made only very shortly before the visit (e.g. painting of walls, contracting of external cleaning staff, etc.)]. In particular, most detention rooms were spacious, well lit (with good access to natural light) and very clean.
That said, it is clear that the centre’s current official capacity of 560 places is far too high, given the space and facilities available. In particular, the living space in the detention rooms is insufficient (e.g. 58 m² for 30 beds), and communal rooms are inadequate in terms of size and equipment (e.g. on the ground floor with a total of 120 beds, the communal room was equipped with eight tables and 23 chairs). The CPT recommends that steps be taken to significantly reduce the official capacity of Istanbul-Kumkapı Detention Centre and to ensure that future occupancy levels are always kept within the limits of the new capacity.
...
It is of particular concern that, with the exception of Kırklareli and, as regards women and children, Istanbul-Kumkapı [footnote: At Kumkapı, the existing courtyard was primarily used as a parking area for police vehicles. Due to the limited space available, only female detainees and children benefited from daily outdoor exercise, whereas male adult detainees were usually denied outdoor exercise for weeks and months on end], foreign nationals held in the detention centres visited were offered no outdoor exercise at all. Such a state of affairs is unacceptable.
During the end-of-visit talks, the delegation made an immediate observation and called upon the Turkish authorities to take the necessary measures to ensure that all immigration detainees at the detention centres in Ağrı, Edirne-Tunça, Istanbul-Kumkapı, Konya and Van are able to benefit from at least one hour of outdoor exercise per day.
By a letter of 23 September 2009, the Turkish authorities informed the Committee that foreign nationals held at Istanbul-Kumkapı Detention Centre “are allowed to open air for an average of one hour per day and benefit from outdoor activities”...
The CPT welcomes the steps taken thus far and would like to receive confirmation that all foreign nationals held at Ağrı and Istanbul-Kumkapı Detention Centres are able to benefit from at least one hour of outdoor exercise per day.
...
In several detention centres visited, many complaints were received about the quality and/or quantity of the food provided. The director of one of the centres visited affirmed to the delegation that, in his experience, the budgetary allocation of 4.60 TLR per person and day was clearly insufficient. The CPT recommends that the provision of food to immigration detainees be reviewed in all the detention centres for foreigners, to ensure that it is adequate in terms of both quantity and quality.”
The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants (“the UN Special Rapporteur”), Mr François Crépeau, undertook an official visit to Turkey from 25 to 29 June 2012, that is approximately fifteen days before the applicant’s detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, at the invitation of the Turkish Government. He visited, inter alia, the removal centres in Kumkapı and Edirne, and submitted a report to the UN General Assembly on 17 April 2013 (A/HRC/23/46/Add.2). The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
“42.  During his visit, the Special Rapporteur noted an insufficient regulation of the reasons for administrative detention of migrants, its duration, detention conditions and the access to safeguards for the detained migrants.
...
While a circular issued by the Turkish National Police in September 2010 gave the instruction to systematically inform irregular migrants held in removal centres in writing of the reason for being held in the centre, the duration of stay, their right to have access to a lawyer, and the right of appeal against the decision to be held in a removal centre or deportation order, the Special Rapporteur’s interviews with detained migrants at Edirne and Kumkapı removal centres indicate that this circular is not systematically implemented in practice.
...
The Special Rapporteur also remains disturbed about the conditions in these removal centres: detainees, including children, are often locked in their rooms or wards, and are given little or no access to outdoor areas. Overcrowding and unclean conditions, including inadequate food, are also significant concerns.”