.  The case originated in an application (no. 10465/17) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovak national, Mr A.P. (“the applicant”), on 30 January 2017. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
.  The applicant was represented by V. Durbáková, a lawyer practising in Košice. The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
.  The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been ill-treated by municipal police officers and that the authorities had failed to conduct an effective investigation into the matter, in breach of the requirements of Article 3 of the Convention.
.  On 21 June 2017 the Government were given notice of the application.
.  The applicant was born in 1999, lives in Rudňany and is of Roma origin.
.  On 10 February 2015 the father of a 15 years old Roma boy, M.Č., reported to the police that earlier that day M.Č. had been beaten by a group of boys. As it would later be reflected in a decision concerning this case (see paragraph 23 below), M.Č. did not know the attackers but believed to be able to identify them by face. The matter was treated as a suspicion of a minor offence and it was agreed that the following morning the police with M.Č. and his father would attempt to identify the perpetrators in front of the local school.
.  The next morning, in front of the school, M.Č. identified the applicant, who was 16 years old at that time, and another Roma boy, A.T., as having been among the attackers. Municipal police officers, E.P. and R.M., who carried out the ensuing intervention, were later recorded in the decision referred to above as having stated that M.Č. had identified the applicant and A.T. as Roma and Gypsy.
.  From the applicant’s perspective, at 7.45 a.m. on 11 February 2015 he was confronted by E.P. and R.M., in front of his school. One of the officers allegedly grabbed him by the hood, leaned him against a car and punched him in the face several times. Then he put him into a police car together with A.T. The applicant claimed that the officer had continued to punch him after having put him in the car.
The boys were then taken to the police station in Rudňany. According to the official record drawn up by the municipal police in Rudňany on 11 February 2015 (úradný záznam o predvedenej osobe), the applicant was taken to the police station at 7.50 a.m., released at 8.10 a.m. and did not have any injuries.
.  The applicant claimed that at the police station, both policemen had put on white gloves and had punched him in the face, and that they had put pressure on him to confess to having attacked M.Č.
.  Later the same morning, after his release, the applicant accompanied by his mother sought treatment in Spišská Nová Ves hospital. Two medical records were produced, one by Dr F.M., a surgeon, and another by Dr J.N., an otolaryngologist. The first record states:
“[The applicant was] injured today, allegedly during police intervention. [By objective observation:] nose oedema and pain in the nose ...”
The second record reads:
“He was treated at the medical centre after an injury caused during a police intervention. He was bleeding from his nose; he also has swelling of the upper lip.”
.  At 8.57 p.m. on 11 February 2015, the applicant again visited the surgery of Dr I.D., who confirmed that the applicant had a superficial injury to his nose and that he had been beaten up at around 7.15 a.m.
In the course of the proceedings before the Court, the Government submitted a record drawn up by the Rudňany municipal police on the use of coercive measures (hlásenie o použití donucovacích prostriedkov) dated 11 February 2015. According to that record, R.M. had grasped the applicant by his elbow to prevent him from leaving. The applicant, however, had pulled away, spat on R.M., told him that he was not afraid of him and swung by his right arm against R.M., who had consequently had to grasp and hit him. According to the record, the applicant did not sustain any injuries.
The applicant claimed that he had complied with the request of the police voluntarily and had not actively resisted.
.  In a report of 25 August 2017, which the Government also submitted in the course of the proceedings before the Court, the Prosecutor General stated in relation to the use of force in front of the school:
“... R.M. used a coercive measure against the applicant. He grasped his arm and used an elbow-lock grip. The applicant was still resisting. As a reaction to being spat on, R.M. slapped him. The applicant calmed down afterwards ...”
.  On 11 February 2015 the applicant, represented by his mother, lodged a criminal complaint with the Spišská Nová Ves district police. He amended his complaint on 3 March 2015.
.  On 13 March 2015 the investigator dismissed the complaint, as no reason had been found to press charges. He did so having heard the police officers, E.P. and R.M., and the father of M.Č. They had given consistent testimony that the applicant had shown disrespect, had been verbally aggressive and had spat on one of the officers. Officer R.M. had admitted to using an elbow-lock grip to get the applicant into the police car. Officer E.P. had further stated that R.M. had slapped the applicant in the face.
The applicant challenged the decision by lodging an interlocutory appeal (sťažnosť). He argued that the investigator had failed to hear independent witnesses to the incident, had not considered the medical reports submitted by him and had failed to consider the possibility of a racial motive on the part of the officers. He also claimed that if the police officers’ version was true, they would have been obliged to report the use of coercive measures to their supervisor, which they had not done.
.  On 9 April and 6 May 2015 respectively, the investigator overruled his previous decision of 13 March 2015 and instituted criminal proceedings against the police officers on suspicion of abuse of power by a public official.
.  On 21 May 2015 the investigator heard the applicant and his mother. On the same day he also heard officers E.P. and R.M., who both admitted that R.M. had slapped the applicant in the face with an open hand while trying to get him in the car in front of the school.
The investigator also heard A.T., who testified that he had been present during the incident in front of the school but had not precisely seen what had happened between the applicant and the officers under investigation. He remembered that when he had reached the police car, the applicant had already been inside and his nose had been bleeding. He denied that the officers had beaten him or the applicant in the car or at the police station. However, he confirmed that the applicant’s nose had still been bleeding after they had been released from the police station. The investigator also heard M.Č. and his father, who had been present in front of the school but testified that they had not witnessed the entire incident.
The authorities ordered an expert opinion on the applicant’s injuries. According to the expert opinion, submitted on 16 June 2015, the applicant had suffered minor injuries corresponding to the effects of blunt force of a mild intensity having been applied to the face. The expert concluded that such injuries could have been caused to the applicant by a slap or by hitting his face against the police car while getting into it. The expert excluded the possibility that the applicant’s injuries had been caused by a fist.
On 27 July 2015 the investigator discontinued the proceedings. Having examined all the evidence and circumstances, he concluded that the officers under investigation had acted in compliance with the applicable rules and that their actions had not amounted to the offence of abuse of power. In particular, it had been excluded that the applicant’s injuries could have been caused in the way he had alleged, namely by blows with a fist. His injuries could have been caused by a slap or by accidentally hitting his face against the police car while entering it. The investigator observed that one of the officers had acknowledged having slapped the applicant in the face with an open palm in order to overcome his resistance.
.  The applicant lodged an interlocutory appeal. He argued in particular that the decision had been based solely on the officers’ statements, which had not been corroborated by other evidence; that M.Č. and his father were biased; that none of the witnesses had directly seen the incident in front of the school; and that the investigator had not heard other witnesses present in front of the school. He further claimed that the investigation had failed to enquire into whether the coercive measures used against him had been lawful and proportionate, and whether the officers had reported the use of coercive measures to their supervisor. If there was no record of the use of coercive against him in the case file, the officers would be seeking retrospectively to legalise their unlawful actions. Moreover, the investigator had failed to investigate the possibility of a racial motive on the part of those officers. The applicant also argued that the officers had not warned him before using coercive measures, and that using coercive measures without prior warning was unlawful on its own.
On 7 September 2015 the Spišská Nová Ves district office of the Public Prosecution Service (“the PPS”) dismissed the applicant’s appeal as unfounded. It held that it had been sufficiently proven that the applicant – suspected of having committed a minor offence – had ignored the orders given by the police officers and had actively resisted arrest. Coercive measures had therefore been used against him in accordance with the law. His injury had been light and could have been caused either by a slap in the face or by hitting the police car while getting into it. In any event, it could not have been caused by a blow with a fist as alleged by the applicant.
.  Those conclusions were in principle upheld by the Košice regional office of the PPS in a decision of 11 November 2015, in response to a request lodged by the applicant for a review (podnet na preskúmanie) of the decision of 7 September 2015.
.  On 12 February 2016 the Prosecutor General dismissed a further complaint lodged by the applicant as unfounded and containing no new relevant information.
.  On 18 April 2016 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Constitutional Court, claiming a violation of Articles 3, 13 and 14 of the Convention and their constitutional equivalents. He argued that the police had used disproportionate force amounting to ill-treatment, that the investigation had been ineffective, and that the authorities had not investigated the possibility that the alleged ill-treatment had been racially motivated.
.  On 8 June 2016 the Constitutional Court rejected the complaint as manifestly ill-founded. It held, in particular, that the applicant had not supported his grievances with concrete statements substantiating his allegations of disproportionality and unlawfulness of the police intervention.
.  Under section 10(1) of the Municipal Police Act (Law no. 564/1991 Coll., as amended), a municipal police officer (“officer”) is entitled to seek necessary explanations from any person who may contribute to the clarification of circumstances necessary to uncover a minor offence and its perpetrator. The officer is entitled to order that person to appear immediately or at a given time at the municipal police station for the purpose of clarification of the minor offence.
.  If that person refuses to provide the explanation without an excuse or a good reason and the explanation is necessary to uncover the minor offence, the officer is entitled to bring such person to the municipal police station for the purpose of providing the explanation. For that purpose and only if necessary, the officer can also use coercive measures (section 10(2)). If such measures are used, the officer must make an official report without delay (section 10(3)).
.  The officer is further entitled to ask persons ordered to provide an explanation to establish their identity. They are bound to comply with such a request (section 9(1)). If they refuse to establish their identity or if their identity cannot be established despite their necessary cooperation, the officer is entitled to bring them to the municipal police station for the purposes of identification (section 9(2)).
.  Sections 13 et seq. regulate the use of coercive measures. Before using coercive measures, an officer is obliged to instruct the persons against whom such measures would be prospectively used to refrain from unlawful action and warn them that coercive measures may be used. Prior instruction and warning may be waived only if the officer is attacked, the life or health of others is at stake, the matter is urgent or there are other circumstances preventing them. The officer decides which coercive measure to use, depending on the concrete situation, in order not to cause disproportionate harm to the person against whom he intervenes.
.  The officer may use selfdefence grips (hamty), grabs (chvaty), blows (údery) and kicks (kopy), inter alia, for the purpose of taking the person to the police station for identification or for providing an explanation (sections 9 and 10) only if such person exercises active resistance. If the person resists passively, the officer may use only grips and grabs. If the officer establishes that the person against whom coercive measures have been used has suffered injuries, the officer must provide first aid, if permitted by the circumstances, and must ensure that the person receives medical treatment (section 17(1)).
.  The officer must report the use of coercive measures to the head of the municipal police without delay. If there are doubts about the legitimacy or adequacy of the use of coercive measures or if their use has resulted in death, injury or damage to property, the head of the municipal police must investigate whether the coercive measures were used in accordance with the law and immediately submit a report with his findings to the PPS (section 17(2) and (3)).
On 19 June 2014 the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (“ECRI”) issued a report on Slovakia (CRI (2014)37). The report contains the following passages regarding anti-Roma violence:
“68. NGOs reported nine violent criminal offences against Roma between 2009 and 2012. In other cases, Roma settlements were the target of vandalism that endangered the lives of the inhabitants. The worst incident so far, which received extensive biased media coverage justifying the killing, took place in June 2012 when three Roma were killed and two wounded by an off-duty municipal police officer in Hurbanovo.
Police ill-treatment (and generally speaking abusive behavior) towards Roma have also been reported by the media, civil society and international organizations.”
.  The ECRI report recommended that “the Slovak authorities ensure effective investigations into allegations of racial discrimination or misconduct by the police and ensure as necessary that the perpetrators of these types of acts are adequately punished.”
.  The UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination adopted concluding observations in respect of Slovakia in 2013 (CERD/C/SVK/CO/9-10). In paragraph 10 the Committee reiterated its concerns “regarding the continued stigmatization of, and discrimination against Roma and their ongoing precarious socio-economic situation.”
In the concluding observations of its 2018 report in respect of Slovakia (CERD/C/SVK/CO/11-12), the same UN Committee expressed serious concerns about reports of verbal and physical attacks against ethnic minorities, including Roma, and recommended, inter alia, that “all racially motivated crimes, including verbal and physical attacks, are investigated, that perpetrators are prosecuted and punished, and that motives based on race or on skin colour, descent or national or ethnic origin are considered as an aggravating circumstance when imposing punishment for a crime.”