The case concerns the Russian authorities’ failure to prevent and prosecute acts of domestic violence against the applicant and to address the discriminatory effect of domestic violence on women in general.
The applicant was born in 1987 and lives in St Petersburg. She was represented before the Court by Ms V. Frolova, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg.
The Government were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and later by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2009, the applicant married P. and gave birth to the boy R. They lived in P.’s flat. From the early months of her pregnancy, P. manifested controlling and coercive behaviour.
On 13 August 2011 P. grabbed the applicant by the chin and hit her head against the door frame. She had the injuries recorded in the trauma unit and complained to the Admiralteyskiy district police department about the assault, threats of violence and insults. On 22 August 2011 the police declined to open criminal proceedings. They talked to P. who said that he “had shaken her up to calm her down”. The police held that verbal threats which had not been accompanied by any physically threatening conduct did not constitute an offence under Article 119 of the Criminal Code (making threats of death or causing bodily harm). They acknowledged that P.’s actions could be constitutive of the offence of battery under Article 116 which was subject to a private prosecution regime requiring the victim to apply directly to a justice of the peace.
The applicant filed for divorce on the grounds of spousal violence. Her application was approved on 4 October 2011. The former spouses agreed that their son would live with the mother on weekdays and with the father on weekends.
In early 2012, the applicant and P. made another attempt at living together. The couple separated after P. had locked up the applicant and their son for twenty-four hours inside the flat without keys or mobile phone. The applicant moved out and did not inform P. of her new address.
On 3 July 2012 the applicant complained to the police that P. had told her on the phone that he would kill her and “gouge her eyes out”. She emphasised that that was not the first menacing incident and that she feared for her life. On 9 July 2012 the police found no indications of any criminal conduct, as P. had denied making threats. On 20 March 2013 the supervising prosecutor set that decision aside and directed the police to interview the applicant’s friend as a potential witness. On 25 April 2013 the police refused again to open a criminal case. The inspector conceded that there were formal indications of an offence under Article 119 of the Criminal Code. However, in the absence of eye-witnesses, the actual sequence of events or the guilty party were impossible to establish. Nor was there any “objective information” showing that the applicant had reasons to fear that threats would be carried out. On 9 January 2014 the supervising prosecutor quashed the police’s decision and ordered a further inquiry.
On 20 November 2012, as the applicant was picking up the son from P., he grabbed her by the chin and told her that she “would not last much longer” and “would die before [him]”. The applicant had the bruises on her face recorded and reported the incident to the police. On 22 December 2012 the police refused to open an investigation, citing the verbal nature of the threats and the classification of battery as a private-prosecution offence.
On 4 December 2012 the applicant and P. had an argument about their son’s residence. P. snatched the child from her and started running away. When she caught up with him, he stopped and pushed her. She fell on the icy pavement and hurt both knees. She took medical evidence of the trauma to the police. The police refused, on 7 December 2012, to open criminal proceedings on the grounds that it was impossible to establish the sequence of events and the guilty party in the absence of eye-witnesses. On 20 March 2013 the supervising prosecutor directed the police to commission a medical assessment of the applicant’s injuries. On 31 March 2013 the police issued an identically worded decision declining institution of criminal proceedings. On 9 January 2014 the supervising prosecutor set aside that decision and ordered a further inquiry.
On 14 January 2013 the applicant filed a new complaint with the police. She listed previously reported incidents, enclosed medical certificates and gave names and contact details of witnesses. She submitted that she feared for her life and safety. On 22 January 2013 the police inspector held that the complaint did not disclose indications of any criminal offence. Without taking statements from the applicant, P. or any witnesses, he held that former spouses were having arguments over the residence of their child which resulted in “situations of conflict and threats being made against the other spouse”. In his view, the issue had to be resolved in civil proceedings. On 28 January 2013 the supervising prosecutor quashed the decision and asked the police to carry out an additional inquiry. On 28 March 2013 the police issued an identically worded decision which the prosecutor set aside on 9 January 2014.
The applicant applied for a judicial review of various police decisions declining institution of criminal proceedings. On 11 February, 10 April 2013, 16 January 2014 and other dates St Petersburg courts discontinued examination of her applications on the grounds that the supervising prosecutors had already set the impugned decisions aside and ordered additional inquiries. The applicant challenged two of the discontinuation decisions on appeal. She pointed out that the prosecutor had intervened on formal grounds and that an assessment of the scope of the inquiry and its impact on her rights had not been made. On 11 April 2013 and 25 March 2014 the St Petersburg City Court rejected the appeals in a summary fashion.
On 1 April 2014 the Leninskiy District Court issued, at the applicant’s request, a “special ruling” (частное постановление) addressed to the chief of the Admiralteyskiy District police department. The court pointed out that the district inspector’s failure to remedy the defects identified by the supervising prosecutor had breached the requirements of procedural law and undermined her right of access to justice.
On 31 May 2013 the applicant issued private-prosecution proceedings against P. for two acts of battery of 13 August 2011 and 20 November 2012. Over the following year the justice of the peace held twenty-three hearings. The applicant who had just given birth to her second child was required to appear in person at each court session. On 27 May 2014 she applied for a discontinuation of proceedings on the grounds of a settlement with P. The justice granted the application, noting that the offence in question was one of a lesser gravity, that P. had had no criminal record, that he had apologised to the applicant and paid damages. The nature and amount of damages were not specified.
On 27 June 2014 the police issued new decisions refusing to open a criminal investigation into the incidents of 3 July and 4 December 2012. They referred to the District Court’s decisions by which the proceedings on the application for a judicial review were discontinued as the ground for considering the matter closed.
Chapter 16 of the Criminal Code covers offences against the person, including murder and manslaughter (Articles 105 to 109) and three levels of assault occasioning actual bodily harm (Articles 111 to 115). Other forms of assault which caused physical pain without resulting in actual bodily harm were treated at the material time as “battery” (побои) under Article 116.
Causing bodily harm and threats of causing such harm (Article 119) are public-prosecution offences; the offences of “minor bodily harm” (Article 115) and “battery” (Article 116) are liable to private prosecution, meaning that the institution and pursuance of criminal proceedings is left to the victim, who has to collect evidence, identify the perpetrator, secure witness testimony and bring charges before a court (Article 20 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
In private-prosecution proceedings, the victim’s failure to be present at a court hearing without valid reasons leads to discontinuation of the proceedings on the grounds that the impugned conduct did not constitute an offence (Articles 249 § 3 and 24 § 1(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure).