The case originated in an application (no. 29405/16) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Ms Rodica Constantinovici (“the applicant”), on 19 May 2016.
The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr V. Mocanu, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 11 October 2017 notice was given to the Government of the complaints concerning the applicant’s stay in the offices of the National Anti-corruption Directorate (“the DNA”) and concerning the conditions of her pre-trial detention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Bucharest.
At the date of the events under examination in the present case, the applicant was a member of the National Authority for the Restitution of Property (Autoritatea Naţională pentru Restituirea Proptietăţilor, hereinafter “the ANRP”). The ANRP was a State agency, responsible for the restitution of property confiscated by the communist State in an abuse of process.
On 16 January 2015 the DNA opened a large-scale investigation into allegations of fraud committed by members of the ANRP. In particular, it was believed that some of the properties had been overvalued, thus causing loss to the State budget.
On 25 November 2015 the DNA ordered the prosecution of nine individuals, including the applicant, for abuse of office. In particular, the applicant was accused of having validated an expert report which had overvalued the property being claimed, thus allowing the former owner to receive more compensation than the property was worth. The applicant thus became a suspect in the criminal investigation into the offence of abuse of office, which was prohibited under Article 132 of the Anti-corruption Act (Law no. 78/2000) and under Article 297 § 1 and Article 309 of the Criminal Code.
On 26 November 2015, at 6 a.m., the DNA issued orders to appear in respect of each of the nine suspects. On that day, starting from 7.30 a.m., all the suspects were taken to the DNA’s offices for questioning. Between 7.30 a.m. and 4.05 p.m. they were all interviewed twice, in the presence of their respective lawyers, first as suspects and then as accused.
The order to appear in the applicant’s name, issued by the prosecutor at 6 a.m. on 26 November 2015, read as follows:
“The police shall bring the suspect, [the applicant] ..., to the [DNA’s] offices for questioning, the object of the case being the offence prohibited under Article 132 of Law no. 78/2000, read together with Article 297 § 1 and Article 309 [of the Criminal Code].
This order to appear is issued for the purpose of determining the case, under Article 265 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.”
At 7 a.m. on that day two police officers appeared at the applicant’s home. She was served with the order to appear and willingly accompanied the police officers to the DNA’s offices. They arrived there half an hour later, at 7.30 a.m.
At the applicant’s request, she was allowed to wait for her chosen lawyer who, according to the applicant, arrived at around 11 a.m. The DNA’s records show that the lawyer arrived at the DNA’s offices at 9.30 a.m. and remained on the premises until 5.15 p.m.
Upon the lawyer’s arrival, the applicant and her counsel were allowed time for consultation. The applicant was then interviewed by the prosecutor, in the presence of her lawyer. She was informed of the object of the criminal investigation and about her rights as a suspect in the investigation. She refused to provide a statement and requested time to consult further with counsel in private. The report drafted by the prosecutor indicated that the interview lasted from 10.50 a.m. to 11.10 a.m. The applicant alleged that she had been interviewed at noon.
Later that day the prosecutor informed the applicant of the decision to prosecute her and once again interviewed her in her lawyer’s presence. It was recorded on the applicant’s statement that the interview had started at 3.10 p.m. and had ended at 4.02 p.m. According to the applicant, her second interview started at about 4 p.m.
At 3.30 p.m. that day, the prosecutor decided to remand the applicant in custody for twenty-four hours, in order to prevent her from absconding and reoffending. The prosecutor informed her of that decision.
The applicant alleged that except for the time spent with the prosecutor, she had had to wait in a corridor, under constant surveillance by three armed police officers. She had not been allowed to leave the building to get food or water.
According to the Government, the applicant spent that time in a waiting room, in the lobby of the building. That waiting room was equipped with chairs, tables, water dispensers and a television set.
The applicant was held in the police detention centre from 6 p.m. on 26 November 2015 until 10 December 2015.
According to her, she was taken into custody on the evening of 26 November and held until the morning of 28 November 2015, when the High Court of Cassation and Justice placed her in pre-trial detention. During this time, she was held without food or water, wearing the same clothes as she had had on when she had left her home.
During her detention in the police centre she was allotted a bunk bed in shared cells. She complained of the poor conditions of hygiene, lack of ventilation and natural light. According to the applicant, the toilet was not separated from the living area by any partition, thus offering no privacy.
According to the Government, the applicant was held in the police detention centre from 26 November 2015 until 3.30 p.m. on 27 November 2015 and again from the afternoon of 28 November until 10 December 2015. They provided information about the conditions of the applicant’s detention. They submitted that the applicant had been detained in two different cells, each measuring about 8.6 sq. m, shared with two or three other detainees, and on one night in a cell measuring 13.52 sq. m, shared with four or five other detainees.
In each cell the applicant had had her own bed, equipped with bed linen, a pillow and blankets. The bathroom was located within the cell, and was separated from the living space by means of a plastic curtain. The bathroom was equipped with a sink, a squat toilet, and a shower.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”), in force since 1 February 2014, concerning orders to appear before the investigating authorities, provide as follows:
Article 265
“(1) A person may be brought before a criminal investigation body or a court on the basis of an order to appear if he or she has been previously summonsed but has not appeared, and if his or her questioning or presence is necessary, or if the summons could not be duly served because the recipient avoided service.
(2) A suspect (suspectul) or an accused (inculpatul) may be brought [before the authorities] on the basis of an order to appear even before being summonsed if the criminal investigation body or the court considers that the measure is necessary for the purpose of determining the case.
(3) During a criminal investigation an order to appear is issued by the criminal investigation body, while during trial it is issued by the judge.
...
(8) The order to appear ... shall include:
...
(d) the purpose for which it was issued;
(e) the name of the person to be brought in as a result of the order to appear ... In the case of a suspect or a defendant, the order to appear shall mention the offence that forms the object of the criminal investigation;
(f) the grounds and reasons why the order to appear is necessary;
...
(10) An order to appear issued by the criminal investigation body during a criminal investigation, or by the judge during trial, shall include all the elements set out in paragraph (8).
(11) The person brought [before the authorities] by virtue of an order to appear shall be examined immediately ...
(12) The person brought [before the authorities] on the basis of an order to appear shall remain at the disposal of the judicial authorities only for such time as is required to question him or her, but for no more than eight hours, except where his or her remand in custody or pre-trial detention has been ordered.”