The case concerns the first applicant’s complaints that he was illtreated at the hands of the police in 2004, that there was no effective investigation into the matter, and that he had no effective domestic remedy at his disposal to complain of the ill-treatment.
The first and second applicants were born in 1983 and 1955 respectively. The first applicant is the son of the second applicant. The first applicant resides in Austria and the second applicant lives in the town of Grozny in Chechnya, Russia. They were represented before the Court by Ms O. Sadovskaya, Mr A. Ryzhov and Mr I. Kalyapin, lawyers from the Committee Against Torture, a non-governmental organisation based in Nizhniy Novgorod.
The Government were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 7 May 2003 the first applicant was arrested on suspicion of having committed a criminal offence and was taken into custody. On 9 February 2004 the Supreme Court of Chechnya found him guilty of the unlawful acquisition and storage of an artillery shell and sentenced him to two years’ imprisonment. The applicant served his sentence at remand prison no. 2 in the village of Chernokozovo, Chechnya.
On 27 May 2004 D., an investigator from the Leninskiy District police station in Grozny (Ленинский РОВД – hereafter “the Leninskiy ROVD”), obtained information that the first applicant was a member of a criminal group and had committed several crimes as part of that group.
On 8 June 2004, at the request of D., the first applicant was transferred from the remand prison to the temporary detention facility of the Leninskiy ROVD (“the IVS”). Upon his admission to the facility, he was examined by a medical assistant, who noted the absence of any health-related complaints.
According to the applicants, upon the first applicant’s transfer to the Leninskiy ROVD, investigator D. met him in one of the Leninskiy ROVD’s offices and demanded that the first applicant confess to having participated in several terrorist attacks, robberies and murders, threatening him with illtreatment. Having obtained no confession, D. left the office. Officers R.Kh., I. Abdur. and I.A. then entered it. They put a black plastic bag over the first applicant’s head, strangled him and hit him all over his body, particularly on his legs, using truncheons and plastic bottles filled with water. The officers ordered the first applicant to confess to murders, robberies and terrorist attacks.
According to the IVS logbook, on 9 June 2004 the first applicant complained to a medical assistant of pain and oedema in the area of his right ankle. The medical assistant diagnosed him with disruption of the ligaments in the right ankle and immobilised the joint. A consultation with a general practitioner was prescribed. The next day, on 10 June 2004 the first applicant was taken to the injury care centre in hospital no. 9 in Grozny, where a neighbour saw him. The hospital doctors diagnosed him with partial disruption of the ligaments in the right leg, a sprain of the ligaments in the left leg, and contusion of the soft tissues of the head. The first applicant’s right leg was put in plaster. After the emergency care police officers took the applicant back to the Leninskiy ROVD.
On 11 June 2004 the first applicant prepared a suicide note and hid it underneath his plaster cast. According to him, he named investigator D. as the person responsible for his death.
On 16 June 2004 the first applicant was transferred to operational-search bureau no. 2 (“ORB-2”). According to him, police officers at ORB-2 beat him severely and gave him electric shocks with a view to obtaining his confessions to murders, terrorist attacks and robberies.
The next day the first applicant slit his wrists with a razor. According to him, he did so fearing that his torture would continue. Shortly thereafter he was provided with emergency medical assistance. It appears that at that time a suicide note dated 11 June 2004 was found underneath his plaster cast.
On 25 August and 2 November 2004 the first applicant was charged with several criminal offences, including participation in a criminal armed group, organised terrorist attacks, robberies, the unlawful possession and manufacture of weapons, and assault on law-enforcement officials.
On 30 March 2005 the Supreme Court of Chechnya acquitted him of all charges having declared several statements incriminating him inadmissible. After that he left Russia.
On 14 April 2005 the Chechnya prosecutor’s office appealed against the acquittal to the Supreme Court of Russia, which set aside the impugned judgment and remitted the case for a fresh examination on 1 June 2005. The proceedings were then suspended by the Supreme Court of Chechnya on 1 September 2005 on account of the first applicant’s whereabouts being unknown.
On 26 June 2004 the first applicant’s counsel filed a complaint in respect of her client’s ill-treatment with the prosecutor’s office of the Leninskiy District in Grozny (“the district prosecutor’s office”).
On 2 July 2004 investigator D. ordered a forensic medical examination of the first applicant, which was conducted on the same day by a forensic medical expert. The first applicant told the expert that no undue pressure had been put on him and that on 17 June 2004 he had slit his wrists. According to report no. 691 prepared by the expert, the first applicant had the following bodily injuries: scars on both inner forearms, a scar on the left ankle, and scars on the back of the head and on the top of the head. The expert concluded that the injuries on the inner forearms were from cuts, possibly from a razor, and had been inflicted no more than one month before the examination. It was not clear how the remaining injuries had been caused; they had been sustained more than eighteen months before the examination.
By a letter of 3 August 2004 the Chechnya prosecutor’s office informed the second applicant that the investigating authorities had refused to open a criminal case in respect of the first applicant’s alleged illtreatment.
The first refusal to open a criminal case was later overruled, and an additional pre-investigation inquiry was ordered. During the inquiry the investigators questioned the investigator D., and six officers from the Leninskiy ROVD and ORB-2. All of them denied having ill-treated the first applicant. The Leninskiy ROVD officers stated that on 9 June 2004 the first applicant had been escorted to the toilet by Officer S.B., and he (the first applicant) had slipped on the stairs and injured his leg. The ORB-2 officers stated that the first applicant had slit his wrists for no apparent reason. The investigators also obtained extracts from the IVS logbook containing the records related to the first applicant’s injuries and a written statement from him dated 9 June 2004 in which he explained that the leg injury had been caused by a fall on the stairs.
Taking into account the above pieces of evidence and medical report no. 691, on 6 August 2004 the investigating authorities refused to open a criminal case. Following subsequent complaints by the applicants new decisions not to open a criminal case were issued on 12 September 2004, 30 October and 28 November 2005, 26 January and 2 March 2006.
On 26 April 2006 the Chechnya prosecutor’s office overruled the refusal of 2 March 2006. It noted that neither the circumstances in which the first applicant had received his injuries nor the motives for his attempted suicide had been clarified. It also held that the pieces of evidence in the case file were in conflict with each other.
On the same day the Deputy Prosecutor of the Chechen Republic instituted criminal proceedings in respect of the first applicant’s alleged illtreatment under Article 286 § 3 of the Russian Criminal Code (“aggravated abuse of power”) and entrusted the investigation to the prosecutor’s office of the Chechen Republic.
On various dates in May 2006 the investigators questioned investigator D, Officers R.Kh., I. Abdur. I.A. and the hospital doctor. Investigator D. stated that the first applicant had sustained the trauma when he had slipped on the stairs. The officers stated that no undue pressure had been put on the first applicant and that he had injured his leg when Officer S.B. had been escorting him to the toilet. The doctor submitted that the trauma in question could have been the result of a fall.
On 30 June 2006 the investigators questioned the first applicant’s mother and father respectively. The parents stated that they had learned about their son’s ill-treatment from a police officer. Later, that information had been confirmed by the first applicant’s counsel. After the first applicant’s acquittal, his father had seen scars on his son’s head, thorax and legs. The first applicant had said that those injuries had been inflicted by Officers I.A., R.Kh., I. Abdur and A.A. during torture.
On 30 June 2006 the first applicant’s aunt was questioned. She stated that she was a medical assistant. She had heard about the first applicant’s illtreatment from his parents. She had seen him in person in May 2006 when she had taken him to her home to provide him with medical care. According to her, at that time he had been in a very poor state of health; he had had dark circles around his eyes, scars on his arms and legs and an injured kneecap, and his hair had been coming out. He had been lame in his right leg. The first applicant had told her that the injuries had been inflicted by police officers who had ill-treated him under the orders of investigator D.
Lastly, on 30 June 2006 the investigators interviewed a neighbour of the first applicant who had been at hospital no. 9 when the first applicant had been escorted there to receive medical care. She stated that men in camouflage uniforms had supported the first applicant, who had been unable to stand himself. His face had been covered in fresh haematomas.
On 26 July 2006 and 28 May 2007 the investigators suspended the proceedings on account of their inability to question the first applicant or identify the perpetrators of the offence. The suspension orders were set aside on 27 April 2007 and 7 October 2007 respectively.
On 5 November 2007 the investigators suspended the proceedings once again. The investigation is still ongoing.
On an unspecified date the first applicant’s counsel challenged the decision not to open a criminal case dated 12 September 2004 before the Leninskiy District Court of Grozny. The court dismissed the challenge on 16 December 2005, finding no grounds for quashing the impugned decision.
For a summary of the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation and the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation, see, in so far as relevant, Lyapin v. Russia (no. 46956/09, §§ 99102, 24 July 2014).
On 10 July 2003 and 13 March 2007 the Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) made public statements concerning the Chechen Republic of the Russian Federation which mentioned frequent cases of alleged ill-treatment in law-enforcement establishments, notably in ORB-2 (for relevant extracts see Mukayev v. Russia, no. 22495/08, §§ 60, 14 March 2017 and Abdulkadyrov and Dakhtayev v. Russia, no. 35061/04, § 47, 10 July 2018).