The case originated in an application (no. 80825/13) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Iulian Muscalu (“the applicant”), on 14 December 2013.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented before the Court by Mr. M. Şenchiu, a lawyer practising in Vaslui. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 13 June 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Bacău.
On 20 September 2012 the applicant was placed in Bacău Prison in order to serve a five-year sentence for robbery. He remained there until
The applicant described the detention conditions in Bacău and Vaslui prisons as inhuman because of overcrowding and extremely poor hygiene. He further mentioned the prison authorities’ failure to provide the necessary cleaning products. He also complained of the presence of pests and of dampness in the cells and the poor quality of food, which sometimes even contained sand.
In Bacău Prison the applicant was held for 7 months and 5 days in three different cells in section 1: one measuring 27.12 sq. m, which he shared with eleven prisoners; a second measuring 39.36 sq. m, which he shared with fifteen other prisoners; and a third measuring 39.27 sq. m, shared with seventeen other prisoners. All the cells had sanitary facilities with an area that was not provided. Taking into account the overall area of the cells without deducting the surface of the in-cell sanitary facility, the applicant had personal space ranging from 2.18 to 2.46 sq. m available. The cells were provided with natural light and ventilation through windows with measurements ranging from 118 x 147 cm to 237 x 75 cm.
The hygiene conditions were adequate. Toiletries were provided within the limits of the prison budget. General disinfection of the cells was conducted once per trimester and also whenever necessary.
The applicant received a menu in line with the regulations. The food prepared was always tested by the prison doctor and a representative of the prisoners and the results were marked in a register.
In Vaslui Prison the applicant was assigned to a semi-open detention regime. He was held in cells measuring 14.75 sq. m, including a storage closet of 0.75 sq. m and sanitary facilities of 1.8 sq. m. For various periods of time the applicant shared the cells with three or five other prisoners.
After deducting the surface of the in-cell sanitary facility and the storage closet from the overall surface of the cells, the applicant had personal space of 2.03 sq. m available for several non-consecutive periods totalling ten months.
For the rest of the time spent in Vaslui Prison until 11 September 2014, the date of the correspondence from the National Administration of Prisons submitted by the Government, the applicant had personal space of 3.05 sq. m available for three non-consecutive periods of time totalling two months and twenty-four days.
For several remaining short periods of time the applicant was transferred for various reasons to other locations.
According to the government, the cells in which the applicant was accommodated were put in use on 1 May 2012 when new mattresses and bed clothes were distributed. The cells were provided with natural light and ventilation through windows measuring 116 x 115 cm. Artificial lighting was also provided as well as the necessary furniture. All the cells had separate sanitary facilities equipped with one toilet, one shower, one sink and a window of 35 x 55 cm. Hot water was provided for two hours twice per week while cold water was provided without interruption.
The applicant was given a special diet for sick prisoners in line with the regulations. Here too the food prepared was always tested by the prison doctor and a representative of the prisoners and the results were marked in a register.
According to the regulations in force at the relevant time a prisoner had the right to receive for free during a year a maximum of six tubes of toothpaste, twelve rolls of toilet paper, 10 kg of washing powder, three kilograms of poor quality soap and 3 litres of bleach. These items were provided within the limits of the prison budget. Between April 2013 and August 2014, washing powder, chlorine, soap and toilet paper were distributed to prisoners on a monthly basis. The Government submitted a copy of a printed form for the distribution of toothbrushes, toothpaste, shaving cream, razors, toilet paper and soap in Vaslui Prison, dated
On 28 August 2012, upon his placement in Bacău Prison, the applicant’s medical chart mentioned that he was suffering from tuberculosis, and gastro duodenitis.
Between 6 and 22 December 2012 the applicant was admitted to Târgu Ocna Prison Hospital where he underwent follow-up examinations on a skin-graft operation carried out before his imprisonment. On this occasion he was diagnosed with chronic hepatitis B (HVB). He was released with the prescription of hepatoprotective and anti-inflammatory drugs and a special diet.
Between 1 and 15 March 2013 the applicant was again admitted for a check-up to the same hospital. Arteriopathy obliterans of the lower limbs was added to his previous diagnosis. He was released with the same prescription.
On 17 May 2013 the applicant was admitted to Târgu Ocna Prison Hospital with acute appendicitis. On 30 May 2013 he was transferred to Moineşti Emergency Hospital where he was operated on. The applicant was subsequently hospitalised four times for follow-up examinations.
The applicant was examined by a dentist on three occasions throughout his detention. He was diagnosed with lateral, latero-frontal maxillary edentation and latero-terminal mandibulary edentation. On
The applicant requested in writing adequate dental treatment and prostheses. On 18 December 2013 in reply to the applicant’s request the National Prisons Administration confirmed that he needed dental prostheses for which the price should be calculated by the prison dentist. The applicant’s personal contribution was to amount to 40% of the calculated price in accordance with the rules for the application of Law no. 275/2006. In case he did not have the necessary financial means to cover his contribution, the applicant was instructed to lodge a request with the Vaslui Prison administration after obtaining an estimate of the extent of the dental work needed and its total costs.
On 18 April 2013 the applicant lodged a complaint on the basis of Law no. 275/2006 on the serving of prison sentences with the
On 20 May 2013 the post-sentencing judge decided to reject the applicant’s complaint as ill-founded. The judge reviewed the applicant’s medical file and his doctors’ prescriptions and, taking into account that the applicant had failed to mention any specific failures on the part of the prison administration, concluded that no breach of rights could be found in the case.
The applicant contested the above decision before the Bacău County Court but during the hearing of 22 August 2013 he withdrew his complaint.
On 18 December 2013 he complained to the Vaslui Prison administration that there had been no hot water for ten days and that the heating had also been cut recently. The prison administration replied on
Excerpts from the relevant legislation concerning the rights of detainees, namely Law no. 275/2006, are given in Iacov Stanciu v. Romania (no. , § 116, 24 July 2012). The aforementioned Law was replaced by Law no. 254/2013 on the serving of prison sentences, which entered into force on 1 February 2014. Article 56 of Law no. 254/2013 stipulates that detainees may complain to the post-sentencing judge about measures taken by the prison authorities in respect of their rights within ten days of becoming aware of the impugned measure. The judge’s decision may be challenged before the domestic courts within five days of its notification.
Article 37 of Law no 254/2013 describes the semi-open regime as a detention regime in which prisoners may walk unaccompanied to certain areas of the prison, may work or participate in various activities in groups in designated areas of the prison which remain open during the day or outside the prison, under surveillance.
In a special report issued in 2015 the Romanian Ombudsman reported on the general problem of prison overcrowding in Romania, which was considered the main cause of poor hygiene, limited time for outside exercise and other activities, poor medical care and reduced efficiency of prisoners’ surveillance which increases instances of violence and self-harm. The Ombudsman observed that on 30 December 2014 the deficit of places in Romanian prisons was 11,170 and on 10 November 2015 the occupancy rate was 151.13%. The report also included factual information gathered as a result of visits conducted by representatives from that institution. As regards Bacău Prison the report mentioned that in the cells of section 1 there was a high degree of dampness and water leaks on the upper floors. The mattresses were humid, mouldy and dirty and the food unit did not have a proper ventilation system. The presence of bed bugs was also reported and was confirmed by the prison administration. The prisoners complained that the food served was not sufficient.
Excerpts from the relevant parts of the General Reports of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT” ), as well as their reports concerning Romanian prisons, are also quoted in Iacov Stanciu (cited above, §§ 121-22 and 125-27).