The case originated in an application (no. 31564/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Aminat Beksultanova, on 16 July 2007.
The applicant was represented by lawyers of the Stichting Russian Justice Initiative (“SRJI”), an NGO based in the Netherlands with a representative office in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 20 May 2009 the Court decided to apply Rule 41 of the Rules of Court, to grant priority treatment to the application and to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of the former Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application and to the application of Rule 41 of the Rules of Court. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1959 and resides in the village of AchkhoyMartan in the . She is the mother of Mr Timur Beksultanov, born in 1980.
The applicant’s account
In the applicant’s submission her family members, including Timur Beksultanov, were victims of continuing persecution on the part of the domestic authorities. In July 2003 Timur Beksultanov even had to quit his job as a coach in the Achkhoy-Martan local sports centre. Furthermore, on several occasions (the applicant did not furnish the exact dates) servicemen of the federal forces allegedly burst into the applicant’s house, searched it and intimidated the applicant and members of her family.
On 7 July 2003 the prosecutor’s office of the Achkhoy-Martan District (“the district prosecutor’s office”) opened a criminal case against Timur Beksultanov under Articles 205 § 2 (terrorism), 208 § 2 (participation in an illegal armed group), 222 § 2 (aggravated possession of weapons) and 317 (assault on a law-enforcement officer) of the Criminal Code (“CC”). The case file was assigned the number 44050. It appears that Timur Beksultanov was put on a list of wanted persons in connection with those proceedings.
According to the applicant, Timur Beksultanov denied the charges against him and intended to appear at the district prosecutor’s office.
On 2 October 2004 Mr I.M., an officer of the police special-purpose squad (“OMON”), came to the applicant’s house and asked Timur Beksultanov to follow him to an unidentified destination “to explain that [Timur Beksultanov] was not implicated in any terrorist activities”. The two men got into I.M.’s vehicle, a VAZ-2107, and drove off. The applicant memorised only a sequence of three figures from the car number plate, namely “940”.
The following account of the events is based on the information allegedly obtained by the applicant from two persons, one of them being identified by her as “a shepherd” and another as “a villager of AchkhoyMartan”. The applicant did not indicate the names of those witnesses or furnish copies of their statements. In her submission, the witnesses did not wish to give their names because they feared reprisals.
According to the applicant, one of the witnesses told her that at about 11 a.m. on 2 October 2004 he had seen a convoy of several armoured personnel carriers (“APCs”) and UAZ vehicles stationed at a crossroads between three villages, where one of the roads led to Shaami-Yurt. There had been numerous servicemen near the vehicles. A VAZ-2107 vehicle had approached the convoy. Timur Beksultanov and I.M. had got out of the vehicle and the servicemen had requested their identity papers. Having checked them, the servicemen had twisted Timur Beksultanov’s arms and had started beating him up. When he had fallen on the ground, the witness had heard several shots and had seen that Timur Beksultanov was wounded in his thigh. Immediately thereafter an officer had approached Timur Beksultanov and had shot him in the shoulder. After that the servicemen had put Timur Beksultanov in an APC and had driven off to an unknown destination. The servicemen had not done anything to I.M., who had got back inside his vehicle and had driven away. According to the applicant, the witness had not been able to hear everything which had occurred at the crossroads but had clearly seen what had been going on there.
On 2 October 2004, several hours after her son’s abduction, the vehicle in which he had been placed by his abductors, was stationed at the Achkhoy-Martan Department of the Interior (“the ROVD”).
The applicant learnt about the apprehension of Timur Beksultanov from the relatives of I.M. on 3 October 2004.
According to written statements by Zh.E., M.G., Z.M. and R.B., dated 20 December 2004 and furnished by the applicant, those persons submitted that on 2 October 2004 they had seen Timur Beksultanov get inside a vehicle together with a man who introduced himself as I.M., an OMON officer. I.M. had picked up Timur Beksultanov at the applicant’s house to accompany him to the law-enforcement authorities because the former wished to surrender in connection with the criminal charges against him. Zh.E., M.G., Z.M. and R.B. stated that on the following days they had learnt that I.M. had taken the applicant’s son into an ambush to deliver him to the authorities.
The applicant has had no news of Timur Beksultanov since 2 October 2004.
The Government submitted that the domestic proceedings had obtained no evidence that Timur Beksultanov had been abducted by State agents.
On 8 October 2004 the applicant complained in writing about the abduction of Timur Beksultanov to various State bodies, including the President of the Commission for Prisoners and Missing Persons with the President of the Russian Federation, the military prosecutor’s office of the North Caucasus Military Circuit, the military prosecutor’s office of the United Group Alignment (UGA), the Prosecutor of the Chechen Republic and the district prosecutor’s office. In those complaints she submitted that, at about noon on 2 October 2004, armed men who had been wearing camouflage uniforms and had arrived in several APCs, military UAZ vehicles and a private vehicle, had stopped I.M.’s vehicle with plate no. “940” and had taken away Timur Beksultanov. The abduction had occurred at the crossroads between three villages, where one of the roads led to Shaami-Yurt. In her complaints the applicant also claimed that, according to I.M., as of 6 October 2004 her son was still alive and was held in Khankala.
On 25 October 2004 the prosecutor’s office of the  (“the republican prosecutor’s office) forwarded the applicant’s complaint about the abduction of Timur Beksultanov for examination to the district prosecutor’s office.
On 5 November 2004 the Office of the Ombudsman of the  forwarded the applicant’s complaint about “the abduction of T. Beksultanov by officers of the special-purpose Department of the Sunzhenskiy Department of the Interior” to the Prosecutor General’s Office.
On 9 November 2004 the applicant re-submitted her complaint of 8 October 2004 to the same State authorities.
On 1 December 2004 the republican prosecutor’s office replied to the applicant that her complaint about the abduction of Timur Beksultanov had been appended to case file no. 44050 opened against him in July 2003. She was also notified that Timur Beksultanov had been put on a federal list of wanted persons and that measures aimed at establishing his whereabouts were under way.
On 3 December 2004 the military prosecutor’s office of the North Caucasus Circuit forwarded the applicant’s complaint about the abduction of her son to the UGA military prosecutor’s office and advised the applicant that she was to address all her queries to that body.
On 21 December 2004 the Ministry of the Interior of the  notified the applicant that they had forwarded her complaint about the abduction of her son to the district prosecutor’s office.
On 10 February 2005 the prosecutor’s office of military unit 20102 informed the applicant that they were verifying the information contained in her complaint about the abduction of her son and that they would notify her about their decision in due course.
On 12 February 2005 the Chechen Department of the Federal Security Service (“the Chechen Department of the FSB”) informed the applicant that they had forwarded her complaint about the abduction of Timur Beksultanov to the district prosecutor’s office for examination.
On 16 February 2005 the Chechen Department of the FSB replied to the applicant’s repeated complaint that on 2 October 2004 they had not carried out any special operations in the Achkhoy-Martanovskiy District. The letter also stated that the department officials had not arrested Timur Beksultanov.
By a letter of 4 March 2005 the prosecutor’s office of military unit no. 20102 notified the applicant that their inquiry had not established the implication of servicemen of the federal forces in the abduction of Timur Beksultanov. The letter also pointed out that the applicant’s complaint about the apprehension of Timur Beksultanov had been appended to case file no. 44050 opened against him on 7 July 2003 and in connection with which he had been put on the list of wanted persons. On 19 February 2005 the preliminary investigation in case no. 44050 had been adjourned owing to the fact that the whereabouts of Timur Beksultanov remained unknown. The district prosecutor’s office was taking investigative steps to establish his whereabouts with a view to prosecuting him for the crimes of which he was suspected.
On 17 May 2005 the applicant’s representatives wrote to the prosecutor of the Achkhoy-Martan District, enquiring, among other things, whether the district prosecutor’s office had launched an investigation into the abduction of Timur Beksultanov and what steps it had taken to establish his whereabouts. They also requested that the applicant be provided access to the relevant documents.
On 29 December 2005 the applicant’s representatives complained to the republican prosecutor’s office that they had not received a reply to their letter of 17 May 2005. It appears that their repeated query was also left without reply.
On 23 January 2007 the applicant’s representatives wrote to the prosecutor of the Achkhoy-Martan District and the republican prosecutor’s office, reiterating the questions raised in their letters dated 17 May and 29 December 2005.
On 7 February 2007 the republican prosecutor’s office replied to the applicant’s representatives that Timur Beksultanov had been put on the federal list of wanted persons in connection with criminal case no. 44050. The investigators of that criminal case had verified the applicant’s version that her son had been abducted by unidentified persons on 2 October 2004. However, apart from the applicant’s own statement, no objective evidence had been obtained to the effect that her son had, indeed, been abducted. At the same time, the investigators had sufficient reasons to believe that the applicant was deliberately complaining about the abduction of Timur Beksultanov in order to shield him from the criminal responsibility for the crimes he had committed.
On 25 May 2009 the applicant wrote to the head of the investigating department of the investigating committee with the Prosecutor’s Office in the . She reiterated the circumstances of her son’s disappearance and requested to be informed whether the authorities had opened an investigation into his disappearance and what steps they had taken to elucidate it.
On 24 September 2009 the Chief Military Prosecutor’s Office replied to the applicant that they had forwarded her complaint about the abduction of her son to the military prosecutor’s office of the United Group Alignment (“the UGS prosecutor’s office”).
By a letter of 6 October 2009 the district prosecutor’s office informed the applicant’s husband that they had received the complaint about the abduction of his son. The letter stated that Timur Beksultanov was being searched for on suspicion of having committed a number of serious crimes, in connection with which criminal proceedings had been instituted against him. The authorities were carrying out unspecified measures to examine the submissions concerning Timur Beksultanov’s allegedly unlawful arrest.
The Government submitted that the domestic authorities had not opened a separate investigation into the disappearance of Timur Beksultanov because he had been placed on a wanted list in connection with the criminal proceedings in case no. 44050 instituted against him. All the applicant’s submissions concerning his alleged abduction had been examined within the framework of the criminal proceedings in case no. 44050. The Government refused to provide the Court with a full copy of criminal case file no. 44050, without providing an explanation. The information provided by the Government and contained in the documents submitted by them may be summarised as follows.
On 6 July 2003 the district prosecutor’s office instituted criminal proceedings against a number of persons, including Timur Beksultanov, on suspicion of participation in illegal armed groups, assault on officers of lawenforcement authorities and possession of arms (Articles 317, 208 § 2 and 222 § 2 of the CC). The decision stated, in particular, that on 5 July 2003 officers of the Achkhoy-Martan police department had carried out an operation aimed at arresting members of illegal armed groups. In the course of the operation they had stopped a vehicle with Timur Beksultanov, R.K. and  inside. R.K. had opened fire on the police officers, had wounded one of them and had been killed in the ensuing skirmish. The police officers had arrested , whilst Timur Beksultanov had managed to escape. The case file was assigned the number 44050.
On 8 July 2003 a further criminal case was opened against Timur Beksultanov and R.K. under Article 317 of the CC on suspicion of an armed assault on a police officer, who had been severely wounded. The case file was given the number 44052.
On 21 July 2003 investigators of the district prosecutor’s office searched the applicant’s home in connection with the proceedings in case no. 44050. The related decision stated that there was information that Timur Beksultanov was hiding from investigators at his mother’s home at  in Achkhoy-Martan. According to the search record of the same date, 400 grams of trotyl were discovered at the applicant’s home.
Between 21 July and 20 August 2003 a number of local police departments and other law-enforcement authorities were instructed to search for Timur Beksultanov in connection with the criminal proceedings against him. It transpires that in the same time span a number of expert examinations concerning the weapons seized from the crime scenes and the trotyl found at Timur Beksultanov’s home were conducted. Further expert examinations with a view to establishing the severity of the injuries inflicted on the victims were carried out; the victims and some witnesses to the assaults were interviewed in the same period of time.
On 6 October 2003 criminal cases nos. 44050 and 44052 were joined; the new case file was assigned the number 44050.
On 29 November 2003 Timur Beksultanov’s name was put on a wanted list as a person suspected of a number of crimes; the lawenforcement authorities of the Achkhoy-Martan district were instructed to search for him.
Between 29 November and 3 December 2003 the investigators interviewed a number of witnesses about the circumstances of the crimes imputed to the applicant’s son.
On 5 December 2003 the criminal case against  was severed from the proceedings in case no. 44050.
On 6 December 2003 the investigation in case no. 44050 was suspended.
It appears that between December 2003 and September 2004 the investigators instructed a number of law-enforcement authorities to search for Timur Beksultanov but their requests yielded no results.
On 10 September 2004 the district prosecutor’s office received yet another criminal case file no. 38567 opened against Timur Beksultanov on 19 April 2004 on suspicion of unlawfully selling a pistol to a third person. On 10 September 2004 case file no. 38567 was joined to case file no. 44050; the new case file was assigned the number 44050.
On 15 September 2004 the investigation in case no. 44050 was suspended owing to its failure to locate Timur Beksultanov.
On 19 January 2005 the investigation in case no. 44050 was resumed. The decision stated, in particular, that on 17 October 2004 the district prosecutor’s office had received the applicant’s complaint that on 2 October 2004 persons in camouflage uniforms had arrested Timur Beksultanov at the “Kavkaz” highway near the Shaami-Yurt woodland and had taken him to an unknown destination. It further stated that the applicant’s submissions were to be examined and that operational and search measures aimed at locating Timur Beksultanov were to be activated.
On 26 January 2005 the district prosecutor’s office instructed its counterparts and departments of the interior in the Chechen Republic and other regions of  to inform it whether they had arrested the applicant’s son, held him in detention or otherwise had any information on his whereabouts. They were also requested to ensure that the search for Timur Beksultanov be activated. It appears to follow from the replies of the relevant authorities, dated between February and May 2005, that those measures yielded no results and that no relevant information was obtained following the investigators’ request.
On an unspecified date in January 2005 the investigators interviewed the applicant. Her interview record, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“... [Timur Beksultanov] had worked as a coach at the local school before 2003. In 2003 I learnt that he had a pistol. He explained to me that he needed it for self-defence ... Some time later our close relative M.B. attempted to kill his sister A.B., who was allegedly leading an immoral life ... Subsequently we heard rumours that my son had given the pistol to M.B.
Several days later police officers stopped a car with my son and two other persons inside to arrest them. My son managed to escape but they had seized his passport and pistol. One of the persons in the car had opened fire on the policemen and was shot dead. After that the authorities had started persecuting our family. On several occasions persons in camouflage uniforms and masks burst into our house, looking for [Timur Beksultanov], whose name had by that time been placed on a wanted list.
On several occasions I tried to persuade him to surrender but he was afraid of getting a long prison term or disappearing ...
Until autumn 2004 [Timur Beksultanov] had succeeded in hiding from authorities. However, at some point I talked him into surrendering and he promised to do so by 7 October 2004.
At about 11 a.m. on 2 October 2004 [Timur Beksultanov] left home together with I.M., an OMON officer. They went to  in I.M.’s silvery VAZ-2109 vehicle with licence plate containing figures “904” [sic]. [Timur Beksultanov] promised me that he would return ... that evening, but he did not return.
On 3 October 2004 an unknown man came to my house and told me that Timur had been arrested. He explained that on 2 October 2004 he had taken his cattle to a river not far from Shaami-Yurt, close to the road between Katyr-Yurt and Shaami-Yurt. There he had seen a number of military vehicles, including several APCs, military UAZ vehicles and a UAZ-469 vehicle. One of the APCs had the licence plate number “E-422”. The vehicles had been stationed at a crossroads. The man had then seen a silvery VAZ-2109 vehicle move in the direction of Shaami-Yurt. When the VAZ2109 had approached the military vehicles, they encircled it and shots had been fired. One of the men from the VAZ-2109 vehicle, who had been beaten up, had been placed in a UAZ vehicle and the other had been taken by his hands and feet and thrown in an APC, following which the military vehicles had driven off in the direction of Achkhoy-Martan through the . The man had heard that the call sign of the servicemen had been “Falcon”. During the events described by him, the man had hidden in the bushes by the road. ... He refused to give his name or to testify before any law-enforcement authorities. According to the man, one of the APCs had white colouring, from beneath which green colour could be seen. When the servicemen had taken off, they had left the VAZ-2109 vehicle behind.
Following that we contacted the authorities and started searching for our son on our own on the outskirts of the ; ... the villagers told us that they had seen military vehicles and had heard the shooting but when we asked them to give their names, they refused and stated that they would not testify before any lawenforcement authorities. On the second day of our search I learnt that the vehicle in which my son had gone to  together with I.M. had been brought to the local ROVD by police officer D. on the order of the head of the [Achkhoy-Martan] ROVD. Some time later I learnt that that vehicle had been transferred to the Sunzhenskiy ROVD. I also learnt that after a while I.M. was released and that he started working [in the police] again. I also learnt that during his arrest my son had been wounded in the right side of the chest and in the right thigh. I don’t know if he is alive or not. There were many rumours about my son’s placement in various power structures of the FSB in Khankala; I mentioned all that information in my complaints to the authorities.”
On 1 February 2005 the investigator in charge of case no. 44050 instructed the Achkhoy-Martan police to examine the applicant’s submissions concerning the abduction of her son by, in particular, identifying and interviewing any witnesses to his apprehension (particular attention was to be paid to persons residing in the vicinity of the crossroads between Shaami-Yurt and the “Kavkaz” motorway).
It appears that following the investigator’s instructions the police interviewed five residents of Shaami-Yurt; they all stated that they did not know anything about the abduction of the applicant’s son.
On 27 June and 9 July 2005 a number of law-enforcement authorities forwarded to the district prosecutor’s office the applicant’s further complaints about the abduction of her son by camouflaged armed men and instructed the latter body to examine her submissions and to inform her of any decisions taken by 20 July 2005.
On an unspecified date in 2005 the head of the criminal police of the ROVD Mr V.K. issued a certificate (справка), which, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“The ROVD has operational information [оперативная информация] to the effect that on 3 October 2004 unidentified officers of security forces stopped on the ‘RostovBaku’ motorway a civilian vehicle in which, according to the available sources, Timur Beksultanov, born in 1980, residing at , Achkhoy-Martan, was found. The ROVD received no complaints from the relatives of [Timur Beksultanov] about his arrest or abduction. The Achkhoy-Martan ROVD has no information on ‘Akhmed’, who had been arrested together with [Timur Beksultanov]. There is information that military armoured vehicles were used during [Timur Beksultanov’s] arrest. There is no information on Beksultanov’s ensuing whereabouts or the persons who had arrested him.”
On 19 February 2005 the district prosecutor’s office suspended the investigation in case no. 44050, owing to its failure to find Timur Beksultanov. By the same decision the district prosecutor’s office instructed the ROVD to continue carrying out operational and search measures aimed at locating Timur Beksultanov.
The investigation in case no. 44050 is still pending.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law see Akhmadova and Sadulayeva v. Russia (no. 40464/02, §§ 67-69, 10 May 2007).