The case originated in an application (no. 4633/15) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Russian nationals, Ms G.B. and her three children, namely Ms A.I., Mr M.Z. and Ms K.Z. (“the applicants”), on 22 January 2015.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Yılmaz, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicants complained, under Articles 3, 8 and 13 of the Convention, about the material conditions of their detention at the Kumkapı and Gaziantep Foreigners’ Removal Centres and of the absence of any effective remedies whereby they could raise those complaints. They also complained, under Article 5 §§ 1, 2, 4 and 5 of the Convention, of the unlawfulness of their detention, the failure of the authorities to duly inform them of the reasons for their detention and the absence of domestic remedies by which they could effectively have the lawfulness of their detention reviewed and claim compensation for the violation of their rights under Article 5.
On 27 May 2015 notice of the complaints under Article 3, Article 5 §§ 1, 2, 4, and 5, Article 8 and Article 13 of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the application. The Russian Government, who were informed of their right to intervene under Article 36 of the Convention, did not make use of that right.
The applicants were born in 1986, 2008, 2012 and 2013 respectively. The first applicant is the mother of the second, third and fourth applicants (also referred to as the “minor applicants”). They were being held in administrative detention at the time of lodging the present application with the Court. According to the latest information in the case file, they currently live in Baku, Azerbaijan.
On 17 October 2014 the applicants entered Turkey via Istanbul Atatürk Airport allegedly with a valid visa.
According to the official records, on 18 October 2014 the applicants were arrested in the province of Kilis by the Syrian border as they were attempting to cross the border illegally into Syria. They were first taken to the Elbeyli provincial gendarmerie command for verification of their identities. Later on the same day, they were transferred to the foreigners department at the Kilis Security Directorate.
On 19 October 2014 the Kilis governor’s office issued an order for the deportation of the first applicant under section 54(1)(h) of Law no. 6458, for having attempted to leave the country illegally. It also ordered her detention under section 57(2) for the same reason.
On 22 October 2014 the applicants were transferred to the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre (“the Kumkapı Removal Centre”) attached to the Istanbul Security Directorate.
On 23 October 2014 the Istanbul governor’s office issued an order for the first applicant’s deportation under section 54(1)(d) and (h) of Law no. 6458 and her detention during the deportation process in accordance with section 57 of the same Law. The order only made reference to the relevant provisions of Law no. 6458 on deportation and detention, without explaining on what grounds the decision to deport and detain the first applicant had been taken. There is no document in the case file to show whether and when that order was served on the first applicant.
On 3 December 2014 the first applicant objected to the deportation order before the Istanbul Administrative Court. There is no information in the case file as to the outcome of those proceedings.
In the meantime, on 7 November 2014 the applicants also sought international protection from the Turkish authorities, arguing that they had left Russia for fear of persecution due to their religious and political convictions and that their lives would be in danger if they were returned there. That request was rejected on 17 December 2014 by the Directorate General of Migration Management (“the DGMM”) attached to the Ministry of the Interior, which found that the applicants did not qualify for international protection. On 6 January 2015 the applicants challenged the decision of the DGMM before the Ankara Administrative Court, which rejected their case on 9 September 2015. An appeal lodged by the applicants against the administrative court’s decision was dismissed by the Supreme Administrative Court on 20 June 2018.
On 11 November 2014 the applicants lodged an application with the Istanbul Magistrates’ Court, challenging the lawfulness of their administrative detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre and requesting their release. They argued, in particular, that
(i)  the detention order had only made reference to section 57 of the Foreigners and International Protection Act (Law no. 6458), without specifying the reasons for detention, even though the competent authority was obliged by law to provide such reasons in its decision;
(ii)  it was clear from section 68 of Law no. 6458 that administrative detention should have been the last resort in respect of them, in view of their asylum seeker status, yet the authorities had ordered their detention without considering any alternative preventive measures and without paying sufficient attention to the fact that the applicants were a mother and her three very young children;
(iii)  the administrative detention entailed serious physical and mental suffering for the applicants, especially the second, third and fourth applicants on account of their young age, having particular regard to the adverse material conditions at the Kumkapı Removal Centre (see paragraphs 24-27 below), which amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment as established by the Court in cases such as Yarashonen v. Turkey (no. 72710/11, 24 June 2014).
On 20 November 2014 the applicants submitted a second request to complement their application, arguing that an official decision on administrative detention had been taken only in respect of the first applicant, and that there was no legal basis for the remaining applicants’ detention.
On 26 November 2014, 2 and 26 December 2014 and 6 January 2015 the applicants lodged four more applications with the Istanbul Magistrates’ Court to challenge the lawfulness of their detention on largely the same grounds as those noted above.
By decisions dated 21 November 2014, 2 and 9 December 2014 and 12 and 29 January 2015 the Istanbul Magistrates’ Court dismissed the applicants’ requests. In its initial decision of 21 November 2014, the magistrates’ court found that according to the information obtained from the Istanbul governor’s office, it had been decided to deport and detain the first applicant as (i) she posed a danger to public safety, and (ii) she had attempted to leave Turkey illegally. Her detention was, therefore, in accordance with the law. As for the remaining applicants, the Istanbul Magistrates’ Court acknowledged the absence of any detention order in respect of them and dismissed their claims – regarding the unlawfulness of their detention – for that reason. The court did not respond to the applicants’ remaining arguments. In its subsequent four decisions, it similarly declared the applicants’ detention lawful, merely making reference to sections 54 and 57 of Law no. 6458. In two of those decisions (delivered on 2 December 2014 and 12 January 2015) the court held that the decision to deport the first applicant had been based on section 54(1)(d) alone (concerning the deportation of those posing a threat to public order and security or public health), while in the other decisions it did not even specify that. In the remaining two decisions the court stated that the applicants had entered Turkey without a valid visa, although the applicants consistently denied that assertion.
On 22 January 2015 the applicants were transferred to the Gaziantep Removal Centre.
On 23 January 2015 the Gaziantep governor’s office issued a deportation order in respect of all of the applicants, and also ordered their detention pending the deportation process, without specifying the provisions on which those orders were based. There is no document in the case file to show whether and when those orders were served on the applicants.
On 30 January 2015 the applicants applied to the Gaziantep Magistrates’ Court, challenging the lawfulness of their administrative detention at the Gaziantep Removal Centre and requesting their release. They largely repeated the arguments that they had previously made before the Istanbul Magistrates’ Court and stressed the unsuitability of the physical conditions at the Gaziantep Removal Centre, especially for small children. They also drew the court’s attention to the fact that they were being detained despite the absence of any immediate prospect of expulsion, because the cases that they had lodged against the deportation decision and the decision refusing their asylum request were still pending before the administrative courts.
On 5 February 2015 the Gaziantep Magistrates’ Court accepted the applicants’ arguments and found that their administrative detention did not comply with the law. The court noted at the outset that the applicants had been detained for over three months in circumstances which were particularly unsuitable for small children. Moreover, although their deportation and detention were based on sections 54(1)(d) and 57(2) of Law no. 6458, no concrete evidence had been provided to support the allegation that they posed a threat to public order, safety or health, particularly bearing in mind that three of the applicants were children aged 2, 3 and 7. Similarly, no explanation had been given as to why their detention was called for under section 57(2) of Law no. 6458. The court also noted that the proceedings brought by the applicants against the decisions ordering their deportation and refusing their asylum request were still pending before the administrative courts. On the basis of those findings, the court declared the applicants’ detention to be unlawful and ordered the applicants’ release from the Gaziantep Removal Centre, unless their deportation could be carried out immediately.
As the authorities failed to release them, on 10 February 2015 the applicants applied to the DGMM, requesting their release from the Gaziantep Removal Centre in accordance with the decision of the Gaziantep Magistrates’ Court dated 5 February 2015 and the interim measure ordered previously by the Court on 23 January 2015 (see below paragraph 39).
On the same date, the decision of the Gaziantep Magistrates’ Court was served on the Gaziantep Security Directorate and the applicants were released from the removal centre on condition that they resided in Gaziantep and reported to a police station three times a week.
The applicants claimed that the Kumkapı Removal Centre had been severely overcrowded at the time of their detention there between 22 October 2014 and 22 January 2015. The centre had had an overall official capacity of 300 people at the relevant time, but had accommodated around 600 people. As proof of that claim, the applicants submitted a note prepared by their lawyer on 23 January 2015, recounting an exchange that he had had with an officer on duty, who had allegedly told him that some 600 people were being held at the removal centre at the material time.
The applicants argued that the overcrowding at the centre had led to problems of hygiene, which had been further exacerbated by the lack of regular cleaning of the rooms, toilets and showers, and by the fact that the bedding provided at the centre was never changed. The building was infested with insects. The first applicant claimed that her children had been bitten by insects and bedbugs, and two of them had suffered allergic reactions to those bites. On an unspecified date the applicants’ room had been disinfected, yet they had not been permitted to leave the room during the disinfection process.
The applicants further submitted that the centre had not been sufficiently lit, heated and ventilated, and that they had been exposed to tobacco smoke at all times of the day. There had been no regular provision for outdoor exercise, not even for children. There were no light switches in the rooms and the lights were kept on during the night, which had disturbed the applicants’ sleep.
The applicants emphasised that the material conditions of detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre were particularly unsuitable for the mental and physical health of children. Children were not provided with a play area or with age-appropriate activities, nor did they have regular access to fresh air. The quality and quantity of the food provided was also poor. In particular, they did not meet the nutritional requirements of children. The applicants’ needs, such as baby food, milk and fruit, as well as nappies, baby cream, clothes and toys, had been met by their lawyers or next of kin, to the extent that their visits had been allowed. The applicants’ lawyers’ oral and written requests for the provision of the three children’s basic needs, including their requests for urgent medical care, had been ignored by the authorities. In addition to their oral requests, on 14 November 2014 and 13 January 2015 the applicants’ lawyer had written twice to the Istanbul Security Directorate to complain of the material conditions at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, and to request medical assistance and basic provisions required by the applicants, in particular the three children. In the letter of 13 January 2015 the lawyer had stressed that one of the children suffered from bronchitis and another one from allergies, and that they were in need of urgent medical care. It appears that the authorities did not respond to any of those requests. On 21 January 2015 the lawyer wrote to the DGMM to draw its attention to the hardships faced by the applicants on account of the material conditions of detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, and to request urgent medical assistance for the children, who had been suffering from a high fever for the past six days. The lawyer stressed that the authorities had taken no action to provide the children with the necessary medical care, despite the first applicant’s numerous pleas. According to the information provided by the applicants, the children were not taken to a doctor until 27 January 2015.
On 22 January 2015 the applicants were transferred to the Gaziantep Removal Centre, where they were held until 10 February 2015. According to their account, the conditions at that centre were even worse than those at Kumkapı: they were held in a room measuring 10 sq. m, which did not receive enough sunlight, together with three other women and one child. There were people who slept in the corridors. The problems concerning the quality and the appropriateness of the food for children, the hygiene, the lack of outdoor exercise and the absence of a play area also existed at that centre. The applicants were given milk, fruit and winter clothes by their lawyers.
The Government submitted that the Kumkapı Removal Centre where the applicants had initially been detained had a capacity of 300 persons. The detainees were accommodated on three floors: the first two floors were reserved for male detainees, and the third floor for females. There were four dormitories on the first floor, measuring 50, 58, 76 and 84 sq. m, and five dormitories on each of the second and third floors, measuring 50, 58, 69, 76 and 84 sq. m respectively. There were forty-four bunk beds on the first floor, seventy-six bunk beds on the second floor and seventy bunk beds on the third floor, and all the rooms were sufficiently lit and ventilated. There were also five showers and six toilets per floor, as well as a cafeteria measuring 69 sq. m on all floors, where breakfast, lunch and dinner were served daily. Children were given 500 ml of milk each day, and there was also a canteen in the centre where personal supplies were sold. The detainees had the right to outdoor exercise in suitable weather conditions, and the applicants had enjoyed that right during their stay in Kumkapı. An indoor and an outdoor play area were moreover provided for children, and facilities for resting, watching television, exercising and religious observance were also made available to all detainees. A doctor was present on the premises weekly and the detainees also had access to medical care in cases of emergency. Detainees were also allowed to meet with their firstdegree relatives, lawyers and legal representatives. As for the hygiene in the facility, there were six cleaning staff working full time at the removal centre, and the building was disinfected whenever necessary. Hot and cold water was available around-the-clock, along with hygiene products such as liquid and bath soap.
The Government stated that as the first applicant had three small children, she had not been kept in the standard female dormitories on the third floor. Rather, she had been housed in a separate area on the same floor, called the “victims’ ward”, where there were no iron bars or locks on the doors, where the detainees were allowed to use the telephones at will and had access to hot and cold water at all times. The so-called victims’ ward consisted of two rooms measuring 23.5 and 23 sq. m respectively and also included a 24 sq. m hallway and an 11 sq. m play area for children. The children were allowed to spend time in the play area with their parents or the sociologists and psychologists on duty at the removal centre, and they were never separated from their mothers.
As for the conditions at the Gaziantep Removal Centre, the Government informed the Court that the applicants had been accommodated in a separate room measuring 12 sq. m as a family. They had been provided with three meals per day as well as with milk for the children. There was heating and twenty-four-hour access to hot water at the removal centre. Those held at the removal centre were allowed to go out to the yard at certain times of the day, and they were provided with medical care as necessary.
In support of their claims, the Government submitted some photographs taken at the Kumkapı and Gaziantep removal centres, showing a number of dormitories from the Gaziantep removal centre and the yards of both centres. Unlike in Kumkapı, there does not seem to be a play area in the Gaziantep Removal Centre’s small concrete court yard. As for the conditions in the dormitory rooms, the rooms in the photographs are well lit and fairly clean, although some of them appear to be cramped. All of the rooms are equipped with iron-frame bunk-beds for adults, and there appear to be no other furniture – such as tables, chairs and closets – present in most of the rooms. The Government have provided no information as to which one of the rooms shown in the photographs the applicants had actually stayed in. The Government also submitted photographs of two common rooms with sofas and tables, and of one kitchen, one shower and one toilet at the Gaziantep Removal Centre, all of which also appear clean. In addition, they submitted video footage from the Kumkapı Removal Centre. One video shows an unidentified woman walking down the stairs of the centre with one baby and two older children and going outside to the car park where swings and a slide had been put in place, and another shows a woman making a phone call with an older boy by her side. The Government lastly sent three photographs taken at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, in which a small – unidentified – girl is seen holding a puzzle with a woman who, according to the note on the photograph, was a psychologist. There is no indication on the photographs as to when they were taken, but the videos indicate that they were taken on 18 and 22 January 2015.
On 15 December 2014 the applicants lodged an individual application with the Constitutional Court and brought all the complaints noted in paragraphs 24-27 above regarding the material conditions of their detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre to that court’s attention. They stressed that the conditions of detention in which they had been held for two months at that centre, which were unsuitable even for adults, were particularly unacceptable in the case of small children. The second, third and fourth applicants’ special needs were not being met at the centre, despite numerous appeals to the authorities. They added that although there was a play room and a yard at the centre, they were not allowed to benefit from those facilities. In particular, they were deprived of basic human needs, such as access to outdoor exercise. Arguing that the conditions of their detention had constituted ill-treatment, as well as violating their right to private and family life, the applicants requested that the Constitutional Court order their release from the Kumkapı Removal Centre by way of an interim measure. In support of their arguments, the applicants relied on the Court’s judgments in the cases of Yarashonen (cited above) and Musaev v. Turkey, (no. 72754/11, 21 October 2014), as well as on the reports of the Human Rights Inquiry Committee of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”), the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants, the European Commission and the Human Rights Institution of Turkey, where the adverse conditions of detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre had been noted and criticised. The applicants also alleged that, apart from the unsuitable physical conditions at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, they had been deprived of their liberty in an unlawful manner and that they had not had an effective remedy to complain about the unlawfulness and the conditions of their detention. They emphasised in this connection that the numerous cases that they had brought before the Istanbul Magistrates’ Court to challenge the lawfulness of their detention had been dismissed by that court on stereotypical grounds without any real assessment of the lawfulness issue.
On 29 December 2014 the applicants sent a letter to the Constitutional Court complaining about the failure of that court to deliver a decision on their interim measure request, despite the fact that two weeks had passed since they had made the request. The applicants pleaded in particular that the physical conditions of detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, where they had now been held for over two months, were putting the three small children’s physical integrity in danger and damaging their health.
On 9 January 2015 the Constitutional Court rejected the applicants’ request for an interim measure. It found that the applicants had failed to lay the basis of an arguable claim that there was an immediate and serious risk to their lives or their physical or mental integrity on account of the conditions of detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre. The court considered that the applicants’ allegations concerning the problems of hygiene and the lack of adequate food and fresh air at the centre, and their argument that such conditions constituted an actual and personal risk for them, were not sufficient to justify an interim measure. The Constitutional Court noted, however, that the State authorities were responsible for providing basic and urgent health services to persons held in removal centres.
On 24 May 2018 the Constitutional Court delivered its judgment on the applicants’ case. After setting out the facts – where it noted, inter alia, that there had been no official order for the minor applicants’ detention prior to their transfer to Gaziantep – it moved on to assess the admissibility of the case. It reiterated at the outset the requirement to exhaust all administrative and legal remedies before lodging an application with the Constitutional Court. Referring to its decision in the case of K.A. (no. 2014/13044, 11 November 2015, see paragraphs 53-58 below), it stated that it had held in the past that there had been no effective remedies available in Turkish law to complain about the conditions of detention at foreigners’ removal centres or the unlawfulness of foreigners’ administrative detention. It then stressed, however, that it had recently changed that jurisprudence in the case of B.T. (no. 2014/15769, 30 November 2017, see paragraphs 59-62 below), where it had held that an action for a full remedy (tam yargı davası) before the administrative courts could provide an effective remedy in respect of complaints concerning both the conditions and the unlawfulness of the administrative detention of foreigners, provided, respectively, that (i) the individual was no longer being held in the conditions complained of, and (ii) the unlawfulness of the detention had already been established by a magistrates’ court. The Constitutional Court held that there was no reason to depart from the findings in the B.T. case in the present circumstances, and therefore declared the applicants’ complaints inadmissible for failure to lodge an action for a full remedy before the administrative courts. The Constitutional Court stressed, in respect of the applicants’ complaint under Article 5, that their detention had already been declared unlawful by the Gaziantep Magistrates’ Court on 5 February 2015.
The Constitutional Court also emphasised that although the aforementioned change of jurisprudence in the case of B.T. had been published in the Official Gazette on 16 February 2018, any such complaints lodged with the Constitutional Court before that date, without having first seized the administrative courts, would still be declared inadmissible on the grounds of non-exhaustion. That said, in the event that such applicants sought to have recourse to the administrativelaw remedy at issue after the inadmissibility decisions delivered by the Constitutional Court in respect of them, the administrative courts would be required to assess compliance with the time-limit rules for bringing an administrative action in a manner that would not prejudice the right of access to a court.
The applicants lodged their application with the Court on 22 January 2015 and also requested it to adopt an interim measure for their release from the Kumkapı Removal Centre, where they were allegedly being subjected to conditions of detention that amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment.
On 23 January 2015 the President of the Section to which the case had been allocated decided, in the interests of the parties and the proper conduct of the proceedings before the Court, to indicate to the Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the necessary measures be taken to ensure that the applicants’ detention conditions were compatible with Article 3 of the Convention. The Government were further requested to inform the Court whether the conditions of the applicants’ detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre were compatible with Article 3 of the Convention and, in particular, whether those conditions could be considered appropriate for the second, third and fourth applicants in view of their young age. The Government were also invited to submit information, documents, photographs and video footage indicating the conditions of detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, including the capacity of the rooms and the number of occupants in the rooms at the material time, the hygiene conditions, and the opportunities for access to fresh air and daily exercise. The Government’s responses to those questions have been outlined in paragraphs 29-32 above.
On the same date, the President of the Section also decided to grant priority to the application under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
On 27 May 2015 the Vice-President of the Section to which the case had been allocated decided to give notice of the application to the Turkish Government. On the same date, it was also decided to discontinue the application of Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
The relevant provisions of the Turkish Constitution read as follows:
Article 17
“...
No one shall be subjected to torture or ill-treatment; no one shall be subjected to punishment or treatment that is incompatible with human dignity.
...”
Article 19
“Everyone has the right to personal liberty and security.
No one shall be deprived of their liberty except for the ... apprehension or detention of a person who enters or attempts to enter the country illegally or against whom a deportation or extradition order has been issued.
...
Anyone who is deprived of his or her liberty for any reason whatsoever shall be entitled to apply to a competent judicial authority for a speedy decision on his or her case and for his or her immediate release if the detention is not lawful.
...”
Article 40
“Anyone whose rights and freedoms recognised under the Constitution have been violated has the right to request prompt access to the competent authority.
...”
Article 125
“All actions or decisions taken by the authorities are amenable to judicial review ...
If the implementation of an administrative measure would result in damage which is difficult or impossible to compensate and the measure is also clearly unlawful, a stay of execution may be granted, stating reasons ...”
The administration shall be liable to make compensation for damage resulting from its actions or decisions.”
Section 2(1)(b) of the Administrative Procedure Act (Law no. 2577) provides that an action for a full remedy may be brought before the administrative courts on account of a violation of personal rights by an administrative action or measure.
The Foreigners and International Protection Act (Law no. 6458) entered into force on 11 April 2014. The provisions that are relevant to the present case read as follows:
Deportation
Section 52
“(1)  Foreigners may be deported to their country of origin or a transit country or a third country by way of a deportation decision.”
Deportation decision
Section 53
“(1)  A deportation decision shall be issued upon the instructions of the Directorate General or ex officio by governors’ offices.
(2)  The decision and the reasons on which it has been based shall be notified to the foreigner, his or her legal representative or his or her lawyer. If the person in respect of whom a deportation order has been issued is not represented by a lawyer, he or she or his or her legal representative shall be notified of the consequences of the decision as well as the procedures and time-limits for appeal.
(3)  A foreigner or his or her legal representative or lawyer may appeal to an administrative court against the deportation decision within fifteen days of the date of notification. The individual who has appealed against the decision shall also notify the authority that issued the deportation decision about the appeal. Appeals to [administrative] courts shall be concluded within fifteen days. The decision of the [administrative] court on this matter shall be final. The foreigner shall not be deported before the expiry of the time-limit for lodging an appeal or, where an appeal has been lodged, until the finalisation of the proceedings, without prejudice to his or her right to request [the contrary].”
Individuals in respect of whom deportation decisions may be issued
Section 54
“(1)  A deportation decision may be issued in respect of foreigners:
...
(d)  who constitute a threat to public order or public security or public health,
...
(h)  who have breached the terms of legal entry into Turkey or legal exit from Turkey,
...”
Administrative detention for deportation and the duration of detention
Section 57
“(1)  Where foreigners who fall into one of the categories listed in section 54 of the present Act are apprehended by law-enforcement units, the governors’ offices shall be notified immediately for a decision to be taken in respect of them. Deportation decisions shall be issued by the governors’ offices in respect of foreigners for whom such a decision is deemed necessary. The assessment and decision-making period shall not exceed forty-eight hours.
(2)  A [foreigner] in respect of whom a deportation decision has been issued shall be placed in administrative detention by a decision of the governor’s office if [he or she] poses a risk of absconding or disappearing, has violated the rules for entry into and exit from Turkey, has used false or fabricated documents, has not left Turkey within the period granted without an acceptable excuse, or constitutes a threat to public order, public security or public health. Those in respect of whom an administrative detention order has been issued shall be transferred to a removal centre within fortyeight hours by the law-enforcement unit that apprehended them.
(3)  The period of administrative detention in removal centres shall not exceed six months. However, if the deportation process cannot be completed owing to the failure of the foreigner to co-operate or provide correct information or documents regarding his or her country [of origin], this period may be extended for a maximum of [a further] six months.
(4)  The need to continue administrative detention shall be reviewed monthly by the governor’s office. Where necessary, reviews may be conducted earlier. If a foreigner’s administrative detention is no longer deemed necessary, it shall be terminated immediately. Foreigners who have been released may be required to comply with such obligations as residing at a designated address and reporting to the authorities in the manner and period requested.
(5)  The administrative detention decision, the extension of the period of administrative detention and the results of the monthly reviews shall be notified to the foreigner or his or her legal representative or lawyer, together with the reasons on which they are based. If the person in respect of whom a deportation order has been issued is not represented by a lawyer, he or she or his or her legal representative shall be notified of the consequences of the decision as well as the procedures and time-limits for appeal.
(6)  The person who has been placed in administrative detention or his or her legal representative or lawyer may appeal against the administrative-detention decision to the magistrates’ courts. An appeal cannot stay the execution of the administrative detention. In the event that an [appeal] is submitted to the administration, it shall be transmitted to the competent magistrates’ court without delay. The magistrates’ court shall conclude the review within five days. [Its] decision shall be final. A person who has been placed in administrative detention or his or her legal representative or lawyer may lodge a further appeal with the magistrates’ courts should the conditions for administrative detention have ceased to exist or changed.
(7)  [Foreigners] who have lodged an appeal against a detention order, but who do not have the means to afford the services of a lawyer, shall be provided with legal aid at their request, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Attorneys Act (Law no. 1136) of 19 March 1969.”
Removal centres
Section 58
“(1)  Foreigners subject to administrative detention shall be held in removal centres.
(2)  Removal centres shall be operated by the Ministry ...
(3)  The principles and procedures related to the establishment, management, outsourcing, and inspection of removal centres and the transfer to removal centres of foreigners subject to administrative detention for deportation purposes, shall be determined by regulation.”
Services provided in removal centres
Section 59
“(1)  In removal centres:
(a)  emergency and primary healthcare services which a foreigner lacks the means to cover shall be provided free of charge,
(b)  a foreigner shall be provided with the opportunity to access and to meet with his or her relatives, a notary public, a legal representative and a lawyer, as well as access to telephone services,
...
(ç)  the bests interests of children shall be observed, and families and unaccompanied minors shall be accommodated in separate areas,
...”
Persons with special needs
Section 67
“(1)  Persons with special needs shall be given priority with respect to the rights and actions referred to in this Part.
...”
Administrative detention of applicants [seeking international protection]
Section 68
“...
(2)  The administrative detention of a person who has applied for international protection is an exceptional measure. He or she may only be subjected to administrative detention in the following circumstances:
...
(ç)  when he or she poses a serious threat to public order or public security.
(3)  The requirement for administrative detention shall be assessed on a case-by-case basis. In circumstances noted in subsection (2) above, an assessment as to whether the residence and reporting obligations stipulated in section 71 would be sufficient shall be carried out before ordering administrative detention. The governors’ office[s] may determine alternatives to administrative detention. Administrative detention shall be ordered in circumstances where such [alternative] measures prove insufficient.
(4)  The administrative detention decision, stating the [court’s] reasons for ordering administrative detention and the duration of the detention, shall be notified in writing to the person subjected to administrative detention or his or her legal representative or lawyer. If the person subject to administrative detention is not represented by a lawyer, he or she or his or her legal representative shall be notified of the consequences of the decision as well as the appeal procedures.
(5)  The period of administrative detention shall not exceed thirty days. ...
...
(7)  The person who has been placed in administrative detention or his or her legal representative or lawyer may appeal against the administrative-detention decision to the magistrates’ courts. The appeal shall not stay the execution of the administrative detention. In the event that the [appeal] is submitted to the administration, it shall be transmitted to the competent magistrates’ court without delay. The magistrates’ court shall conclude the review within five days. [Its] decision shall be final. The person who has been placed in administrative detention or his or her legal representative or lawyer may lodge a further appeal with the magistrates’ courts, should the conditions for administrative detention have ceased to exist or changed.
...”
Residence and reporting obligations
Section 71
“(1)  Administrative obligations may be imposed on [persons who have applied for international protection], such as an obligation to reside in a designated reception and accommodation centre, a specific location or province, or to report [to the authorities] as and when requested to do so.
...”
The regulation on the establishment, management, operation, outsourcing and inspection of reception and accommodation centres and removal centres came into force on 22 April 2014, as required under, inter alia, section 58 of Law no. 6458. The relevant provisions of the regulation provide as follows:
Article 4
“(1)  The following rules and procedures shall be observed in the establishment, operation and outsourcing of the centres and the provision of services under the present Regulation:
(a)  the right to life shall be protected;
(b)  a humane approach shall be taken;
...
(ç)  those with special needs shall receive priority [treatment];
...”
Article 10
“...
(2)  The director of the centre has the following duties and powers:
...
(ç)  to make the necessary requests to the provincial directorate [of migration management] in respect of the needs of the centre;
...
(e)  to take the necessary measures to ensure an environment compatible with health requirements at the centre;
...
(ğ)  to take all structural and administrative measures within the context of the [relevant] legislation;
...”
Article 11
“(1)  The management of the centre has the following duties:
...
(g)  to follow the accomplishment of the tasks and activities pertaining to the ... service standards determined by the Directorate General [of Migration Management] with respect to the operation of the centre;
...”
Article 14
“(1)  The following services shall be provided at the centres:
(a)  accommodation and nourishment;
...
(c)  emergency and primary healthcare services which the foreigner lacks the means to cover;
(ç)  psychological and social support activities;
(d)  allocation of suitable areas to those with special needs;
...
(g)  other services deemed appropriate by the Directorate General [of Migration Management].
(2)  The standards concerning the provision of the services indicated in subsection (1) above shall be determined by the Directorate General [of Migration Management].
...”
Article 16
“(1)  The centres should be inspected regularly by the provincial directorate [of migration management] to which they are attached, annually by the Directorate General [of Migration Management], and triennially by the Ministry [of the Interior] Inspection Board. Governors’ offices may request an inspection from the Ministry at any time.
...”
At its meeting of 8 December 2011 the Human Rights Inquiry Committee of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey established a subcommittee to look into the problems encountered by refugees, asylum seekers and irregular migrants in Turkey, including the conditions in which they were detained pending their deportation. For that purpose, on 10 and 11 May 2012 two members of parliament (“MPs”) visited a number of removal centres, including the Kumkapı Removal Centre in Istanbul. The findings in those reports have been noted in the case of Yarashonen (cited above, §§ 24-26).
Following continuing complaints regarding the material conditions of detention and the lack of outdoor exercise at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, on 2 May 2014 the National Human Rights Institution of Turkey (“the NHRI”), along with a number of representatives of various nongovernmental organisations and academics, visited the Kumkapı Removal Centre. A report of their visit was issued on 6 November 2014.
According to the information provided to the NHRI by officials from the removal centre, the centre accommodated 350 persons as at the date of the visit. This number had been 384 only a couple of days before the visit. The centre was cleaned every two months by a company attached to the Istanbul metropolitan municipality, and the dormitories were cleaned by the detainees themselves. A medical doctor was available at the premises every Thursday, in addition to a nurse, who was present daily. In seasons when the weather allowed, the detainees were permitted to go out to the yard for fresh air after 5 p.m., but during winter months they were not allowed to go out, to prevent them from getting sick. The yard was used as a car park, and there was in reality no secure area where the detainees could enjoy fresh air.
According to the observations of the delegation that visited the centre, the dormitories were very dirty, damp, run down and overcrowded, and there were no pillows or bedding on the beds. The toilets, in particular, were extremely dirty, and there were not enough toilets and sanitary materials, including toilet paper, for all detainees. A strong smell was noted in the centre. Smoking was allowed in all of the dormitories, including those where babies were present, whereas, under section 59(1)(ç) of Law no. 6458, families with children had to be kept in a separate area. Bearing particularly in mind the presence of children in the centre, the conditions of detention could in no way be considered to be healthy or hygienic. An effective cleaning system, along with periodic disinfection, was necessary to improve the conditions, which were currently amenable to the spread of all types of diseases. The delegation further observed that the food served at the centre was not suitable for small children, and no special provision was made to meet their particular needs. As a result, the small children, along with many adults, suffered from digestive problems.
The visit report stressed that overcrowding continued to be a serious problem at the centre: although the official detention capacity was 300, there were often 400 to 500 people held at the centre. Moreover, even at its maximum official capacity, the personal space available to the detainees was below the standards set by the CPT.
The report also included accounts from detainees encountered at the centre on the date of the visit. According to those detainees, the place was infested with insects, which was evident from the bites on their bodies, and the centre was not fumigated or disinfected. Even those with children said that they were hardly ever allowed to go outdoors for fresh air and that they had never seen a doctor or a nurse at the centre, despite repetitive health complaints made by some of them. They also told the delegation, however, that ambulances were called in cases of emergency and that children were given access to hospitals when required.
In its concluding remarks, the report indicated that the Kumkapı Removal Centre did not have the capacity to provide minimum humanrights standards to the detainees held there, and recommended a transfer to new premises as soon as possible. It noted that despite the criticisms made in the 2012 report of the Human Rights Inquiry Committee (noted in paragraph 46 above), no improvements had been made in the material conditions of detention.
The Constitutional Court’s decisions on the availability of domestic remedies in respect of complaints concerning material conditions of detention at foreigners’ removal centres and the unlawfulness of the administrative detention
Between 11 August 2014 and 5 February 2015, a Syrian national, namely K.A., lodged three applications with the Constitutional Court complaining about, inter alia, the conditions of his detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre – where he had been held between 26 April 2014 and 6 January 2015 – the unlawfulness of his detention, and the absence of any effective remedies whereby he could raise those complaints (application no. 2014/13044).
In observations submitted to the Constitutional Court, the Ministry of Justice stated, inter alia, that whereas there had previously been no effective domestic remedies that met the requirements of the Convention in respect of the complaints at issue, Law no. 6458 had been enacted to remedy that defect. It further stated that the applicant, K.A., had not brought his complaints concerning the material conditions of his detention to the attention of the relevant administrative authorities. K.A. denied the Ministry’s allegations and argued that the complaints he had lodged with various authorities had been left unanswered.
On 11 November 2015 the Plenary of the Constitutional Court delivered its decision on the admissibility and merits of the case. The Constitutional Court first examined whether there had been effective remedies at K.A.’s disposal to complain about his conditions of detention. Referring mainly to the principles cited in the case of Ananyev and Others v. Russia (nos. 42525/07 and 60800/08, §§ 93-119, 10 January 2012), and noting that K.A. had lodged his first two applications while still detained in the impugned conditions, the Constitutional Court held at the outset that in order to be considered effective, the domestic remedy in question had to be capable of ameliorating the conditions complained of, as well as providing the victim with an enforceable right to compensation for the damage that he or she had suffered because of those conditions. It then went on to note that the newly enacted Law no. 6458 did not set out any standards of detention at foreigners’ removal centres. Nor did it envisage any administrative or legal appeal mechanisms capable of assessing the conditions at removal centres and ordering the amelioration of those conditions or release from the centre, as appropriate. The Ministry of Justice had not mentioned the existence of any such remedies in their observations, either. Moreover, the magistrates’ court had not examined K.A.’s complaints regarding the conditions of detention, despite the fact he had raised those complaints along with his allegations concerning the unlawfulness of his detention. In these circumstances, the Constitutional Court found that K.A. had not had an effective remedy at his disposal by which to raise his grievances concerning the conditions of detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, in breach of the right to an effective remedy under Article 40 of the Constitution.
The Constitutional Court further held that the material conditions of detention that K.A. had been subjected to at the Kumkapı Removal Centre (between 26 April 2014 and 6 January 2015) had constituted treatment incompatible with human dignity. It found, in particular, that the overcrowding at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, coupled with K.A.’s inability to go outdoors on a regular basis and the inadequacy of the communal indoor areas, had been in breach of Article 17 of the Constitution. In making that finding, the Constitutional Court mainly relied on (i) the Court’s case-law, and in particular the judgment in Yarashonen (cited above, §§ 70-81); (ii) the standards of the CPT concerning the conditions of detention of foreign nationals; and (iii) the aforementioned report of the National Human Rights Institution of Turkey of 6 November 2014 on the conditions at the Kumkapı Removal Centre (see paragraphs 47-52 above).
The Constitutional Court also found a breach of Article 19 of the Constitution, holding that K.A.’s detention had been unlawful, that he had not been informed of the reasons for his detention and that he had not had an effective remedy whereby he could challenge the lawfulness of his detention. As regards the latter complaint, the Constitutional Court noted that the magistrates’ court had failed to carry out an adequate examination of K.A.’s application, even though Law no. 6458 contained provisions protecting detainees against arbitrariness. Accordingly, the Constitutional Court found that K.A. had not had an effective remedy whereby he could have obtained a judicial review of the lawfulness of his detention.
On 20 January, 17 and 18 February, 9 June and 22 September 2016 the Constitutional Court rendered six more judgments in which it found breaches of Articles 17, 19 and 40 of the Constitution in relation to the respective applicants’ detention at the Kumkapı Removal Centre (applications nos. 2013/655, 2013/1649, 2013/8735, 2013/8810, 2014/2841 and 2014/15824). The applications in all those six cases had been lodged after the release of the relevant individuals from the Kumkapı Removal Centre.
By way of a decision it delivered on 30 November 2017 in the case of B.T. (application no. 2014/15769), which similarly concerned the detention of a foreigner at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, the Constitutional Court departed from its findings in the K.A. case regarding the absence of an effective domestic remedy (i) to complain about the conditions of detention at foreigners’ removal centres, and (ii) to challenge the unlawfulness of an administrative detention.
In that decision, the Constitutional Court noted at the outset that B.T. had lodged his individual application after his release from the removal centre. Therefore, a legal remedy which offered reasonable prospects of compensating him for the damage he had suffered as a result of the adverse material conditions of detention would be considered effective for the purposes of Article 40 of the Constitution. The Constitutional Court noted in this connection that section 2 of the Administrative Procedure Act provided a remedy whereby compensation for all damage arising from the acts and omissions of the administration could be claimed before the administrative courts – namely by lodging an action for a full remedy. The fact that that remedy had never been tried and tested by any foreigners in B.T.’s position did not mean that it did not offer reasonable prospects of success. Bearing in mind that the decisions ordering the detention of foreigners were administrative in nature, and the removal centres where they were held were operated and inspected by the Ministry of the Interior, there was no reason why B.T. could not bring an action for compensation against the Ministry on account of the conditions in which he had been kept at the Kumkapı Removal Centre. According to the Constitutional Court, there was no doubt that administrative courts had the capacity to determine whether the conditions of detention had been adequate or not and to compensate B.T. as necessary. The Constitutional Court further noted that administrative courts were better placed than it was to assess the conditions of detention at removal centres within their jurisdiction as, unlike the Constitutional Court, they could perform on-site inspections and obtain expert reports.
The Constitutional Court, sitting in plenary session, decided in the light of the foregoing that B.T. had failed to exhaust the available domestic remedies in relation to his complaints concerning the conditions of detention at the removal centre where he had been held.
As regards B.T.’s complaints concerning the unlawfulness of his administrative detention and the absence of effective remedies in that regard, the Constitutional Court held, unanimously, that while administrative courts had no jurisdiction to assess the lawfulness of the administrative detention orders delivered pursuant to Law no. 6458, they could compensate any losses arising from an unlawful detention once such unlawfulness had been established by a magistrates’ court. Since, on the instant facts, B.T.’s detention had been considered lawful by the Istanbul Magistrates’ Court, B.T. could not be expected to bring an action before the administrative courts to claim compensation for damage sustained prior to lodging an individual application with the Constitutional Court. After laying out this ground rule as regards the exhaustion requirements in the context of claims concerning the unlawfulness of administrative detention, the Constitutional Court went on to find a violation in respect of all the complaints raised by B.T. concerning his right to liberty and security.
The standards of the CPT concerning the material conditions of detention of foreign nationals in the immigration context have been noted in cases such as Yarashonen (cited above, § 27) and Alimov v. Turkey (no. 14344/13, § 29, 6 September 2016).
In June 2009 and June 2015 the CPT visited a number of removal centres for foreigners in different provinces in Turkey, including the Kumkapı Removal Centre in Istanbul where the applicants in the present case were detained between 22 October 2014 and 22 January 2015. The relevant parts of the CPT’s observations following its visit in June 2009, along with the Turkish Government’s response to those observations, were noted in the case of Yarashonen (cited above, §§ 28-29). The relevant observations from its subsequent visit in June 2015, published on 17 October 2017, are as follows:
“6.  ...
That said, the CPT must stress that the principle of co-operation set out in Article 3 of the Convention [the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment] is not limited to facilitating the task of visiting delegations. It also requires that decisive action be taken in response to the Committee’s recommendations. In this regard, the Committee is very concerned about the total lack of action to implement longstanding recommendations regarding the provision of outdoor exercise to immigration detainees at Ankara and Istanbul-Kumkapı Removal Centres (see paragraphs 28 to 30). The Committee urges the Turkish authorities to take decisive steps to address this issue, in accordance with the principle of cooperation which lies at the heart of the Convention.
...
The first immediate observation was made concerning the provision of outdoor exercise at Ankara, Istanbul-Kumkapı and İzmir Removal Centres. At Ankara Removal Centre, no outdoor exercise whatsoever was provided to immigration detainees (including women and children). The situation was only slightly better at Kumkapı where outdoor exercise was offered at best once a week, for some 20 to 30 minutes... The delegation requested the Turkish authorities to take urgent measures to ensure that all foreign nationals held at Ankara, Istanbul-Kumkapı and İzmir Removal Centres are offered at least one hour of outdoor exercise every day.
...
In the course of the visit, the delegation visited seven removal centres for foreigners in different provinces.
...
Istanbul-Kumkapı Removal Centre had been visited by the CPT in 2009. The centre’s official capacity had since been reduced from 560 to 380 places. At the time of the 2015 visit, it was accommodating 312 inmates, including 102 women and five children (none of them unaccompanied). The delegation was told that the average stay was about ten days; nevertheless, many of the inmates had been in the centre for prolonged periods of time (some 50 inmates between two and seven months).
...
As will be described later in this report, conditions of detention in some of the establishments visited could be considered to be inhuman and degrading, taking also into account the fact that many foreign nationals were kept under such conditions for prolonged periods of time [footnote: This has also been confirmed in recent judgments of the European Court of Human Rights; see, in particular, Yarashonen v. Turkey dated 24 June 2014 (application no. 72710/11) regarding Kumkapı Removal Centre ...].
...
The CPT is particularly concerned about the situation it found at Ankara, Istanbul-Kumkapı and İzmir Removal Centres where conditions of detention for foreign nationals were extremely poor [footnote: It should be noted that, following its visit to Kumkapı Removal Centre in May 2014, the NPM (National Preventive Mechanism set up under the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention Against Torture) made a very critical assessment of the conditions of detention at the centre and recommended that it be closed down]. Most of the dormitories in these centres were severely overcrowded and, as a result, inmates had to share beds or sleep on (often filthy) mattresses on the floor. Further, the general state of hygiene and cleanliness at İzmir and Kumkapı was rather poor; in particular, the communal sanitary facilities were invariably dirty [footnote: As regards Kumkapı Removal Centre, this was in sharp contrast with the situation observed by the CPT in this establishment in 2009 (cf. paragraph 45 of CPT/Inf (2011) 13)]. In addition, as at Edirne and Van, the delegation received numerous complaints about an infestation with bedbugs and other vermin.
In the light of the remarks made in paragraphs 20 and 21, the CPT recommends that the Turkish authorities take the necessary measures to improve conditions of detention in the removal centres at Ankara, Edirne, Istanbul-Kumkapı, İzmir and Van. In particular, steps should be taken to ensure that:
-  the accommodation areas, including communal sanitary facilities, are kept in an acceptable state of hygiene and that regular disinfection of the premises is carried out;
-  the accommodation rooms have adequate lighting (including access to daylight) and ventilation and are suitably equipped;
-  every foreign national has his/her own bed with a clean mattress and clean bedding;
...
Steps should also be taken in all the removal centres visited, in particular at Ankara, Istanbul-Kumkapı and İzmir, to reduce the official capacity and to ensure that future occupancy levels are always kept within the limits of the new capacity.
...
..., it is a matter of grave concern that no outdoor exercise whatsoever was provided to inmates (including minors) at Ankara Removal Centre for weeks or even months on end. The situation was scarcely better at Kumkapı Removal Centre where outdoor exercise was provided at best once a week, for some 20 to 30 minutes...
In the CPT’s view, such a state of affairs is unacceptable. The Committee considers it a fundamental obligation to allow all detained persons – including immigration detainees – at least one hour of outdoor exercise every day. The situation found at Ankara and Kumkapı Removal Centres is all the more disconcerting in that, during its previous visits, the CPT had already made immediate observations concerning the lack of outdoor exercise in these establishments. Clearly, the commitments subsequently given by the Turkish authorities to remedy the situation have not been followed up [footnote: The lack of outdoor exercise for male adult detainees at Kumkapı Removal Centre was the subject of an immediate observation during the CPT’s 2009 visit to this establishment. The Committee was subsequently informed by the Turkish authorities that foreign nationals held at Kumkapı “are allowed to open air for an average of one hour per day and benefit from outdoor activities”].
At the end of the visit, the delegation therefore once again invoked Article 8, paragraph 5, of the Convention and made an immediate observation, requesting the Turkish authorities to take urgent measures to ensure that all foreign nationals held at Ankara, Istanbul-Kumkapı and İzmir Removal Centres are offered at least one hour of outdoor exercise every day.
...
The CPT was also concerned to note once again that, with very few exceptions, no sports or other recreational activities were organised for inmates in any of the removal centres visited... Further, at İzmir and Kumkapı, apart from the very limited possibility for outdoor exercise (see paragraph 28), inmates had to spend their days strolling around in the corridors or sitting in their dormitories.
To sum up, a considerable number of immigration detainees in each of the removal centres visited spent weeks or even months in a state of complete idleness.
The CPT considers that efforts should be made to introduce a basic minimum of activities for immigration detainees, such as providing access to television and other appropriate means of recreation (e.g. board games, table tennis, etc.), and to ensure access to reading material in the most frequently spoken foreign languages. The Committee recommends that the Turkish authorities take steps in all the removal centres visited to develop regime activities for foreign nationals, in the light of the preceding remarks; the longer the period for which persons are detained, the more varied the activities which are offered to them should be.
...
As regards the situation of accompanied minors, the CPT was concerned to note that, in most of the removal centres visited, hardly any specific arrangements had been made to care for the needs of young children, despite significant numbers of them being held in some centres. In particular, there were no designated staff to care for children in any of the establishments visited. Furthermore, with the exception of Edirne Removal Centre, none of the centres visited possessed a playground.
...
In their letter of 5 August 2015, the Turkish authorities indicated that “a fullyfledged playground for children has been created at Kumkapı Removal Centre...”. Whilst acknowledging the steps taken so far, the CPT urges the Turkish authorities to redouble their efforts to provide young children with appropriate care.
Both Aydın and Van Removal Centres comprised a number of well-equipped “family rooms” for joint accommodation of parents and children. In practice, however, these rooms had never been used for the intended purpose.
...
... the information gathered during the visit suggests that, in most of the removal centres visited, the attendance hours of a doctor were insufficient for the needs of the inmate population [footnote: At Kumkapı, the records showed that there had only been 13 medical consultations during the entire month of May 2015] ... Indeed, many inmates met by the delegation complained about insufficient attention to their health problems.”
On an unspecified date in 2015 the Turkish Government responded to the CPT’s observations set out in the previous paragraph. The following extracts are from the relevant parts of the Government’s response:
“Preliminary remarks
...
Istanbul-Kumkapı removal centre will be closed down in 2016.
...
Conditions of detention in removal centres
Material conditions
Necessary legislative work has been carried [out] in order to address the hygiene conditions in the centres. In accordance with current rules and procedures, cleaning personnel are being employed at the removal centres through service purchasing for cleaning and hygiene conditions.
Legal arrangements have been made in order to ensure the provision of personal hygiene equipment to foreigners residing in the removal centres and necessary infrastructure [has been] established to ensure their [daily] access to hot water ...
...
Regime
Access to open air
As to the access to open air by the foreigners held in the removal centres, the legislative framework has been formulated under the ‘Directive on Removal Centres of DGMM’. And in line with this Directive, measures are taken to ensure that foreigners in the removal centres have access to open air [for] at least one hour a day, with the necessary security measures.
Outdoor exercise facilities have been arranged at İzmir, Adana and Kumkapı removal centres and foreigners have been given the opportunity to benefit from these facilities [for] at least an hour per day.
Playground facilities at the removal centres
There are playgrounds in removal centres. In some removal centres these playgrounds are in [a] closed area whereas in others, they are in the gardens.
Accommodation of parents and children/Family sections
In all removal centres in Turkey ... necessary arrangements are made to enable children to stay with their attendants. Children are sheltered with their parents in family sections.”
The Council of Europe Special Representative of the Secretary General on migration and refugees, Mr Tomáš Boček, undertook an official visit to Turkey from 30 May to 4 June 2016. He visited, inter alia, the removal centre in Kumkapı and documented his observations and findings in a report dated 10 August 2016 (SG/Inf(2016)29). The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
“Kumkapı Removal Centre has two floors for male detainees and one for females. There is a separate living area with two rooms for families. The authorities explained that since January 2016, they had kept the occupancy at around 70% of the maximum capacity of the centre, which is 350. 240 people were present during my visit on 30 May 2016, of which four were accompanied children staying with their mother in one of the family rooms. There was no evidence of overcrowding in the sleeping area. Since the centre is located in the middle of a residential area, there is limited outdoor space – it is essentially a car parking area. There was a separate internal courtyard with a playground for children. The detainees complained that they did not have much access to fresh air. I was assured that the centre would be closed in the coming months as construction was underway to build two new centres in Istanbul ....
...
Generally speaking, it is clear from the facilities available that the possible detention of children in removal centres is anticipated. During my mission I encountered few. However, I consider this to be a serious matter. I believe the Turkish authorities need assistance in developing a proper system of alternatives to detention for migrant children.”
Detention of minors in the immigration context
The pertinent provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989, ratified by Turkey on 4 April 1995, provide as follows:
Article 3
“1.  In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.”
Article 37
“States Parties shall ensure that:
...
(b)  No child shall be deprived of his or her liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily. The arrest, detention or imprisonment of a child shall be in conformity with the law and shall be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time;
(c)  Every child deprived of liberty shall be treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a manner which takes into account the needs of persons of his or her age. In particular, every child deprived of liberty shall be separated from adults unless it is considered in the child’s best interest not to do so and shall have the right to maintain contact with his or her family through correspondence and visits, save in exceptional circumstances;
(d)  Every child deprived of his or her liberty shall have the right to prompt access to legal and other appropriate assistance, as well as the right to challenge the legality of the deprivation of his or her liberty before a court or other competent, independent and impartial authority, and to a prompt decision on any such action.”
In its “Revised Guidelines on Applicable Criteria and Standards relating to the Detention of Asylum-Seekers” issued in February 1999, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) stated:
Guideline 6: Detention of Persons under the Age of 18 years
“All appropriate alternatives to detention should be considered in the case of children accompanying their parents. Children and their primary caregivers should not be detained unless this is the only means of maintaining family unity.
If none of the alternatives can be applied and States do detain children, this should, in accordance with Article 37 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, be as a measure of last resort, and for the shortest period of time.”
Those Guidelines have since been replaced by the “Guidelines on the Applicable Criteria and Standards relating to the Detention of AsylumSeekers and Alternatives to Detention” issued in 2012, which sets out principles along similar lines as concerns the detention of minors accompanying their parents.
In the report he submitted to the United Nations Human Rights Council on 2 April 2012, the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, Mr François Crépeau, stated as follows:
“40.  Migrant children are sometimes detained together with their parents when the latter are found to be in an irregular situation, justified on the basis of maintaining family unity. Not only may this violate the principle of the best interests of the child and the right of the child to be detained only as a measure of last resort, but it may also violate their right not be punished for the acts of their parents (art. 2, para. 2). This does not mean that the best interests of the child are served through splitting up the family by detaining the parents and transferring their children to the alternativecare system. The detention of their parents has a detrimental effect on children, and may violate children’s right not to be separated from their parents against their will, as well as the right to protection of the family set forward in article 23 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and article 10 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. A decision to detain migrants who are accompanied by their children should therefore only be taken in very exceptional circumstances. States must carefully evaluate the need for detention in these cases, and rather preserve the family unit by applying alternatives to detention to the entire family.” (emphasis added)
On 16 November 2017 the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee on Migrant Workers”) issued a joint general comment on State obligations regarding the human rights of children in the context of international migration in countries of origin, transit, destination and return, where they further developed the notions mentioned in the preceding paragraphs regarding the administrative detention of children and their families in an immigration context. The relevant parts of the joint general comment read as follows (footnotes omitted):
“B.  Right to liberty
Every child, at all times, has a fundamental right to liberty and freedom from immigration detention. The Committee on the Rights of the Child has asserted that the detention of any child because of their or their parents’ migration status constitutes a child rights violation and contravenes the principle of the best interests of the child. In this light, both Committees have repeatedly affirmed that children should never be detained for reasons related to their or their parents’ migration status and States should expeditiously and completely cease or eradicate the immigration detention of children. Any kind of child immigration detention should be forbidden by law and such prohibition should be fully implemented in practice.
...
The Committees emphasize the harm inherent in any deprivation of liberty and the negative impact that immigration detention can have on children’s physical and mental health and on their development, even when they are detained for a short period of time or with their families. The Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment has stated that “within the context of administrative immigration enforcement ... the deprivation of liberty of children based on their or their parents’ migration status is never in the best interests of the child, exceeds the requirement of necessity, becomes grossly disproportionate and may constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of migrant children”.
Article 37 (b) of the Convention on the Rights of the Child establishes the general principle that a child may be deprived of liberty only as a last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time. However, offences concerning irregular entry or stay cannot under any circumstances have consequences similar to those derived from the commission of a crime. Therefore, the possibility of detaining children as a measure of last resort, which may apply in other contexts such as juvenile criminal justice, is not applicable in immigration proceedings as it would conflict with the principle of the best interests of the child and the right to development.
Instead, States should adopt solutions that fulfil the best interests of the child, along with their rights to liberty and family life, through legislation, policy and practices that allow children to remain with their family members and/or guardians in non-custodial, community-based contexts while their immigration status is being resolved and the children’s best interests are assessed, as well as before return. ... When children are accompanied, the need to keep the family together is not a valid reason to justify the deprivation of liberty of a child. When the child’s best interests require keeping the family together, the imperative requirement not to deprive the child of liberty extends to the child’s parents and requires the authorities to choose non-custodial solutions for the entire family (emphasis added).
Consequently, child and family immigration detention should be prohibited by law and its abolishment ensured in policy and practice. Resources dedicated to detention should be diverted to non-custodial solutions carried out by competent child protection actors engaging with the child and, where applicable, his or her family. The measures offered to the child and the family should not imply any kind of child or family deprivation of liberty and should be based on an ethic of care and protection, not enforcement. ... Children and families should have access to effective remedies in case any kind of immigration detention is enforced.
Due process guarantees and access to justice
...
The Committees are of the view that States should ensure that their legislation, policies, measures and practices guarantee child-sensitive due process in all migration and asylum administrative and judicial proceedings affecting the rights of children and/or those of their parents. ... They should have access to administrative and judicial remedies against decisions affecting their own situation or that of their parents, to guarantee that all decisions are taken in their best interests. ...Unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests, speedy proceedings should be encouraged, provided that this does not restrict any due process guarantees.”
The principles enunciated by the Committee of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) on the detention of irregular migrants or asylum seekers, and the special provisions concerning minors, have been noted by the Court in the judgment of Popov v. France (nos. 39472/07 and 39474/07, §§ 53-57, 19 January 2012).
In addition, on 3 October 2014 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) adopted a resolution (Resolution 2020 (2014)) concerning the alternatives to immigration detention of children. The relevant parts of that resolution read as follows:
“1.  The Parliamentary Assembly is very concerned to note that the immigration detention of children is a growing phenomenon in Council of Europe member States. Despite improvements in legislation and practice in some European countries, tens of thousands of migrant children still end up in detention every year. The practice is contrary to the best interests of the child and a clear and unequivocal child rights violation.
...
The detention of children on the basis of their or their parents’ immigration status is contrary to the best interests of the child and constitutes a child rights violation as defined in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The Assembly is particularly concerned that detention, even for very short periods of time and in relatively humane conditions, has severe negative short- and long-term effects on children’s physical and mental health. Children in immigration detention are particularly vulnerable to the negative effects of detention and can be severely traumatised. Also, there is a high risk of detained children being subjected to different forms of violence.
...
The Assembly considers that it is urgent to put an end to the detention of migrant children and that this requires concerted efforts from the relevant national authorities. The Assembly therefore calls on the member States to:
1.  acknowledge that it is never in the best interests of a child to be detained on the basis of their or their parents’ immigration status;
2.  introduce legislation prohibiting the detention of children for immigration reasons, if it has not yet been done, and ensure its full implementation in practice;
...
6.  continue efforts to make their legislation on foreign nationals conform with the best international standards, while taking into account the best interests of the child as enshrined in Article 3 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and promoting various forms of internationally recognised alternatives to detention;
7.  adopt alternatives to detention that meet the best interests of the child and allow children to remain with their family members and/or guardians in non-custodial, community-based contexts while their immigration status is being resolved;
...”.
On 20 April 2015 PACE launched the “Parliamentary Campaign to End Immigration Detention of Children”, thereby joining the “Global Campaign to End Immigration Detention of Children”, which had been launched during the 19th Session of the United Nations Human Rights Council in 2012.
In addition to the general standards referred to in paragraph 63 above, in its 19th General Report the CPT remarked as follows as regards the additional safeguards for children deprived of their liberty in the context of immigration procedures:
“Additional safeguards for children
The CPT considers that every effort should be made to avoid resorting to the deprivation of liberty of an irregular migrant who is a minor. Following the principle of the “best interests of the child”, as formulated in Article 3 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, detention of children, including unaccompanied and separated children, is rarely justified and, in the Committee’s view, can certainly not be motivated solely by the absence of residence status.
When, exceptionally, a child is detained, the deprivation of liberty should be for the shortest possible period of time; ... Further, owing to the vulnerable nature of a child, additional safeguards should apply whenever a child is detained ...”
The CPT has also emphasised in a number of individual country reports that the accommodation of children accompanying their parent(s) together with other adults in a detention centre could have a negative psychological effect on the child’s development and well-being, particularly when the child was young, and that where detention – which should only be a measure of last resort – could not be avoided, children should be accommodated with their parent(s) in a facility catering to their specific needs.
On 25 June 2010 the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights issued a position paper on the rights of migrant children in an irregular situation (CommDH/PositionPaper (2010)6). The relevant part of the paper reads as follows:
“Minimising the detention of minors
The use of detention for minors should be kept to the absolute minimum in accordance with the provisions of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Convention states, in article 37, that children should be deprived of their liberty only as a last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time. While the detention of children for a matter of hours or days prior to a certain expulsion might exceptionally fall within the permissible scope of these provisions, anything much longer would be of serious concern.
It should be stressed that detention cannot be justified solely on the basis of the child’s or parents’ irregular status under national migration law. As a principle, migrant children should not be subjected to detention. Any detention of children must be closely monitored and authorities need to ensure the utmost transparency with respect to such detention, keeping statistics that provide a detailed picture of the extent of their detention.
In accordance with the principle of the best interest of the child, special arrangements must be made for living quarters that are suitable for children and which separate them from adults, unless it is considered in the child’s best interest not to do so; the underlying approach to such a programme should be ‘care’ and not ‘detention’.
It is imperative that any decision to detain children be taken by a judicial authority, capable of independently weighing all the relevant considerations. Children should have access to legal aid, the opportunity to receive visits from friends, relatives, religious, social and legal counsel and their guardians. They should be provided with all basic necessities as well as appropriate medical treatment and psychological counselling where necessary. During their period in detention, children have the right to recreation and play.”
On 10 March 2017 the Council of Europe Special Representative of the Secretary General on migration and refugees, Mr Tomáš Boček, issued a Thematic Report on migrant and refugee children (SG/Inf(2017)13). It was emphasised in the report, inter alia, that immigration detention was never in the best interests of the child and that the lack of alternatives to detention was one of the most damaging structural problems affecting children, and needed to be addressed urgently.
The Council of Europe adopted an Action Plan on protecting refugee and migrant children in Europe (2017-2019) at the 127th Session of the Committee of Ministers in Nicosia, Cyprus, on 19 May 2017. The action plan proposed, inter alia, immediate action to avoid resorting to the deprivation of children’s liberty on the sole ground of their migration status, and further action to develop guidance on alternatives to immigration detention and/or a compilation of good practices to be submitted to the Committee of Ministers.
Relying, inter alia, on the report of Mr François Crépeau mentioned in paragraph 69 above, on 19 August 2014 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights issued an Advisory Opinion on the Rights and Guarantees of Children in the Context of Migration and/or in Need of International Protection. The relevant paragraph provides as follows (footnotes omitted):
“158.  ... In this way, in the case of children who are with their parents, keeping the family together owing to the child’s best interest does not represent a sufficient reason to legitimate or justify the exceptional admissibility of the deprivation of liberty of children together with their parents, because of the prejudicial effects on their emotional development and physical well-being. To the contrary, when the child’s best interest requires keeping the family together, the imperative requirement not to deprive the child of liberty extends to her or his parents and obliges the authorities to choose alternative measures to detention for the family, which are appropriate to the needs of the children.” (emphasis added)
In its 27th General Report published in April 2018, the CPT stated that complaints mechanisms constituted a fundamental safeguard against torture and inhuman or degrading treatment of persons deprived of their liberty by a public authority, including those detained in immigration detention centres. For the purposes of the report at issue, the term “complaints” referred to all formal complaints lodged by, or on behalf of, persons deprived of their liberty about decisions, actions or lack of official action on a variety of issues, including poor material conditions, lack of activities or insufficient provision of healthcare.
The CPT noted that the major shortcomings observed across the Council of Europe Member States in this area included an insufficient legal basis for a complaints procedure, the lack of, or inadequate provision of information about complaints bodies or procedures, undue delays in initiating the examination or investigation of complaints, and the lack of thoroughness in the examination or investigation of complaints.
In its report prepared following the visit to Turkey in June 2015 (noted in paragraph 64 above), the CPT made the following observations:
“61.  Finally, the CPT wishes to stress that effective complaints and inspection procedures are important tools for the prevention of ill-treatment by staff and, more generally, for ensuring satisfactory conditions of detention in removal centres. Foreign nationals should have avenues of complaint open to them, both within and outside the DGMM, and be entitled to confidential access to an appropriate authority. In addition to addressing the individual case involved, the CPT considers that a careful analysis of complaints can be a useful tool in identifying issues to be addressed at a general level.
At the time of the visit, the relevant legislation did not provide for any formal complaints and inspection procedures. The Committee recommends that the Turkish authorities take the necessary steps to ensure that effective complaints and inspection procedures are formally established and implemented in practice.”