The case originated in an application (no. 65158/09) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a stateless person, Mr Adrian Drăgan (“the applicant”), on 25 November 2009.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms N.T. Popescu, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions of his detention in Galaţi, Rahova and Jilava Prisons were inhuman. He also alleged a lack of adequate medical treatment, ill-treatment by a prison guard, and an ineffective investigation into these events, all in breach of Article 3 of the Convention.
On 4 March 2014 the complaints concerning the inhuman conditions of detention, the lack of medical treatment and the ill-treatment by a prison guard were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1956 and is currently detained in Giurgiu Prison.
For the last nine years the applicant had been convicted several times and he had been detained in various prisons. For certain periods of time he had been held in the Jilava and Rahova prison hospitals.
On 1 November 2007 the applicant was convicted by the Arad County Court on two counts of robbery and theft and was sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment. The court also ordered the applicant’s committal to the psychiatric section of the Bucharest Jilava Prison Hospital until his recovery.
In his application forms and letters sent to the Court since 2009, the applicant complained of the severe overcrowding he had had to endure in Galaţi Prison, where thirteen to fifteen detainees were held in a cell of between 20 and 24 sq. m, as well as in Rahova and Jilava Prisons.
The applicant also alleged that the quality of food and drinking water had been very poor in these prisons, that he had not always been served a diet in accordance with his Muslim religious beliefs and that most of the time he had been starving as the portions had not been sufficient.
In all three prisons hot water had only been provided for short periods of time in which there had not been enough time to brush his teeth. Furthermore, in Jilava Prison there had not been enough cold water provided.
The applicant further alleged that, although he had no financial resources and had had no family to help him, the prison authorities in all three prisons had failed to provide him with the necessary clothes, toilet paper, soap or toiletries to brush his teeth.
In Galaţi Prison the applicant was held for almost eight months in six different cells including in the infirmary and the “hunger strike” (refuz de hrană) cell. The cells in this prison are approximately 24 sq. m with a maximum of fifteen beds. The applicant shared the cells with a maximum of eleven other prisoners (2.1 sq. m of space per person, including the space occupied by beds and other furniture).
Cold water was available at various intervals for a total of seven hours per day and was not available between 9 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. The quality of the drinking water was certified by the Galaţi Public Health Authority.
The applicant received a diet in accordance with his religious beliefs and the composition of the daily menu was in line with the regulations.
Toiletries were provided as the budget allowed. During the period of almost eight months that the applicant spent in Galaţi Prison he received the following: two tubes of toothpaste, six razors, four tubes of shaving cream, nine bars of poor quality soap, six rolls of toilet paper, two toothbrushes and washing powder.
Throughout his detention in Galaţi Prison the applicant received no visits and was considered unfit for work. He did not have any income.
The applicant was held in Rahova Prison for six months and four days. He was placed in cells measuring 21 sq. m which he shared with nine other prisoners (2.1 sq. m of space per person including beds and other furniture). The cells had bathrooms equipped with two sinks, a shower and a toilet. Cold water was constantly available and hot water was twice per week following a schedule.
Food was prepared in accordance with the standards and regulations. Renovation of the food preparation and storage areas were under way when the Government’s observations were being submitted.
The Government submitted that upon their placement in a detention facility, prisoners received one set of bed linen.
Throughout his detention in Rahova Prison the applicant received no visits, was considered unfit for work and did not have any income.
The applicant was detained in Jilava Prison for twenty-two days. For a few days he shared a cell measuring 40.28 sq. m with twenty-seven prisoners; there were thirty beds as well as other items of furniture (1.43 sq. m of space per person including beds and other furniture). This cell was equipped with two toilets and two sinks where cold water was constantly available. The rest of the time he was held in the infirmary where he had approximately 6 sq. m of personal space.
Hot water was provided in common shower facilities according to a pre-established schedule for two hours on Mondays and Fridays for half of the prison and Tuesdays and Saturdays for the other half. In one of the infirmary wards, where the applicant spent fourteen days, two showers with hot water were available for up to seven prisoners, for the same periods as the general schedule (two hours per week).
During the twenty-two days he spent in this prison, the applicant received one roll of toilet paper, a razor and one tube of shaving cream.
The Government alleged that on 17 May 2013 the applicant also received clothing that he could use during his stay in this prison but they submitted no documents in support of this claim.
The applicant received the “Muslim menu” in accordance with the internal regulations.
The applicant had access to the exercise yard for six hours per day.
Throughout his detention in Jilava Prison the applicant received no visits and did not have any income.
On 11 June 2013 the applicant was transferred to Giurgiu Prison.
The applicant lodged numerous complaints with the prison authorities or the post-sentencing judge outlining his dissatisfaction with the overcrowding, the poor quality of the drinking water or the quality and quantity of the food he received. He asked on several occasions to be placed in a single occupancy cell and to be given certain foods such as fried eggs or fried potatoes.
These complaints were always rejected as being ill-founded.
On 30 September 2009, the Bucharest District Court rejected with final effect the applicant’s complaint concerning the lack of adequate provision of drinking water in Jilava Prison, reasoning that this situation was a result of budgetary constraints. Another complaint lodged with the delegate judge while the applicant was being held in Rahova Prison has on its reverse side the note “Transferred”.
The complaints about overcrowding were always solved with the conclusion that the assignment of detainees to sections and cells was a function of the prison’s administration and placement in individual cells was not possible and was not allowed by law.
On several occasions the applicant complained to the
On 7 March 2013 while he was held in Rahova Prison the applicant requested one pair of shoes, two pairs of socks and one tracksuit. A note on the request says that it shall be examined depending on stocks, but there is no subsequent mention of whether the applicant received any of the items requested.
On July 2009, following a dental examination in Rahova Prison Hospital, the applicant was diagnosed with periodontitis (I and II degree) and frontal, lateral and terminal edentulism. The doctor prescribed specific periodontitis treatment, a mobile prosthesis and a liquid or semi-liquid diet until the installation of the prosthesis.
Since then, the applicant had been taken to see a dentist on numerous occasions upon his requests following bouts of inflammation of the gums or pain. He was consistently prescribed symptomatic treatment with antibiotic or anti-inflammatory drugs. On these occasions the doctors would
In November 2009 the applicant was diagnosed with chronic generalised marginal periodontitis and was prescribed antibiotics,
On 11 May 2010 the applicant was diagnosed with a duodenal ulcer and on 11 August 2011 with chronic gastroduodenitis.
On 21 July 2011 during a medical examination in Galaţi Prison the applicant, who had been previously diagnosed with several personality disorders, was diagnosed as showing symptoms of paranoia; it was recommended that he be committed to the psychiatric section of the Poarta Albă Prison Hospital.
Between 15 and 19 October 2012 the applicant was hospitalised for an acute inflammation of the salivary glands and generalised stomatitis. He was released with a prescription to eat liquid and semi-liquid food, to brush his teeth three times per day, to take antibiotics and to use mouthwash.
The applicant had one tooth extracted on 29 November 2012.
On 24 February 2014 the applicant was taken to the prison hospital with congestion and swelling of the gums. He was diagnosed with, among other conditions, chronic acute otitis, generalised stomatitis, chronic apical periodontitis, neurovegetative disorders, conjunctivitis and spondylosis.
On several occasions the applicant was taken to prison hospitals or to the emergency unit of public hospitals with a broken nose or ribs after having been assaulted by other prisoners.
Throughout his detention the applicant refused treatment with drugs or, on a few occasions, to be transported to Rahova Prison Hospital for conditions not related to his dental problems. In November 2011 the applicant, who was in a nervous state, refused to be seen by the prison dentist. On 3 February 2014 the applicant refused to have a tooth extracted.
On 15 October 2009 the applicant complained before the prison authorities and the post-sentencing judge that he was not receiving the liquid and semi-liquid diet prescribed by the doctor. On 3 November 2009 the post-sentencing judge in Rahova Prison rejected the complaint, agreeing with the prison authorities that there was no prescription from a doctor for such a diet in the applicant’s medical file. Another similar complaint lodged by the applicant in January 2013 had been rejected by the post-sentencing judge for the same reason.
On 21 May 2012, in August 2012 and on 10 September 2012 the applicant complained to the prison administration that he had toothache and that he could not eat as he had not been given a liquid diet, as requested. No replies to these complaints could be found in the applicant’s prison file submitted by the Government.
In January 2013 the applicant complained before the post-sentencing judge of the poor quality of the food served in prison; the vegetables were undercooked; he received bones without meat. He further complained that he had not been given the liquid diet prescribed by the doctors and that he had thus constantly received food that he could not chew and eat. The prison administration averred before the judge that no special diet had been prescribed to the applicant by a doctor and that the food served in prison was in accordance with the regulations and within the limits of the budget of 4.06 Romanian lei per prisoner per day (approximately 1 euro). On 8 January 2013 the post-sentencing judge rejected the applicant’s complaint as ill-founded, considering that the food received by the applicant had been in accordance with the regulations and the budget.
In March 2013 the applicant complained again before the
On 16 and 25 June, 23 December 2013 and 12 and 24 March 2014 the applicant complained to the prison administration of toothache and requested treatment for his periodontitis. The authorities replied to these complaints that the doctor was on holiday and that an appointment would be scheduled in the future.
According to the applicant, on 14 February 2013 when he was being transported to an infirmary outside the prison, he was ill-treated by a prison guard escorting him.
Immediately after the incident the applicant lodged a criminal complaint against the prison guard for ill-treatment and abusive behaviour.
On 27 November 2013 the Prosecutor’s Office of the Bucharest District Court issued a decision not to commence criminal proceedings in the case. According to a copy of the prison’s correspondence logbook, as submitted by the Government, the applicant received a copy of the decision on 12 December 2013.
The applicant did not contest this decision before the superior prosecutor as provided for by the Criminal Procedure Code.
Law no. 275/2006 on the execution of sentences provides in Article 38 that prisoners have the right to lodge complaints concerning measures taken by prison authorities in connection with their rights provided for by law with a post-sentencing judge delegated by the court of appeal to supervise the observance of these rights. The post-sentencing judge’s decisions can be appealed against to a court. The post-sentencing judge and the court can either cancel the impugned measure or reject the complaint.
Law no. 275/2006 also stipulates that sentences must be executed in conditions compatible with respect for human dignity, and that, among other provisions, detainees must wear civilian clothes when serving their sentences, and that if they do not have any, these should be provided free of charge by the prison authorities.
Order no. 433/C of the Minister of Justice of 5 February 2010, concerning compulsory minimum standards in prison facilities, entered into force on 15 February 2010. According to this order, the minimum living space was set at 6 cubic meters per person (about 2 m sq.) for prisoners assigned to an open or semi-open prison regime, and 4 m sq. per person for other categories of prisoners, including minors and remand prisoners.
Joint Order no. 1361/C/1016/2007 of the Ministers of Justice and Health, of 6 July 2007, concerning health insurance for detained persons provided that, inter alia, only detainees who lacked financial resources and had lost more than 50 % of their chewing ability while in detention were entitled to a free dental prosthesis. In other cases, detainees had to bear part of the cost of such a prosthesis.
Government Ordinance no. 1113 of 3 November 2010 for the amendment of the rules for the application of Law no. 275/2006 provides in paragraph 6 of Article 14 as follows:
“At the request of a prisoner whose chewing ability has been severely affected during his detention, with effects on his/her digestive functions – as diagnosed by a specialist doctor within the prison system – and when the prisoner does not have the necessary financial means, the prisoner’s personal contribution to the costs [of the prosthesis] shall be covered from the prison’s budget, within the limits of the budget granted for this purpose, or from other sources in accordance with the law."
On 7 February 2012 the Ministers of Justice and Health issued a new Joint Order no. 429/125/2012. This Order provides that the costs of dental prostheses incurred by prisoners are covered partly by the state social security scheme and partly by the prisoner. The portion contributed by the state social security is to be recalculated every year in accordance with various factors. In addition, Article 39 of this Order provides as follows:
“(5)  When a prisoner has lost his chewing ability during detention and when the digestive functions are also affected, if he/she does not have the necessary financial means to pay the personal contribution, the cost shall be covered from the budget of the detention centre, within the limits of the funds allocated for this purpose, or from other sources in accordance with the law.”
In a letter addressed to the Government’s Agent on 8 May 2013, the National Administration of Prisons stated that between 7 February 2012 and 8 May 2013 two prisoners had benefited from the provisions of Article 39 of the new Joint Order. The letter also mentioned that there was no special budget allocated to prisons to meet these requirements and the possible costs generated by purchase of dental prostheses must be deducted from the general medical supplies budget.
The relevant parts of the reports issued by the Romanian Helsinki Committee following their visits to Rahova and Jilava Prisons are quoted in Iacov Stanciu v. Romania (no. , §§ 146-58, 24 July 2012). Their findings in respect of Galaţi Prison are quoted in Porumb v. Romania (no. 19832/04, § 48, 7 December 2010).
Excerpts from the relevant parts of the General Reports of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”), as well as their reports concerning Romanian prisons, are also quoted in Iacov Stanciu (cited above, §§ 121-27).