The case originated in an application (no. 44689/16) against the Hellenic Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Greek national, Mr Christos Marouggas (“the applicant”), on 28 July 2016.
The applicant was represented by Mr C. Lampakis, a lawyer practising in Thessaloniki. The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent’s delegates, Mr K. Georgiadis and Ms K. Karavassili, Senior Advisor and Legal Representative A, respectively, at the State Legal Council.
On 8 November 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1956 and was detained in Diavata Prison in Thessaloniki when he lodged his application with the Court. He was serving a sentence of sixteen years for attempted murder, being a member of an organised criminal group and other offences. Since his arrest on 29 September 2010 and until the time that he submitted his observations before the Court, he was detained in Diavata Prison. He was initially detained for fifteen days in a disciplinary cell (πειθαρχείο) – that is to say in isolation – and subsequently in cell no. GR 9 for approximately two years, and later in cell no. 2.
The applicant submitted that the material conditions of his detention had been very poor. The cells in which he had been detained had measured 24 sq. m, including the toilets, and each one had held ten prisoners; the living space for each prisoner had been therefore less than 3 sq. m. Overcrowding had exposed him to infectious diseases and he had additionally suffered from passive smoking. Due to the overcrowding, he had had barely any space to move within his cell, and the bunk bed above his own had been low, not allowing him to sit up comfortably.
Access to natural light and ventilation had been inadequate. Sanitary facilities and supplies had been old, broken and insufficient to ensure the prisoners’ wellbeing and personal hygiene. Heating had only been provided for one hour per day (from 9 p.m. until 10 p.m.), while hot water during winter had been provided for two hours per day and had not sufficed for all prisoners. In each ten-person cell there had been five bunk beds, five stools, a small table and five side tables, but no lockable space for personal belongings. The mattresses had been old, mouldy and smelly, and sheets and towels had never been provided. In addition, prisoners had lacked access to cultural, recreational and sports activities and had had to rely on visits from friends and families in order to obtain any newspapers or magazines, which had intensified their feeling of isolation. The applicant also complained about the low quantity and quality of the food.
The Government did not submit a description of the conditions of the applicant’s detention.
The relevant domestic law and practice is described in the decision in the case of Chatzivasiliadis v. Greece (no. 51618/12, §§ 17-21, 26 November 2013).
In its report of 16 October 2014, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT), following a visit that it made to Greece from 4 until 16 April 2013, noted the following as regards Diavata Prison:
“Diavata Judicial Prison, in Thessaloniki, has a capacity of 250 places, but at the time of the visit held 590 inmates. The establishment has 53 dormitories measuring 24  m² and holding up to 10 inmates each, 10 cells of 11 m² holding on average four inmates each, and three dormitories accommodating 34 female prisoners. The dormitories for female prisoners, located on the ground floor, were separated from the sections accommodating male prisoners. However, like the rest of the inmate accommodation, they offer cramped conditions, with 24 m² of space for five sets of bunk beds. Access to natural light and ventilation was adequate and there were a few stools, but no lockable space for personal belongings. The sanitary annexes contained floor-level toilets and a sink, which also had to be used for washing clothes and dishes; however, on a positive note, the annexes were fully partitioned.”
In its report of 1 March 2016, following a visit that it made from 14 until 23 April 2015, the CPT found that the situation in Diavata Prison had remained essentially the same since its previous visit in 2013; on the day of the visit, it had had a capacity of 370 places but had held 588 prisoners, the official capacity having been increased by more than 100 by extending rooms of 24 sq. m to six prisoners instead of four.