The case originated in an application (no. 74820/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksey Viktorovich Pastukhov (“the applicant”), on 18 November 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr Z. Zhulanov and Ms Y. Pershakova, lawyers practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged that he had been unlawfully detained and ill-treated in the police custody, that the investigation into the events had been ineffective and that he had been unable to obtain adequate redress for the damage sustained as a result of unlawful actions of the police.
On 23 February 2017 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Perm.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On the night of 6 February 2011 the applicant was returning home. He was drunk and mistakenly entered a neighbouring block of flats, which, by coincidence, had a flat with the same number as his own. He persistently rang the doorbell and asked to let him in. The flat owner, Ms B., called the police. When officers arrived, the applicant was lying on the stairs. They checked his passport and established his registration address. Ms B. suggested that the applicant had confused the buildings and asked the officers to notify his relatives about the incident. After a failed attempt to contact them, the officers took the applicant to a station.
At 5.11 a.m. on 6 February 2011 the applicant was brought to police station no. 4 of the Motovilikhinskiy District of Perm. He was formally charged under Article 20.21 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”), on account of being drunk in a public place and fined 300 Russian roubles (RUB). The police also drew up an arrest record which indicated that the applicant had an abrasion on his nose. The applicant was not subjected to a medical examination. After a body search he was taken to an empty cell and placed on a bunk bed, which was installed at some 40 centimetres above the concrete floor and lacked any safety railings. At 9 a.m. duty officers found the applicant lying on the floor. They were unable to wake him up and left him lying on the floor. One of them made an entry in a register of administrative detainees, noting that the applicant had been released at 8.10 a.m. on 6 February 2011. At 3 p.m. the duty officer once again tried to wake the applicant up, but failed and called an ambulance. Medics who arrived at the scene stated that the applicant was in coma and took him to a hospital. During the next five hours the applicant was transferred between three hospitals. At 9 p.m. he was admitted to State Hospital no. 1 of Perm where he was examined by a doctor and a number of injuries, including bruises on the left cheekbone area, knee and shoulder, as well as a swelling on the left parietal area, were found on him. The applicant was also diagnosed with a grave closed cranio-cerebral trauma with hematomas in the left part of the frontal lobe and a haemorrhagic contusion epicentre in the right part of the frontal lobe and a skullcap fracture affecting the base of the skull. On the same day he underwent a surgery.
Between 6 February and 22 March 2011 the applicant received treatment in a neurosurgical unit of the hospital. He remained in the state of coma at least until 15 February 2011. The applicant developed a posttraumatic encephalopathy, epilepsy and dementia. He partially lost his eyesight and ability to understand the nature of his acts and to control his actions. The applicant was assigned a lifelong first-degree disability and was formally declared legally incapacitated. His mother, Ms Yelena Pastukhova, became his legal guardian.
On 6 February 2011 the hospital to which the applicant was admitted informed the police about his trauma and the state of his health. Four days later Ms Pastukhova lodged a criminal complaint against the officers of the police station with the Prosecutor of the Motovilikhinskiy District of Perm. She complained about the applicant’s unlawful detention in the police custody and the absence of necessary medical treatment. She also implied that the injury was inflicted on him by the police officers. An additional complaint was lodged on 17 February 2011.
On 14 February 2011 an officer of police station no. 4, in response to the information from the hospital, issued a one-page decision refusing to open a criminal investigation into the events. It stated that the applicant’s injuries were not “criminal” in origin and that it was impossible to question him because he was unconscious. The officer also referred to statements from the applicant’s mother and Ms B., according to whom, “no crimes or offences were committed against the applicant and none of his personal belongings disappeared”.
Meanwhile, an investigator of the Motovilikhinskiy District Department of the Investigative Committee carried out a preliminary inquiry in response to Ms Pastukhova’s complaint. He interviewed Ms Pastukhova, arresting officers Y. and S., duty officer N., doctor A. and Ms B.
Ms Pastukhova stated that on 5 February 2011 the applicant had been in a sauna with his friends. He had been drunk and at 2 a.m. on 6 February 2011 he had taken taxi to drive home but had disappeared. The police had tried to contact Ms Pakhtusova at her home address, but she had been at work. On 7 February 2011 officers informed her that the applicant had had a stroke, that he had fallen down the stairs in a block of flats and that he had been taken to a hospital in coma. Ms Pastukhova had collected the applicant’s passport and money from the police and had gone to see her son in the hospital.
Mr N., a police officer, submitted that at 9 a.m. on 6 February 2011, upon staring his duty at the police station, he and Mr Zh., an officer finishing his duty shift, had entered the applicant’s cell and had found him sleeping face down on the floor and snoring. He had had no blood on his clothes or visible injuries on his face. Officer N. had had to serve the applicant with an administrative offence record and to return him the money found on him. Officer N. had tried to wake him up by “pulling his hand and lightly slapping his face”, but the applicant had not responded and officer N. had called the ambulance. The applicant had been taken to a hospital.
Arresting officers Y. and S. stated that approximately at 5 a.m. on 6 February 2011 they had responded to a call from Ms B. who had complained that a drunken man had been breaking into her flat. They had found the applicant on the floor in the staircase near Ms B’s flat. He had had abrasions on his nose and hands and had reeked of alcohol. The officers had checked his passport and had discovered that the applicant lived in the neighbouring house, in a flat with the same number as that of Ms B. An officer had gone to the applicant’s home, but no one had answered the door bell. The officers had decided to take the applicant to the police station for sobering up. They had lifted him and had helped him to walk to the police car. The applicant had stated his name but had not answered any other questions. The applicant had been taken to the station. The officers denied using any force against him.
According to Ms B., the applicant had rung her doorbell for the first time at around 3 a.m. on 6 February 2011. Two men in plain clothes who had identified themselves as “security” had been lifting the applicant. The latter had apparently been intoxicated and had been unable to stand straight. They had explained that the applicant had lived in that flat. Ms B. had noted that she had seen the applicant for the first time and that he had probably gone to the wrong house. The men had left. She had not seen any injuries on the applicant. Fifteen minutes later the applicant alone had rung her doorbell. He had kicked and punched the door and had demanded to be let in. She had unsuccessfully tried to reason with him. Ms B. had called the police. Through the door peephole viewer she had seen the applicant on floor, lying on his back. He had bumped his head against the wall and he had started snoring. She had not heard any sounds of a fall. Police officers had arrived few minutes later. She had opened the door and had confirmed that she had not known the applicant. The officers had turned the applicant to his left side and had asked her for an ammonia inhalant to wake him up. The applicant had not had any visible injuries. The officer had found a passport in the name of Aleksey Pastukhov which also had his address. The applicant had not responded to any questions, but had confirmed his name. Ms B. had suggested that he had confused the houses. She denied any violence against the applicant on the part of the police officers. According to Ms B., the applicant could have sustained an injury as a result of a fall, because he had been drunk, and had had difficulties standing on his feet.
Mr A., a doctor, submitted that upon admission to the hospital the applicant had had bruises on his cheek and on a parieto-occipital area of his head. An examination also revealed a serious cranio-cerebral trauma – cerebral contusion, skullcap and skull base fracture. These injuries, according to Mr A., could have been caused by a fall from a standing position on a firm surface, but the actual mechanism of the injury was not known.
On 18 March 2011 the investigator decided not to institute criminal proceedings due to the absence of corpus delicti in the police officers’ actions. He found plausible the explanation of the applicant’s injuries by Mr A. and held that there had been no indication that the injuries had resulted from violence. The investigator also noted that a medical expert examination of the gravity of the applicant’s injuries and their nature was underway.
On 22 April 2011 a deputy prosecutor of the Motovilikhinskiy District of Perm quashed the decision of 14 February 2011 (see paragraph 11 above) and ordered to join the preliminary inquiry by the police to the inquiry initiated by the Investigative Committee. On 25 May 2011 the prosecutor also quashed the decision of 18 March 2011 stressing that the inquiry had been incomplete as the investigator had yet to question a number of potential witnesses.
In the course of an additional inquiry the investigator held a number of interviews:
Mr L., an emergency doctor, stated that he had found the applicant unconscious on the floor of the cell with his face down and snoring. He had not had any visible injuries. The applicant, in coma, had been taken to a hospital. Mr L. explained that a short time after a serious head injury a person may be able to walk unassisted, until a hematoma becomes larger. The applicant could have thus fallen into a coma during his sleep.
Mr K. and Mr R. confirmed that he had been heavily drunk in the evening of 5 February 2011. They had denied any conflicts between them.
Mr Zh., an officer on duty when the applicant had been brought in, stated that the latter had been drunk and had had difficulties standing on his feet. His speech had been slurred. He had not had any visible injuries. After a record of administrative offence and a record of arrest had been drawn up, the applicant had been taken to an empty cell and had been placed on a bunk bed, on his right side. The officer had body searched the applicant and had made a list of his personal belongings. The cell had been under video surveillance. Once every hour he had checked on the applicant who had continued sleeping. Officer Zh. had not heard any sounds of a fall. In the morning officers Zh. and N. found the applicant sleeping on the floor. They had not noticed any injuries on him. Zh. thought that the applicant had fallen from the bed. The officers had unsuccessfully tried to wake him up. Officer Zh. denied using any physical force against the applicant.
The investigator also received a forensic medical expert report assessing the applicant’s injuries. The experts concluded that his head injury had originated from a single or multiple impacts with “a massive firm blunt object (surface), such as [the one] resulting from a fall”. The report also listed other injuries found on the applicant, namely bruises on his cheekbone, left shoulder, right knee and on a shoulder blade. The experts’ conclusion was that those injuries had been most probably caused by blows by a hard blunt object and had not led to any damage to the applicant’s health.
On 9 June 2011 the investigator issued another decision once again finding no evidence that the applicant’s injuries had resulted from violence and refusing to institute criminal proceedings. This decision was quashed on 28 November 2011 when a deputy head of the District Investigative Department ordered the investigator to interview other persons detained in the police station together with the applicant; to obtain a video recording from the police station; to inspect the staircase where the applicant had been found and the cell where he had been held; to find and question the security guards who had brought the applicant to Ms B.’s flat; to re-interrogate officer N. and to order an additional medical expert examination for the origin of other injuries found on the applicant.
On 8 December 2011 the investigator issued a third decision, essentially similar to the previous two. He noted, in particular, that the video recordings were no longer available as they had only been stored for one month and that it was impossible to find the security guards who had brought the applicant to Ms B.’s flat. The inspections of the staircase and the cell were also fruitless. An additional medical expert examination was pending.
On 30 January 2012 the deputy head of the District Investigative Department quashed the decision of 8 December 2011. On 24 February 2012 he instituted criminal proceedings under Article 111 § 1 of the Criminal Code of Russia (“infliction of serious injuries”). The investigator in charge of the case interrogated a number of persons. In addition to witnesses already questioned during the preliminary inquiries, the investigator heard Ms M., who had been at the police station on the night of the applicant’s arrest. She essentially confirmed statements by the police officers concerning the applicant’s arrest and also noted that he had been brought to the station in handcuffs, which had been removed before his placement in a cell. Ms M. further stated that officer Zh. had surveyed the applicant via a video camera installed in the cell. The applicant had fallen from the bed twice during that night and each time officer Zh. had put him back on the bed. Ms M. denied any violence against the applicant during his custody in the police station.
The investigator also questioned detainees who had been held in other cells of the police station. They had not heard any screams, sounds of blows or of fighting. They insisted that officers had not used force against detainees, including the applicant. Mr Ku., a doctor in a hospital to which the applicant had been taken before his transfer to State Hospital no. 1, stated that there had been no visible injuries on the applicant or any signs of beatings. Mr P., a police driver, argued that no physical force or special means had been used against the applicant. The applicant had neither been dropped on the ground nor hit against a police car. Ms K., Ms B.’s neighbour, stated that on the night of the incident she had heard three male voices in the stairway; two men had then left. She did not hear any sounds of fighting.
An additional medical expert examination showed that the applicant’s head trauma could not have resulted from “impacts with any blunt objects weighing less that the head with a limited impact surface (including fists, feet and truncheons)”. It was possible that the injury had resulted from a fall from the upright position and a blow of the head against a hard surface. According to the report, other injuries found on the applicant (see paragraph 21 above) had not caused any harm to his health. They had been inflicted by multiple blows by a hard blunt object, but it was impossible to establish time or sequence of their infliction.
On 16 August 2012 criminal proceedings against the police officers were discontinued with the finding that they had not caused any harm to the applicant. The case was transferred to the investigators of the Motovilikhinskiy District Department of the Interior. On 4 October 2012 the Deputy District Prosecutor quashed the decision of 16 August 2012 on a formal ground. The case was sent back to the District Investigative Committee Department. The criminal proceedings under Article 111 § 1 of the Criminal Code were suspended on 2 December 2012 and the criminal search division of police station no. 4 was ordered to find those responsible for causing bodily harm to the applicant.
On 28 December 2012 the investigator again refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers. He found that the applicant’s arrest was necessary because his actions had disclosed elements of administrative offences under Articles 20.1 § 1 and 20.21 of the CAO (minor disorderly acts and public intoxication), punishable, in particular, by administrative arrest, and, therefore, he had had to be brought before a judge. The applicant had been lawfully detained pursuant to section 11 § 11 of the Police Act of 1991, which empowered the police to detain until sober persons in a state of intoxication, if they are unable to walk unaided or if they lost their bearings or can cause harm to themselves or others. The investigator further held that the police station had not employed a paramedic and the duty officers Zh. and N. had not had any medical training. Thus no one in the station could have promptly identify that the applicant had not been sleeping drunk, but rather had been in a coma as a result of the head injury. The investigator concluded that the officers had duly discharged their duties and had taken sufficient care of the applicant by calling an ambulance. He dismissed, as unreliable and uncorroborated by other witness testimony, statements by a doctor, Mr Yu., who had insisted that in addition to other injuries, the applicant had had a hematoma in the area of his scrotum.
On 25 June 2013 the applicant’s mother applied to the Motovilikhinskiy District Court of Perm with a complaint under Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of Russia (“the CCrP”) against the decision of 28 December 2012, arguing, with reference to Article 3 of the Convention, that the investigation had been ineffective. On 15 July 2013 the District Court granted her complaint and found the impugned decision unlawful and unjustified. The court pointed out, in particular, that the investigator had not resolved discrepancies between the statements by the police officers, who had testified that the applicant had not fallen from the bunk bed during his stay in the cell and that no means of restraint had been used against him, and the statements by Ms M., who had testified that the applicant had been handcuffed when he had entered the police station and that he had fallen from the bed twice during the night and that each time officer Zh. had put him back in bed. The District Court further held that the medical experts had failed to substantiate their conclusions and had not assessed whether the applicant’s injuries could have resulted from a fall from the bed.
On 14 October 2013 the investigator once again refused to initiate criminal proceedings. This decision was quashed by the Perm Regional Department of the Investigative Committee on 11 December 2013.
Another decision refusing to open a criminal case against the police officers was delivered on 28 February 2014. The investigator noted that the criminal proceedings under Article 111 § 1 of the Criminal Code were pending (see paragraph 24 above) and that the criminal filed contained evidence that the applicant had been intentionally injured by unidentified persons. The investigator also referred to an additional forensic medical report showing that during the applicant’s examination on 17 February 2011, eleven days after his admission to the hospital, a bruise on his scrotum had been found. According to the description in the applicant’s medical record, the bruise had been inflicted by a firm blunt object not later than three days before the examination. At the same time, the investigator once again dismissed statements from doctor Yu. as unfounded (see paragraph 28 above).
The applicant’s mother complained about the refusal to the District Court under Article 125 of the CCrP, asserting that the investigator had failed to eliminate the defects identified by the District Court in its decision of 15 July 2013. On 15 May 2014 the District Court dismissed her complaint. It was convinced by the findings of the forensic medical experts and pointed out that during an additional interview Ms M., had retracted her previous statements about the handcuffing. The decision was upheld on appeal by the Perm Regional Court on 15 July 2014.
On 7 November 2013 Ms Pastukhova, acting on the applicant’s behalf, brought a civil action against the Ministry of Finance of Russia seeking RUB 4,000,000 in compensation for non-pecuniary damage resulting from unlawful detention, infliction of injuries and the failure on the part of the police to afford necessary medical care and assistance.
On 14 March 2014 the District Court partially granted the claim and awarded the applicant RUB 50,000. It held that a criminal complaint of Ms Pastukhova had not been properly addressed for almost a year, until the institution of the criminal proceedings under Article 111 § 1 of the Criminal Code in February 2012. It also stressed that the decisions dismissing requests for a criminal case to be opened, issued during that period, had all been declared unlawful and incomplete. Multiple unlawful refusals to open a criminal case, in the District Court view, interfered with the applicant’s rights as a victim of a crime, guaranteed by Article 52 of the Constitution of Russia. The court concluded that the applicant was entitled to non-pecuniary damages given the unlawful actions of the investigation authorities, irrespective of the possible outcome of the ongoing criminal proceedings under Article 111 § 1 of the Criminal Code. The District Court, at the same time, found no grounds for declaring the ensuing investigation (after February 2012) ineffective, and rejected the relevant part of the claim.
The court also held that the applicant’s arrest and detention were lawful and justified because the administrative offence record could not have been issued on the spot, in view of his condition and due to impossibility to contact his relatives and to take him home. The conditions of the applicant’s detention in the police station were also found to be in compliance with the applicable regulations. Finally, the District Court dismissed as unsubstantiated Ms Pastukhova’s argument about the police officers’ responsibility for intentional or negligent infliction of health damage to the applicant, including their alleged failure to timely provide him with the requisite medical aid.
On 4 June 2014 the Perm Regional Court upheld the judgment of 14 March 2014 on appeal. An application for a cassation review of the case was rejected on 10 September 20154 by the Presidium of the Regional Court.
For the relevant domestic law and practice see Tsvetkova and Others v. Russia, nos. 54381/08 and 5 others, §§ 60-82, 10 April 2018; Lyapin v. Russia, no. 46956/09, §§ 96-102, 24 July 2014; Shimovolos v. Russia, no. 30194/09, §§ 31-34, 21 June 2011.