The case originated in an application (no. 17521/09) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Vardan Teymurazyan (“the applicant”), on 23 March 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms A. Melkonyan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that no compensation for nonpecuniary damage was available to him under Armenian law in respect of his ill-treatment and unlawful deprivation of liberty.
On 17 November 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. On 15 March 2016, the Chamber to which the case had been allocated decided to request further information from the parties concerning the admissibility and merits of the application.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Yerevan.
.  In 1983 and 1988 the applicant was found guilty of indecent acts with minors and sentenced to prison sentences.
On 25 January 2001 the Court of Cassation decided to allow an extraordinary appeal lodged by the Deputy Prosecutor General of Armenia, quashed the two judgments and terminated both sets of criminal proceedings against the applicant on the grounds of absence of corpus delicti. In particular, the Court of Cassation found that there was no evidence to suggest that the applicant had committed the imputed offences, and that the court judgments had been based on assumptions and erroneous interpretation of the law.
.  From 2001 the applicant lodged two civil claims against the State, seeking compensation for pecuniary damage sustained as a result of his two convictions. These claims were allowed on 10 September 2001 and 26 August 2005 by the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan, which decided to award the applicant – as an acquitted person – sums of money in compensation for lost income, medical costs incurred to restore his damaged health, his future treatment abroad and travel costs to be incurred in that connection.
On 13 April 2005 Investigator N. of the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Prosecutor’s Office instituted a criminal case under Article 316 § 1 of the Criminal Code (“the CC”) in respect of the applicant who was suspected of having assaulted two traffic-police officers, V.S. and G.G., who had stopped the applicant’s car for a violation of traffic laws.
.  On the same date, the applicant was arrested and two days later charged, under the same Article, with assaulting the two traffic-police officers.
.  On 16 April 2005 it was decided not to detain the applicant and to release him on a written undertaking not to leave his place of residence, on the grounds that he was a disabled person suffering from a number of diseases, had no previous convictions, had two children who were minors, as well as his wife and mother as dependants, and had a permanent place of residence.
On an unspecified date the two police officers were recognised as victims for the purposes of the criminal case.
.  On 5 May 2005 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan, on the basis of an application by the investigator, changed the preventive measure in respect of the applicant from a written undertaking not to leave his place of residence to detention on remand for a period of two months. The applicant lodged an appeal against that decision, which was dismissed by the Criminal Court of Appeal on 2 June 2005.
In the course of the investigation the applicant testified that V.S. and G.G. had demanded a bribe from him in order not to record a violation of the traffic laws and then subjected him to beatings when he refused. A forensic medical examination of the applicant was carried out, which found that he had suffered injuries, including concussion and a fractured cheek bone.
.  On 10 June 2005 the applicant’s lawyer addressed a letter to the investigator, alleging that it had been the applicant who had been assaulted by V.S. and G.G rather than the other way around. Thus, the applicant’s actions had been wrongly assessed as falling within the scope of Article 316 § 1 of the CC, while no charges had been brought against the police officers. The lawyer requested the investigator that such charges be brought.
.  On 20 June 2005 the District Prosecutor decided to replace the applicant’s detention on remand with a written undertaking not to leave his place of residence, on the same grounds as previously (see paragraph 
11 above).
On 21 June 2005 Investigator N., having reviewed the materials of the criminal case against the applicant, took a decision to discontinue a part of that case and not to carry out criminal prosecution (Որոշում քրեական գործի մասը կարճելու և քրեական հետապնդում չիրականացնելու) with regard to the infliction of injuries on the applicant by V.S. and G.G.. The investigator found that the traffic-police officers had inflicted injuries on the applicant as they had tried to overcome his resistance at the time of arrest, and therefore their actions had amounted to a legitimate use of force.
On 16 February 2006 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan acquitted the applicant, finding that he was not guilty of the imputed offence. The District Court also held that the police officers V.S. and G.G. had exceeded their authority by acting violently against the applicant, which had caused serious damage and grave consequences to the applicant and his family. In particular, the applicant had been taken to the police station unlawfully and had been arrested on the basis of false information provided by traffic-police officers V.S. and G.G. The police officers had subjected the applicant to beatings, as a result of which the latter had sustained injuries, including a concussion and a fractured cheek bone. Furthermore, they had forced the applicant into the police car and driven him to the police station leaving the applicant’s car, with his eightyear-old son inside, in the outside lane of the road. As a result, the applicant’s son had suffered psychological trauma and damage to his health. In spite of the fact that the applicant had not violated the conditions of his written undertaking not to leave his place of residence and that he had been a disabled person and had had two minors as dependants, the investigator had applied to a court with an unfounded application seeking to have him detained. As a result, the applicant had been detained from 5 May to 20 June 2005. Moreover, the grounds for his release on 20 June 2005 under a written undertaking were the same as those which had already been used on 16 April 2005 to justify his release under a written undertaking as opposed to placing him in pre-trial detention. The District Court lastly found that the investigator had taken an unfounded decision not to prosecute the police officers by assessing their actions as lawful and asked the Prosecutor General, with reference to Article 184 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”), to institute criminal proceedings against them under Article 309 § 3 of the CC for exceeding their authority, resulting in grave consequences.
.  On unspecified dates the prosecutor’s office and Officers V.S. and G.G. lodged appeals against that judgment.
On 14 November 2006 the Criminal Court of Appeal dismissed the appeals and upheld the judgment of the District Court, finding that the applicant had acted in necessary self-defence. However, it decided to annul the request made to the Prosecutor General on the grounds that Article 21 of the CCP prohibited the reopening of proceedings if there had been a decision of the prosecuting authority to discontinue the proceedings or not to carry out prosecution. On 21 June 2005 the investigator had taken such a decision in respect of V.S. and G.G., which had never been annulled, hence Article 21 excluded the possibility of prosecuting them.
.  On 15 May 2007 the Court of Cassation declared inadmissible for lack of merit an appeal lodged by police officers V.S. and G.G. against that judgment.
On 27 November 2007 the applicant lodged a complaint with the courts, seeking to annul the investigator’s decision of 21 June 2005 as it contradicted the findings reached by the courts in his trial when assessing the actions of the police officers.
.  The district prosecutor argued that the applicant’s complaint must be dismissed, since he had missed the six months’ time-limit prescribed by Article 21 § 4 of the CCP. The applicant argued in reply that, pursuant to Article 21 § 5 of the CCP, the time-limits prescribed by that Article did not apply in the event of newly emerged circumstances, which in his case were the judgments adopted in his criminal case. Furthermore, the prosecuting authority was obliged by law to take measures to restore his rights of its own motion.
On 25 March 2008 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan decided to dismiss the complaint, finding the district prosecutor’s arguments under Article 21 of the CCP to be valid. It further stated that the district prosecutor’s office could not bear responsibility for the applicant’s failure to contest the investigator’s decision in due time.
.  The applicant lodged an appeal against that decision.
On 19 May 2008 the Criminal Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal, finding that Article 21 § 5 of the CCP was not applicable to his case and holding that the applicant had failed to contest the investigator’s decision of 21 June 2005 within the time-limits prescribed by Articles 21 and 290 of the CCP, as well as the time-limit for requesting a reopening of a case prescribed by Article 426.3 of the CCP. The Court of Appeal’s decision was subject to appeal within one month of the date of its delivery.
.  On 16 March 2009 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the Court of Appeal’s decision, together with a request that the missed one-month time-limit for appeal be renewed.
On 8 April 2009 the Court of Cassation found that the applicant had failed to show that he had valid reasons for missing the prescribed one-month timelimit and decided to refuse the examination of the applicant’s appeal on points of law.
.  On 11 September 2007 the applicant lodged a civil claim against the State, seeking further compensation for pecuniary damage, specifically for loss of income, and compensation for non-pecuniary damage in relation to his two unfair convictions, in the amount of 15,078,664 United States dollars, and in relation to his unlawful arrest and detention and infliction of bodily harm, in the amount of 1,000,000 euros (EUR).
On 26 November 2007 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court decided to dismiss his claims. It stated at the outset that the applicant was an “acquitted person” within the meaning of Article 66 of the CCP and was entitled under the same Article to claim pecuniary damage suffered as a result of his unlawful arrest, detention, indictment and conviction. However, the types of compensation that the applicant sought were not envisaged by Article 66 § 4 of the CCP, apart from that sought for loss of income, which the applicant had failed to substantiate.
.  On 28 November 2007 the applicant lodged an appeal.
On 7 March 2008 the Civil Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the judgment of the District Court, finding that the applicant had already been compensated for pecuniary damage in relation to his convictions, while his new claims for pecuniary damages were unsubstantiated. As regards the claim for non-pecuniary damage, this had to be rejected on the grounds that Armenian law did not provide for compensation for non-pecuniary damage.
.  On 29 July 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, which was declared inadmissible for lack of merit by the Court of Cassation on 28 October 2008.
.  On 26 February 2009 the applicant lodged another civil claim against the State, seeking compensation for pecuniary damage suffered as a result of his ill-treatment, such as various medical costs.
On 26 December 2011 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan examined the applicant’s claim. It held at the outset, with reference to the judgments adopted in the applicant’s criminal case and Article 52 of the Code of Civil Procedure, that the applicant had a case for damages under Article 1063 of the Civil Code, taking into account the fact that the police officers’ actions had been unlawful within the meaning of that Article. The District Court went on to conclude, however, that there was no causal link between the police officers’ unlawful actions and the specific medical costs claimed by the applicant, and decided to dismiss the claim.
.  On 25 January 2012 the applicant lodged an appeal.
.  On 4 October 2012 the Civil Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the judgment of the District Court.
.  On 2 November 2012 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, which was declared inadmissible for lack of merit by the Court of Cassation on 28 November 2012.
Article 21, entitled “Prohibition of double jeopardy”, proscribed, as of 21 June 2005, punishment on an individual twice for the same act. Article 21 § 4 provided that a decision of the prosecuting authority to discontinue criminal proceedings or to terminate a criminal prosecution might be annulled only by the Prosecutor General within six months of the date of such a decision.
Article 21 § 3, as in force in 2008, provided that a criminal case may not be reopened if there is a decision of the prosecuting authority to discontinue proceedings, to terminate a criminal prosecution or not to carry out a criminal prosecution and it may lead to a worsening of a person’s situation, with the exception of cases set out in Article 21 § 4. Article 21 § 5 provided that this rule did not apply in the event of newly emerged circumstances.
.  Article 32 prescribes that proceedings in a criminal case are completed by a decision to discontinue the proceedings or by a final judgment.
.  Article 33 § 4 prescribes that criminal prosecution may be carried out only within the scope of an instituted criminal case.
Article 66 § 3 provided at the material time that an acquitted person was entitled to claim full compensation for pecuniary damage caused as a result of his unlawful arrest, detention, indictment and conviction, taking into account possible loss of income. Article 66 § 4 provided that an acquitted person was entitled to receive as compensation the following: (a) salary, pension, allowances and other types of income; (b) damages incurred as a result of confiscation, seizure or freezing of property; (c) court fees; (d) legal fees; and (e) penalties paid as a result of criminal conviction.
.  Article 175 provides that a prosecutor, an investigator or a body of preliminary inquiry are obliged, within the scope of their jurisdiction, to institute criminal proceedings if there are reasons and grounds provided by the Code. Article 176 provides that reasons for instituting criminal proceedings include, inter alia, discovery of information regarding a crime or physical evidence and consequences of a crime by a body of preliminary inquiry, an investigator, a prosecutor, a court or a judge while performing their functions.
.  Article 184 § 1 provides that the body of preliminary inquiry, the investigator or the prosecutor, based on the evidence in a criminal case dealt with by them, must adopt a decision to institute a new criminal case and to sever it into a separate set of criminal proceedings, while the court must apply to the prosecutor with a request to adopt such a decision, if a crime unrelated to the crimes imputed to the accused is disclosed, which has been committed by a third person without the involvement of the accused.
Article 263 provided, as of 21 June 2005, that a decision to discontinue criminal proceedings or to terminate a criminal prosecution may be contested before a supervising prosecutor within seven days of the receipt of a copy of that decision by a suspect, an accused, a defendant, his or her defence lawyers, a victim, his or her representative, a civil plaintiff, a civil respondent, his or her representatives, or by the physical person or the legal entity on the basis of whose allegations the criminal case was instituted. A refusal of the prosecutor to grant the appeal may be contested before the courts.
Article 290 § 1 provides that a suspect, an accused, the defence lawyer, a victim, participants in the proceedings and other persons whose rights and lawful interests have been violated are entitled to lodge complaints with a court against the unlawfulness and unfoundedness of the decisions and actions prescribed by the Code taken by a body of preliminary inquiry, an investigator, a prosecutor or bodies carrying out operative and intelligence measures, if such complaints have not been allowed by a prosecutor. Article 290 § 2 provides that the same persons are entitled to contest before a court the refusal of a body of preliminary inquiry, an investigator or a prosecutor to receive information about a crime or to institute criminal proceedings, as well as their decisions to suspend or discontinue the proceedings or to terminate the criminal prosecution, in cases prescribed by the Code. Article 290 § 3 provides that a complaint may be lodged with a court within one month of the date of being informed of the refusal or, if no reply is received, one month after the expiry of the one-month period following the lodging of the complaint.
Article 52 § 3 provides that a final judgment adopted in a criminal case is binding on a court in a civil case only to the extent of circumstances establishing actions and the identities of persons who have performed them.
Article 309 § 3 provides that deliberate actions committed by an official, which obviously fall outside the scope of his authority and cause considerable damage to the rights and lawful interests of individuals or organisations, or the lawful interests of society or the State, if they accidentally leading to grave consequences, is punishable by imprisonment for a period of between six and ten years and a forfeiture of the right to hold certain posts or to carry out certain activities for a period not exceeding three years.
.  Article 316 § 1 provides that non-life-threatening or non-health-threatening assault or threat of such assault on a public official or his or her next-of-kin, connected with the performance of his or her official duties, is punishable by a fine of between 300 and 500 times the minimum wage or detention of up to one month or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years.
.  Article 17 provides that anyone whose rights have been violated may claim compensation for the damage. Damage is the expenses borne or to be borne by the person, whose rights have been violated, in connection with restoring the violated rights, loss of property or damage thereto (material damage), including loss of earnings which the person would have gained in normal conditions of civil life, had his rights not been violated (loss of income).
Article 1063 provides that damage caused to a physical or legal person by unlawful actions (inaction) of a public or local authority or its officials must be compensated by the State or the relevant local authority.
Article 1064 provides that damage caused as a result of an unlawful conviction, an unlawful criminal prosecution, an unlawful imposition of a preventive measure in the form of detention or a written undertaking not to leave an individual’s place of residence, or an unlawful imposition of an administrative penalty must be compensated in full, in a procedure prescribed by law, by the State, regardless of whether the officials of the body of inquiry, the investigating authority, the prosecutor’s office or the courts were at fault.