The case originated in an application (no. 50149/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Oleg Izosimovich Zhuravlev (“the applicant”), on 8 July 2011.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 13 April 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
By letter of 25 May 2012 Ms Y.V. Zhuravleva, the applicant’s wife, informed the Court about the applicant’s death on 18 April 2012 and expressed her wish to pursue the application before the Court.
On 8 June 2012 the Government requested the Court to strike the application out of its list of cases on account of the applicant’s death.
On 19 July 2010 the Supreme Court of the Chuvash Republic found the applicant guilty of corruption and an abuse of official powers and gave him a custodial sentence. The applicant appealed alleging, in particular, that he was innocent, that the prosecution had been unlawful and the trial court had applied the criminal law erroneously.
On 26 October 2010 the Supreme Court of Russia quashed the judgment on appeal and remitted it for a new hearing.
On 2 March 2011 the Supreme Court of the Chuvash Republic found the applicant guilty as charged before and sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment. The applicant lodged an appeal. He complained, among other matters, about erroneous interpretation of law, improper assessment of evidence by the courts, and an excessive severity of the penalty
On 23 May 2011 the Supreme Court of Russia upheld the judgment on appeal reducing the sentence to four years’ imprisonment.
Between 2 March and 16 June 2011 the applicant was held in remand prison IZ-21/1 in the Cheboksary Region. The facility was overcrowded. Thus, cell 39 measuring 23 sq. m was equipped with fourteen sleeping places and accommodated up to ten inmates.
The applicant submitted the following evidence in support of the above allegations: his complaints to the prison management and their reply and statements by three cellmates.