The application concerns the applicants’ allegedly discriminatory illtreatment by the police (on the grounds of their actual and/or perceived sexual orientation and gender identity) and the purported absence of an effective domestic investigation capable of, amongst other things, unmasking the role which homophobic and/or transphobic motives played in the ill-treatment. The applicants rely on Articles 3, 8 and 14 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 12.
The first and second applicants were born in 1969 and 1979 respectively and live in Tbilisi. They were successively represented by a group of three Georgian lawyers and one British lawyer (Mr L. Tchintcharauli, Ms A. Tvaradze, Ms S. Japaridze and Ms J. Sawyer), and then by a group of four British lawyers (Mr Ph. Leach, Ms J. Evans, Mr J. Gavron and Ms K. Levine).
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Meskhoradze, of the Ministry of Justice.
The first applicant is a co-founder of a lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) non-governmental organisation (NGO) in Georgia – the Inclusive Foundation (IF). Its goal is to promote the integration of the LGBT community in Georgia through advocacy and by overcoming homophobia and increasing the civil activity of the group. At the time of the events described below (see paragraphs 6-17 below), the first applicant was working at the IF as a part-time programme manager, and was acting head of the organisation in the absence of its director, whilst the second applicant was working there as a programme officer in charge of office administration.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the applicants and not disputed by the Government, may be summarised as follows.
On 15 December 2009 approximately eight to ten women gathered in the IF office in Tbilisi to make preparations for an upcoming art exhibition. They were working in the office kitchen. P.S., the director of the IF, was also present.
At approximately 6-7 p.m. someone rang the doorbell. As soon as the door was opened, up to seventeen men and women, all dressed in civilian clothing, rushed into the office. Presenting themselves as police officers, the intruders asked for P.S. and isolated him in a separate room for questioning. All the women in the kitchen were ordered to go to the meeting room. Only A.M., a male-to-female transsexual person, was left in the kitchen, as the police seemed to be confused as to her gender. The police officers announced that they were there to conduct a search of the IF office. They did not show a search warrant or any other judicial order, despite the repeated requests which were voiced by the women present in the office.
It was apparent at the beginning of the search that the police did not know about the specific nature of the NGO. The police officers became progressively aware of it in the course of the search, observing various posters on the office walls which were depicting homosexual couples. They started asking about the IF’s activities and, having realised that they had entered the premises of an LGBT organisation, suddenly became aggressive and started displaying homophobic behaviour. The police officers started referring to the women in the meeting room as “not Georgians”, “sick people” and “perverts who should receive medical treatment”. Referring to P.S., the police officers wondered what the women present in the IF office had in common with that “faggot”.
Some of the police officers threatened to reveal the sexual orientation of the women gathered in the office to the public, and to their parents and relatives. They also threatened to hurt their family members. The officers said that they wished those in the office were men, because in that case they would use physical force on them. One of the police officers ripped a poster which depicted two men embracing off the wall in the meeting room and tore it to pieces, adding that he would burn the place down if he had matches. Assuming that A.M. was male (see paragraph 7 above), male police officers tried to make friends with her and enquired sarcastically whether the women in the meeting room were interested in men at all.
During the search, cannabis was found inside the office desk of P.S., the director of the NGO. He was then arrested and immediately transferred to a police station for further questioning. Subsequently, he was charged with a drug offence, to which he confessed, and under the terms of a plea bargain he was released on the condition that he pay a fine.
At about 10.30 p.m., again without providing any explanation or informing the women present in the IF office of their rights, the police officers announced that some of them had to be strip-searched. A.M. and two other women were the only people not to be searched. The strip-searches were conducted in the office toilet by the female police officers. Most of the women were searched in groups of two to three, and some of them were asked to take off their underwear. They stood barefoot on the cold floor, while the police officers who were carrying out the searches made denigrating remarks such as “dykes”. All the women concerned felt that in reality the strip-searches were carried out to humiliate them, as the police officers carrying out the searches paid little attention to the clothes that they asked the women to remove.
Before releasing the women, including the applicants, at about 11.30 p.m. the police wrote down their names and dates of birth, but did not ask them to sign anything. There has never been any suggestion that the applicants or the other women present in the office on that day were involved in the drug offence of which P.S. was subsequently convicted (see paragraph 10 above).
The first applicant arrived at the office of the IF at about 8 p.m. on 15 December 2009. As soon as she opened the office door, she was pushed into the meeting room by a man in plain black clothes. After she had realised that the police were conducting a search of the office, she asked to be shown a search warrant. A senior police officer in charge of the search, who was later identified as D.K., replied that they were carrying out an investigative act based on intelligence, and that the police were not obliged to produce a search warrant. D.K. then demanded that the first applicant hand him her mobile telephone. She refused, insisting that she had the right to make a call. D.K. then grabbed her hand and twisted her arm, and eventually was able to confiscate her mobile telephone.
The first applicant heard the police using expressions such as “perverts”, “sick people” and “dyke”. When she saw the ripped poster, she asked who had done that. D.K. responded that it had been him and he had done it because he wanted to.
The first applicant was then subjected to a strip-search by two female police officers in the office toilet, on her own. At no point was she informed about the reasons for that. The first applicant felt that the stripsearch was carried out to humiliate her, because although she was ordered to undress down to her underwear, the police officers did not search the clothes which she took off. While in the toilet, the police officers kept making various insults towards the women (see paragraphs 8 and 11 above). The comments of the police officers and the whole situation made the first applicant feel humiliated. She spent about five minutes in the toilet. No record of the strip-search was drawn up, and she was not asked to sign any other document.
The second applicant arrived at the IF office at about 9 p.m. She already knew from a friend that the police were in there. When she entered the office she saw that everything was a mess: the furniture had been moved, the piano dismantled and some other objects were scattered on the floor. There were a lot of unfamiliar people in civilian clothes walking around, talking on their mobile telephones or just sitting around. One of the police officers forced the second applicant into the meeting room against her will, where she noticed that some of the women were terrified and crying. Once there, the second applicant found out that the police officers had found some drugs in the office.
The second applicant was then strip-searched, together with her sister, by two female police officers in the toilet. Like the first applicant (see paragraph 15 above), she too felt that the strip-search was carried out to humiliate her and her sister, because although they were ordered to undress, the police officers did not properly check the clothes which they took off. The second applicant spent about five minutes in the toilet. No record of the strip-search was drawn up, and she was not asked to sign any other document.
On 9 January 2010 the applicants filed a complaint with the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office (“the CPPO”), the Tbilisi city public prosecutor’s office (“the Tbilisi Prosecutor”) and the head of the General Inspectorate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (“the General Inspectorate of the MIA”), listing the abuses of power committed by the police officers during the search of the IF office and requesting that the authorities look into the matter and respond accordingly.
On 12 and 22 January 2010 respectively the applicants’ letter of 9 January 2010 was forwarded to the Tbilisi Prosecutor by the CPPO and the General Inspectorate of the MIA for further inquiry.
On 8 February 2010 the applicants enquired with the General Inspectorate of the MIA and the CPPO about the complaint which they had submitted on 9 January 2010. They explicitly requested that the investigating authorities take into consideration the influence that the women’s perceived sexual orientation and gender identity had had on the police behaviour.
On 19 April 2010 the applicants asked the Tbilisi Prosecutor to grant them victim status; they also asked to be questioned.
On 25 June 2010 the applicants enquired with the Tbilisi Prosecutor as to why there had been no reply to their previous complaints. The applicants once again drew the prosecutor’s attention to the violations of both the domestic law and the Convention which had occurred during the search. They asked whether an investigation had been initiated on the basis of their complaint of 9 January 2010, and demanded that an inquiry be launched immediately if not. They also requested that they be granted victim status and questioned together with the other women who had been present in the IF office during the police raid of 15 December 2009. Detailed written statements of both the applicants and the eyewitnesses, describing in detail the police abuse, were attached to the letter.
On 16 March 2011 the applicants wrote to the Tbilisi Prosecutor again. They referred to all the previous communications with the law enforcement authorities, noting that there had been no replies to any of them. The applicants once again reminded the prosecutor of the positive obligation under both the domestic legislation and the Convention to carry out an effective investigation capable of leading to the prosecution and punishment of those responsible for treatment contrary to Articles 3, 8 and 14 of the Convention.
On 14 April 2011 the applicants received a letter from the Tbilisi Prosecutor informing them that an investigation into the case was ongoing under Article 333 of the Criminal Code of Georgia (abuse of official powers). As the letter did not give the date when the investigation had commenced, or provide any information on the particular investigative measures which had been implemented, the applicants made an additional enquiry with the Tbilisi Prosecutor on 27 May 2011.
On 28 June 2011 the applicants received a further letter from the Tbilisi Prosecutor, reiterating that a pre-trial investigation into the case was ongoing under Article 333 of the Criminal Code of Georgia. The letter stated “a range of early investigative measures have already been implemented in relation to this criminal case. Other pertinent investigative measures are planned and will be implemented, for the purpose of a thorough investigation”. No other information was provided.
According to the case file, the investigation into the possible abuse of power by the police officers has still not been concluded. The available case material does not indicate whether any other investigative measures have been carried out, apart from the measures mentioned above.
The relevant domestic law and international material concerning the situation of the LGBT community in Georgia was comprehensively summarised in paragraphs 30-39 of the Court’s judgment in the case of Identoba and Others v. Georgia (no. 73235/12, 12 May 2015).