The case originated in an application (no. 36617/07) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Ms Afet Süreyya Eren (“the applicant”), on 25 July 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mrs G. Tuncer, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the ill-treatment inflicted on her by a number of police officers in police custody was in breach of her rights guaranteed by Articles 3, 6 and 13 of the Convention.
On 20 September 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Istanbul.
On 7 June 1999 the applicant and a number of other suspects were taken into police custody by officers from the Security Branch of the Istanbul Security Headquarters (Güvenlik Şube Müdürlüğü) on suspicion of membership of the DHKP-C (the abbreviation for the Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party/Front, an illegal organisation). The applicant alleges that she was subjected to torture by police officers for four days.
On 9 June 1999 the applicant was taken to a forensic doctor, who noted that the applicant had complained that she had been hung by her arms for approximately ten minutes and that her head had been banged against a wall. The medical report indicates that she had a scrape under her left armpit, a 7-8 cm-long large brown macule on her right forearm and a 3 cmlong oedema on her forehead above the nose.
On 11 June 1999 the applicant was brought before the Istanbul public prosecutor and then before a judge at the Istanbul State Security Court. Before both authorities she denied all accusations against her and complained that she had been subjected to ill-treatment while in police custody. She was subsequently detained pending trial.
On 14 June 1999 the applicant was examined by the prison doctor, who reported a 4x5 cm mark on her right forearm and a swelling on her right clavicle. According to the medical report, the applicant had stated that her arms felt painful and she had a headache.
On 18 June 1999 the applicant filed a complaint with the public prosecutor’s office in Istanbul against the police officers of the Security Branch of the Istanbul Security Headquarters, accusing them of having tortured her. She stated in particular that she had been hung by her arms and had received blows to her head.
On 8 June 2001 the Fatih public prosecutor issued a decision not to prosecute. The public prosecutor considered that the applicant had not been questioned as a suspect and that there was no evidence showing that the accused police officers had committed the crime of torture. The applicant claims that she was not notified of this decision.
On an unspecified date the investigation was reopened. Accordingly, on 18 April 2003 the applicant’s statement was taken by a public prosecutor in the prison where she was detained on remand. The applicant stated that at some time in June 1999 she had been taken into custody at the Anti-Terror Branch of the Istanbul Security Headquarters, where she had been ill-treated for seven to eight days. She noted in particular that she had been undressed, threatened with rape, beaten and hung by her arms by the police officers. The applicant stated that she had been unable to use her arms for approximately one month subsequent to her detention in police custody. She further stated that she could identify the police officers in question.
On 6 August 2003 the Fatih public prosecutor filed an indictment with the Fatih Criminal Court, charging two police officers, A.T. and Z.T., under Article 245 of the former Criminal Code with inflicting illtreatment on the applicant while in police custody between 7 and 10 June 1999.
On 8 September 2005 the Fatih Criminal Court considered that it lacked jurisdiction to hear the case. The court held that the accusations against A.T. and Z.T. could not be qualified as ill-treatment within the meaning of Article 245 of the former Criminal Code but should be qualified rather as torture under Article 243 of the same Code. The court therefore ordered the transfer of the case to the competent court.
The case was referred to the Istanbul Assize Court, which on 22 November 2005 also held that it lacked jurisdiction. It held that in order for Article 243 of the former Criminal Code to apply, the acts of illtreatment or torture had to be inflicted with the intention to extract information. The court held that the applicant had complained about having been subjected to torture, but she had not alleged that the intent behind such acts had been to extract information from her. The complaint therefore fell under Article 245 of the former Criminal Code and accordingly within the jurisdiction of the Fatih Criminal Court. Consequently, the court referred the case to the Court of Cassation to resolve the jurisdictional dispute.
On 2 October 2006 the Court of Cassation held that the case fell within the jurisdiction of the Istanbul Assize Court.
On 6 March 2007 the Istanbul Assize Court held a hearing in the case during which the applicant joined the proceedings as a civil party. At the same hearing, the applicant made statements to the court. During her examination, she identified Z.T. in the courtroom as one of the police officers who had interrogated and tortured her. The applicant stated that she had been held at two different facilities while in custody. According to her statements to the court, at the first facility she had been beaten; at the second facility, she had been subjected to various forms of torture, including reverse hanging and sexual harassment by around ten police officers. She had been stripped naked and threatened with rape in front of her sister, and she had been sprayed with pepper gas. At the end of the hearing, the Istanbul Assize Court discontinued the proceedings against the accused police officers on the ground that the prosecution of the offences proscribed by Articles 243 and 245 of the former Criminal Code had become timebarred (the period being seven years and six months at the relevant time).
.  On an unspecified date the applicant lodged an appeal against the judgment of 6 March 2007.
On 31 January 2008 the Court of Cassation rejected the applicant’s appeal and upheld the judgment of the Istanbul Assize Court.
A description of the domestic law and practice concerning prosecution for ill-treatment in force at the material time can be found in Batı and Others v. Turkey, nos. 33097/96 and 57834/00, §§ 96-98, ECHR 2004-IV (extracts).