The case originated in an application (no. 653/12) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Dariusz Karykowski (“the applicant”), on 27 December 2011.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr T. Bąk, a lawyer practising in Szczecin. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged a breach of Article 3 of the Convention on account of the imposition on him of the so-called “dangerous detainee” regime.
On 7 July 2014 the complaint under Article 3 of the Convention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1966 and is detained in Stargard Szczeciński.
The applicant is a habitual offender. He was arrested on an unspecified date on suspicion of uttering threats. He was subsequently convicted as charged and sentenced to three years and six months’ imprisonment. He was first detained in Nowogard Prison and subsequently in Goleniów Prison.
On 7 September 2011 the applicant’s cell was searched. During the search the prison officers found a note entitled “Protest letter” signed by 135 prisoners. The prisoners stated their opposition to the forthcoming changes to the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences affecting, in particular, the possibility of shopping during prison visits. The letter was confiscated by the authorities.
On 8 September 2011 the Nowogard Prison Penitentiary Commission imposed on the applicant the so-called “dangerous detainee” regime. The commission held that the applicant was one of the organisers of a planned collective remonstrance in Nowogard Prison, and that it was therefore necessary to isolate him from other prisoners.
The applicant appealed against that decision. He submitted that he was not the organiser of the protest but merely one of 140 prisoners who had signed the letter.
On 29 November 2011 the Szczecin Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The court held that the decision had been lawful.
On an unknown date the applicant was transferred to Goleniów Prison.
On 6 December 2011 the Goleniów Prison Penitentiary Commission extended the imposition of the “dangerous detainee” regime, holding that the applicant represented a serious threat to the community and should be kept in a solitary cell. The applicant appealed.
On 31 January 2012 the Szczecin Regional Court quashed the decision and remitted the case to the commission. The court held that only the original decision to impose the regime of 8 September 2011 had been justified. The following one taken on 6 December 2011 had not indicated any new circumstances justifying the continuing application of the regime and its reasoning had been scarce. The court noted that several months had elapsed since the applicant had signed the protest letter and the suppositions regarding the allegedly planned collective remonstrance of the prisoners had been not confirmed.
On 14 February 2012 the Goleniów Prison Penitentiary Commission decided to lift the “dangerous detainee” regime. The regime was imposed on the applicant for a total of five months and seven days.
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning the imposition of the “dangerous detainee” regime are set out in the Court’s judgments in the cases of Piechowicz v. Poland (no. 20071/07, §§ 110-17, 17 April 2012), and Horych v. Poland (no. 13621/08, §§ 49-56, 17 April 2012).
The provisions of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences concerning the imposition of the regime on convicted persons read as follows:
“A convicted person posing a serious danger to society or to the security of a prison shall be placed in a prison with a closed regime in conditions ensuring increased protection of society and the security of the prison.”
“1.  The convicted person referred to in Article 88 § 3 shall be placed in a designated wing or in a cell of a prison with a closed regime. A penitentiary judge shall be informed about this placement.
The provisions of paragraph 1 above shall be applied to a convicted person whose characteristics, personal circumstances, motivations, behaviour when committing the offence, type of offence and its consequences, behaviour in prison, or degree of depravity pose a serious danger to society or to the security of a prison, and who:
(2a)  during the prior or current term of imprisonment posed a danger to the security of a prison or a remand centre in that he was a leader or an active participant in a collective remonstrance in a prison or a remand centre ...”
Article 88b of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences lays down specific arrangements applicable to convicted persons to whom the “dangerous detainee” regime is applied. They are identical to those specified in Article 212b of the Code applicable to persons remanded in custody (see Piechowicz, cited above, § 106).