The case originated in two applications (nos. 29612/05 and 30668/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Turkish nationals, Mr Serdar Güler and Mr Savaş Kurtuluş Öngel (“the applicants”), on 3 August 2005.
The applicants were represented by Mrs Y. Yeşilyurt, a lawyer practising in İstanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 15 September 2009 the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the applications to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicants were born in 1977 and 1979 respectively.
On 29 June 2004 a large group of demonstrators, including the applicants, gathered in Istiklal Street in front of the Galatasaray  in Istanbul to attend the reading out of a statement to the press in protest against the NATO summit which was being held in  on 28-29 June 2004. The demonstration was organised by KESK (Kamu Emekçileri Sendikaları Konfederasyonu – The Confederation of Public Employees’ Trade Unions). A large group of police officers, all wearing helmets and gas masks and equipped with the necessary material, was also deployed to the area. Nearly 500 demonstrators took part in the demonstration and slogans were chanted against NATO. After the statement was read out by the representative of KESK, the demonstrators started to disperse. A small group of demonstrators, carrying the flags of their non-governmental organisation Halkevleri Derneği (Peoples’ Houses), walked towards the police officers who had blocked Istiklal Street to prevent the group from approaching Taksim Square. The demonstrators attacked the police officers with sticks and stones and the police officers used tear gas and truncheons to disperse the group. Some of the nearby shops and vehicles were damaged during the incident. According to the incident report, six police officers were wounded during the incident.
The applicants, who had listened to the press statement, were arrested during this incident. According to the applicants, they were beaten and insulted during and after their arrest. The same day, they were taken to the Bayrampaşa Health Clinic for a medical examination. According to the applicants, the doctor examined them in the presence of the police officers. A copy of the medical report is not included in the case file.
On 30 June 2004 the applicants were taken to the Beyoğlu Forensic Medicine Institute for a further medical examination. The doctor who examined the applicants concluded that both of them were unfit to work for seven days. The following findings were noted in the medical report:
–  Serdar Güler: Large bruises on the back of the upper left arm, bruises on the back, bruises on the shoulders and on the waist, bruises on the right shoulder, bruises on the left gluteal region, tenderness of the left leg.
–  Savaş Kurtuluş Öngel: Several bruises on the back of the left shoulder, bruise on the upper side of the right shoulder blade, bruises on the left and right sides of the back, a bleeding wound on the left elbow, a bruise on the right knee, bruises on the left knee. The doctor also noted that the applicant had a nose bleed.
The same day, the applicants were released upon the order of the Beyoğlu Public Prosecutor.
On 18 July 2004 the applicants filed a petition with the Beyoğlu public prosecutor against the police officers who had carried out their arrest. In their petition, the applicants complained, inter alia, that their arrest had been unlawful and that the police officers had used excessive force during and after the arrest.
On 2 November 2004 the Beyoğlu public prosecutor issued a decision of non-prosecution in respect of the police officers who had been on duty at the relevant time. In his decision, the public prosecutor considered that the force used by the security forces had been in line with Article 16 of Law no. 2559 on the Duties and Powers of the Police and had not been excessive. In the public prosecutor’s opinion, the injuries sustained by the applicants had been caused by a use of force which was proportionate. In delivering this decision, the public prosecutor had regard to the fact that after the press statement had been read out, a group of seventy people had not dispersed and had attacked the police officers with sticks and stones, also causing damage to nearby shops and vehicles. In the public prosecutor’s opinion, the force used by the police had therefore been proportionate.
On 29 December 2004 the applicants filed an objection against the public prosecutor’s decision.
On 13 December 2005 the  dismissed the applicants’ objection.
In the meantime, on 30 June 2004, the Beyoğlu public prosecutor filed a bill of indictment against eighteen accused, including the applicants, with the Beyoğlu Criminal Court and accused them under Article 32 of Law no. 2911 of taking part in an illegal demonstration without prior authorisation and of not dispersing despite the police officers’ warning. Five police officers, who had been wounded during the incident, joined the proceedings as intervening parties.
On 7 March 2006 the Beyoğlu Criminal Court acquitted the applicants of the charges against them. In delivering its decision, the Criminal Court had regard to a video recording of the incident, to witness statements and to the submissions of the intervening parties. The court found it established that the applicants were not amongst the demonstrators who had been carrying “Halkevleri” flags and had attacked the police officers. The court accordingly stated that there was no evidence in the file to support a finding that the applicants had violated Law no. 2911 or resisted the police officers as alleged.
Article 16 of Law no. 2559 on the Duties and Powers of the Police provides:
“The police may use firearms:
(a)  In self defence, ...;
(h)  if a person or a group resists the police and prevents them from carrying out their duties or if there is an attack against the police.”
Additional Article 6 (dated 16 June 1985)
“In cases of resistance by persons whose arrest is necessary or by groups whose dispersal is necessary, threat of attack or an attack, the police may use force to subdue these actions.
Use of force refers to the use of bodily force, physical force and all types of weapons specified in the law and may gradually increase according to the nature and level of resistance or attack with a view to restoring calm.
In cases of intervention by group forces, the extent of the use of force and the equipment and instruments to be used shall be determined by the commander of the intervening force.”