The case originated in an application (no. 13013/11) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Vasile Cantaragiu (“the applicant”), on 15 February 2011.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Beruceaşvili, a lawyer practising in Chișinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Apostol.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he and his brother had been ill-treated while in detention, as a result of which his brother had died.
On 16 December 2014 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Articles 2, 3 and 13 of the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1986 and was detained in Cahul at the time of the last observations made by the parties.
On 29 April 2005 the applicant and his brother were arrested and detained on suspicion of murder. In May 2005 their father was also arrested.
During his detention, on 1 November 2005 the applicant was admitted to a hospital with a diagnosis of “decompensated post-contusion syndrome”. He subsequently complained of having been ill-treated by the police while in detention.
On 17 May 2007 a prosecutor decided not to initiate a criminal investigation into his allegations, finding that no offence had been committed.
According to the Government, on 10 May 2007 the prosecution created a “verification file” (no. 78pr/07) in order to look into the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment. After the expiry of five years from the date of the review of those allegations and the refusal to initiate an investigation on 17 May 2007, the verification file was destroyed on 16 September 2013 in accordance with the relevant regulations.
On 30 October 2005 the applicant’s brother (a former junior judo champion of Moldova, who was 21 at the time) complained to the prison staff of headaches and pain in the epigastric region. During the night of 30 to 31 October 2005 urgent medical treatment was given to the applicant’s brother on several occasions.
At around 5 a.m. on 1 November 2005 an emergency medical team transported the applicant’s brother to a hospital in a comatose state. He died at the hospital on 3 November 2005.
On 29 November 2005 the prosecution initiated a criminal investigation into the possibility of medical malpractice, such as a breach of established methods and procedures, resulting in the applicant’s brother’s death. An autopsy was carried out. The resulting autopsy report indicated that he had suffered trauma to his abdomen, leading to a rupture of his duodenum. The prosecutor interviewed the medical personnel who had been in contact with the applicant’s brother in the prison and the hospital, as well as the prison staff who had transported him to the hospital on 1 November 2005. The doctors on the emergency team that had transported him declared that they had not seen any signs of ill-treatment on his body. Finally, the prosecutor interviewed the applicant’s brother’s co-detainees. He mentioned that, as a result of the various investigative actions, no facts had been discovered confirming the applicant’s brother’s ill-treatment.
On 25 September 2008 the prosecutor in charge of the case suspended the investigation on the basis that it was impossible to determine the cause of the rupture of the applicant’s brother’s duodenum. All the possibilities considered (medical malpractice, ill-treatment, self-mutilation or an accident) had been rejected as unsupported by evidence.
On 24 September 2012 the applicant’s father challenged the decision of 25 September 2008 before a higher-ranking prosecutor, who rejected the complaint on 21 April 2011. He then challenged both decisions before an investigating judge, who rejected the complaint as unfounded on 12 December 2012.
In the meantime, on an unknown date the applicant also made a complaint about his brother’s death, which was rejected by the prosecutor in charge of the case on 26 October 2011.
On 22 December 2006 the Ciocana District Court found the applicant, his brother and their father guilty of murder. In respect of the applicant’s brother the proceedings were discontinued due to his death. The judgment was upheld by the Chișinău Court of Appeal on 18 May 2007 and by the Supreme Court of Justice on 26 February 2008.
On 1 March 2010 the Plenary Supreme Court of Justice accepted an extraordinary appeal and ordered the re-examination of the case by the Supreme Court of Justice.
On 14 December 2010 the Supreme Court of Justice quashed the judgment of 26 February 2008 and ordered a rehearing by the Chișinău Court of Appeal. In its decision the court found that the applicant, his brother and their father had been ill-treated during their detention, contrary to Article 3 of the Convention. It relied on the strong presumption that all injuries caused to a detainee, in the absence of an acceptable explanation by the authorities of the origin of such injuries, were the result of ill-treatment. The court also found that the prosecution had not carried out an effective investigation into the allegations of ill-treatment made by the applicant, his brother and their father, and noted that the use of any evidence obtained as a result of ill-treatment was contrary to Article 6 of the Convention.
On 19 June 2012 the Chișinău Court of Appeal found the applicant and his brother guilty of murder. It discontinued the proceedings against the applicant’s brother due to his death and sentenced the applicant to twelve years of imprisonment. The court found the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment unfounded, referring to the results of the investigation (see paragraph 13 above). The applicant appealed.
In its final judgment of 9 April 2013 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the conviction. However, it added that the material in the case file proved the ill-treatment to which the applicant, his brother and their father had been subjected and that an effective investigation into the allegations of ill-treatment had not been carried out. Accordingly, the self-incriminating statements obtained from them could not be relied on in the criminal proceedings against them.