The case originated in an application (no. 27804/10) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Bogdan Ioan Bulea (“the applicant”), on 17 May 2010.
The applicant was represented by Ms Diana-Elena Dragomir, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained that he had been subjected to inhuman and degrading detention conditions in Bacău Prison. He also complained that the prohibition on leaving Romania imposed on him by the authorities had breached his rights under Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention.
On 17 January 2012 the application was declared partly inadmissible and the complaints concerning Article 3 of the Convention and Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention were communicated to the Government.
The applicant, Mr Bogdan Ioan Bulea, is a Romanian national who was born in 1973.
On 30 January 2003 the applicant was arrested and charged with several crimes. On 24 February 2003 the investigation concluded with the applicant’s indictment for fraud, use of forged documents and associating with several people with the goal of committing economic crimes.
On 28 August 2003 the applicant’s pre-trial detention was replaced by the Bacău County Court with the preventive measure of a prohibition on leaving town. Claiming that the prohibition on leaving his town of residence had prevented him from obtaining a job, the applicant sought to have the measure overturned. On 25 November 2003 the Bacău County Court allowed the applicant’s application and replaced it with a prohibition on leaving the country.
On 20 April 2004 the Bacău County Court convicted the applicant of aggravated fraud, use of forged documents and associating with several people with the goal of committing crimes and sentenced him to twelve years’ imprisonment.
The applicant filed an appeal, which was partially allowed on 22 March 2005 when the Galaţi Court of Appeal decided to send the case back to the Galaţi County Court for retrial on the merits.
During the retrial, the applicant sought the revocation of the preventive measure prohibiting him from leaving the country on several occasions, complaining that the unreasonably long travel ban had prevented him from conducting his business activities and earning a living for his family. He also argued that there were no reasons to suspect that he posed a flight risk. On 7 March 2006 the Galaţi County Court rejected the applicant’s application, holding that the severity of the crimes he was accused of, the significant losses to the State treasury which had been caused by those offences and the early phase of the trial justified the need to keep the preventive measure against him in place. The court further stated that the duration of the proceedings and the duration of the preventive measure imposed on him were also due to the complexity of the case, which involved numerous defendants and witnesses.
Similar applications for revocation of the preventive measure filed by the applicant were rejected with the same reasoning by the Galaţi County Court on 3 and 28 April 2006. On 19 September 2006 a new application by the applicant was again rejected by the same court, which found that the measure was still necessary given the significant losses caused to the State treasury, the complexity of the case and the fact that the measure had not been in force for an excessive period of time.
On 30 March 2007 a new judgment on the merits was issued by the Galaţi County Court, which found the applicant guilty of aggravated fraud, use of forged documents and associating with several people with the goal of committing crimes and sentenced him to eleven years’ imprisonment. The applicant was also obliged to repay to the State treasury the sum of 3,740,901,433 Romanian lei (ROL) which he had received illegally. The court analysed the necessity of the preventive measure prohibiting the applicant from leaving the country and decided to maintain it, considering that it was necessary in view of the severity of the crimes committed by the applicant.
The applicant filed an appeal against the judgment of 30 March 2007. During the appeal hearings before the Galaţi Court of Appeal, the applicant once again applied for the removal of the prohibition on leaving the country. At a hearing which took place on 8 October 2008 the court rejected the applicant’s application with the reasoning that, at this stage of the proceedings, given the fact that the applicant had been convicted by the first-instance court but also in view of his numerous attempts to delay the proceedings, keeping the measure in place was warranted. On 18 December 2008 the Galaţi Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The preventive measure imposed on the applicant was maintained, the court holding that the reasons for imposing the measure were still valid.
Both the applicant and the prosecutor filed appeals on points of law (recurs) against the judgment of 18 December 2008.
By a final judgment of 18 March 2010 the High Court of Cassation and Justice allowed the prosecutor’s appeal and convicted the applicant of aggravated fraud and associating with several people with the goal of committing crimes and sentenced him to ten years’ imprisonment. The obligation to reimburse the sum illegally received from the State treasury was upheld.
On 8 April 2010 the applicant started serving his sentence in Bacău Prison.
In his application form of 17 May 2010 the applicant complained that the atmosphere in the prison cell was terrifying and amounted to psychological pressure.
In his letter of 9 July 2010 the applicant complained before the Court that his prison cell was overcrowded, measuring 24 sq. m and having twenty-seven beds arranged in three-level bunks separated by a space of one metre. The applicant also complained that the cell only had one window of 1 sq. m and was therefore lacking in natural light and ventilation. In addition, he complained that he was being held in the same cell as very dangerous criminals.
According to an order of the prison administration submitted by the applicant, there was no electricity provided in the cells between 7:30 a.m. and 7 p.m., while between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. electricity was only provided for the security light.
The applicant was detained in Bacău Prison between 8 April 2010 and 15 July 2010.
Between 8 April and 3 May 2010 he was held in the intake area and was detained in cell no. 115, which measured 26.27 sq. m and had fifteen beds installed. The applicant shared the cell with a maximum of seven other detainees. The window measured 1.73 sq. m.
Between 3 May and 7 July 2010 the applicant was detained in cell no. 107, which measured 39.36 sq. m, had twenty-seven beds installed and which he shared with a maximum of seventeen other detainees. The window measured 2.78 sq. m.
Between 7 and 15 July 2010 the applicant was detained in cell no. 506, which measured 32.13 sq. m, had ten beds and which he shared with nine other detainees. The window measured 2.52 sq. m.
In respect of the hygiene conditions in the cells, the Government submitted that the cells each had a bathroom with individual toilets, showers and sinks and windows which provided natural light and allowed ventilation. The cells and the bathrooms were also equipped with an electric ventilation system.
On 15 July 2010 the applicant’s application for temporary release for three months was allowed by the Bacău Court of Appeal and he was released from prison on the same date.
Because the applicant did not return to continue serving his sentence after the expiry of the three-month term, on 19 October 2010 a nationwide search warrant for him was issued. On 4 November 2011 the warrant was extended to the international level by the Bacău County Police. The applicant remains at large.
A description of the relevant legal provisions concerning the rights of detainees, namely Law no. 275/2006, as well as the national practice concerning domestic remedies with respect to complaints of overcrowding in Romanian prisons are summarised in the cases of Cucu v. Romania (no. 22362/06, § 56, 13 November 2012) and Porumb v. Romania (no. 19832/04, §§ 41-43, 7 December 2010).
According to the order setting the required minimum conditions of detention issued by the Minister of Justice (Order no. 433/C of 5 February 2010, published in Official Journal no.105 on 15 February 2010), prison cells must provide a minimum space of 4 sq. m per detainee for detainees who are confined to their cells (including those in the “closed” detention regime).
Excerpts from the relevant parts of the general recommendations of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT), as well as its reports concerning detention conditions in Romanian prisons, can be consulted in Bragadireanu v. Romania (no. 22088/04, §§ 73-75, 6 December 2007).
In addition, in its most recent report concerning its 2006 visit to Romania, the CPT described the conditions in Bacău Prison as follows:
“Overcrowding remains a central problem in this prison whose incarcerated population amounted to 1,036 persons at the time of the visit as opposed to an official capacity of 456 places. (...)
The living space in practically all cells fell at a minimum of under 0.6 sq m per detainee, the maximum being 1.5 sq m; the beds (superposed on three levels) and the mattresses were barely enough and the ones existent were in a severely bad condition.”
Article 25 of the 2003 Constitution provides that:
“The right to freedom of movement is guaranteed within the country and abroad. The enforcement of this right is regulated by law.”
Article 136 of the Criminal Procedure Code provides the following:
“(1)  In cases concerning offences punishable with imprisonment, in order to ensure the good conduct of the criminal trial or to prevent the suspect or the defendant from fleeing during the criminal investigation, trial or during the execution of the sentence, one of the following preventive measures may be imposed on the person: (...)
(b)  prohibition on leaving town;
(c)  prohibition on leaving the country; (...)
(8)  The measure to be taken shall be chosen taking account of its purpose, the severity of the crime, the health, age, [and any] previous convictions or other circumstances [of] the person against whom the measure is to be imposed.”
Article 139 of the Criminal Procedure Code provides that:
“(2)  When there are no reasons to justify the maintenance of a preventive measure, it must be revoked automatically or upon request.”