The case originated in six applications (nos. 14097/12, 45135/12, 73712/12, 34001/13, 44055/13, and 64586/13) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by six Hungarian nationals, Messrs Lajos Varga, Tamás Zsolt Lakatos, Gábor Tóth, László Pesti, Attila Fakó and Gábor Kapczár (“the applicants”), on 1 March, 10 July and 14 November 2012, and 14 May, 2 July, and 1 October 2013, respectively.
The applicants were represented respectively by Messrs T. Fazekas, D. Karsai, A. Cech, A. Nemesszeghy and G. Magyar, lawyers practising in Budapest, and Mr A. Kovács, a lawyer practising in Szeged. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicants complained about their detention in overcrowded prison cells and the absence of an effective domestic remedy in this regard. They relied on Article 3 read alone and in conjunction with Article 13 of the Convention.
On 9 January 2014 the applications were communicated to the Government.
On 23 September 2014 the Chamber decided to inform the parties that it was considering the suitability of applying a pilot judgment procedure in the case pursuant to Article 46 § 1 of the Convention.
The applicants and the Government each filed observations on the applicability of the pilot judgment procedure.
The applicants were born in 1975, 1987, 1961, 1968, 1973 and 1984, respectively. When introducing the applications, they were detained in prisons in Baracska, Szolnok, Budapest, Sopronkőhida, Pálhalma and Szeged, respectively.
On 31 December 2013 the Hungarian prisons accommodated altogether 18,042 inmates (that is, an overcrowding rate of 144 %), out of which 5,053 people were in pre-trial detention.
Mr Varga
Mr Lakatos was held from 20 January 2011 until an unspecified date in the spring of 2012 at Hajdú-Bihar County Prison in a cell that measured nine square metres and accommodated three inmates including him (that is, three square metres gross living space per inmate). As of spring 2012, he was transferred to Jász-Nagykun-Szolnok County Prison where he has been held in a cell measuring nine square metres and housing four inmates including him (that is, 2.25 square metres gross living space per inmate). He claimed that at the latter facility there was no ventilation and the toilet was only separated from the living area by a curtain, offering insufficient privacy.
Mr Tóth was placed in pre-trial detention on 7 April 2010. On 10 April 2010 he was transferred to Hajdú-Bihar County Prison where he was held until 18 January 2012 in a cell of about ten square metres together with three other detainees (that is, 2.5 square metres gross living space per inmate). Only a curtain was used as a partition between the toilet and the living area.
He was subsequently transferred to Budapest Prison (Budapesti Fegyház és Börtön) where the cell in which he was held between 18 January 2012 and 18 January 2014 was about ten square metres in size; he shared it with two other inmates (that is, 3.33 square metres gross living space per inmate).
Since 18 January 2014 he has been detained with seven other detainees in a cell measuring 25 square metres (that is, 3.13 square metres gross living space per inmate). He claimed that the toilet is separated only by a curtain from the living area. The bed linen is changed only once every five or six weeks.
The applicant started to serve his prison sentence in 2009 at Márianosztra Prison. He shared his cell with eight to ten inmates and the surface available was 25.7 square metres (that is, a maximum of 2.86 square metres gross living space per inmate).
On 6 December 2012 he was transferred to Sopronkőhida Prison where his cell measures 6.2 square metres and is occupied by him and another man (that is, 3.1 square metres gross living space per inmate).
On 27 October 2011 Mr Fakó was placed in pre-trial detention at Budapest Correctional Facility (Fővárosi Büntetés-végrehajtási Intézet). On 29 April 2013 he was transferred to Pálhalma Prison, where he shared a cell with thirteen other inmates. Without specifying the size of the cell, he submitted that the gross living space per person varied between 1.5 and 2.2 square metres.
He had a daily one-hour-long outdoor exercise and spent the remainder of his time in the cell. He submitted that in 2013 the summer temperature in the cell rose to 40˚C because of poor ventilation. He asserted that he was allowed to take a shower once a week for no longer than five minutes each time. Furthermore, the cell was infected with bed bugs, lice and cockroaches, but the prison administration did not address this issue.
From 12 December 2006 Mr Kapczár has served his sentence at Szeged Prison. Throughout his detention he has been held in fourteen different cells. The size of those cells was 8, 12 and 24 square metres, respectively. The occupancy rate in the cells measuring 8 square metres was often up to three persons (that is, 2.67 square metres gross living space per inmate). In the cells of 12 square metres the occupancy rate was four persons (that is, 3 square metres gross living space per inmate). In the cells measuring 24 square metres it was often up to ten persons (that is, 2.4 square metres gross living space per inmate).
The applicant claimed that the toilets in those cells had been separated from the living space only some eighteen months ago, and their ventilation remained unresolved. Furthermore, some of the bunk beds had been welded together, so detainees were obliged to sleep right next to each other.
.  The Decree regulates complaints to be addressed to the governor of the penitentiary institution or the public prosecutor as follows:
“(1) Unless provided otherwise by the law, matters relating to an inmate’s detention shall be decided on – upon request or ex officio – by the head of the designated unit of the penitentiary institution in which the inmate is residing for the purpose of serving the punishment or measure imposed on him. In matters relating to his detention, the inmate may, without indicating the subject matter of his request ... request the head of the unit or the governor of the penitentiary to hear him in person, or may submit a written request.
(2) Inmates may file a complaint to the governor against a ruling, measure, decision or omission occurring in the context of subsection (1). Where the decision has been taken by the governor ... the complaint shall be examined by the commander of the national penitentiary department.
(3) Where, in cases specified under the law, the inmate’s case was decided on ... by the national commander, the complaint shall be examined by the Minister ...”
“In addition to the remedies specified under section 6, inmates ...
a) may directly turn to the public prosecutor in charge of the supervision of the execution of sentences and may request a hearing by the public prosecutor;”
Before the amendment of 24 October 2010, entering into force on 24 November 2010, section 137 of Decree no. 6/1996. provided that the allocation of prison cells should ensure that each inmate dispose of 6 cubic metres air space and 3 square metres (in case of male detainees) or 3.5 square metres (in case of juvenile and female detainees) living space. Nonetheless, as in force at the material time, section 137 did not provide for a legally binding obligation concerning this issue and regulated conditions of detention as follows:
“(1) The number of persons allocated to a cell ... should be determined in a manner that each detainee should have, in so far as possible, 6 cubic metres air space and, in case of male detainees, 3 square metres living space, in case of juvenile and female detainees, 3.5 square metres living space.
(2) The living space is to be calculated by taking into account the floor space of the cell reduced by the area occupied by furniture and other equipment.
(3) The size of individual cells ... should reach 6 square metres, if possible.”
.  This Act regulated the public prosecutors’ role in supervising detention as follows:
Act no. IV of 1959 on the [Old] Civil Code, in force until 15 March 2014, provided for compensation for actions impairing an individual’s personality rights if they caused him damage under the following terms:
“(1) A person whose personality rights have been infringed may bring the following civil-law claims, depending on the circumstances of the case:
a) a claim that the court establish that an infringement has taken place;
b) a claim that the infringement be discontinued and the perpetrator be forbidden from further infringements;
c) a claim that the perpetrator be ordered to give satisfaction by making a declaration or in any other appropriate manner and, if necessary, this be made adequately public by, or at the expense of, the perpetrator;
d) a claim that the prejudicial situation be terminated, and that the situation prior to the infringement be restored by, or at the expense of, the perpetrator ...;
e) a claim for damages under the rules of civil law liability...”
“(1) Anyone who unlawfully causes damage to another person shall be obliged to pay compensation. He shall be exculpated if he proves that he proceeded in such manner as can generally be expected in the given situation.”
“(1) Liability for damage caused by the State administration shall only be established if damage could not be prevented by means of ordinary legal remedies or if the person concerned has resorted to ordinary legal remedies appropriate for preventing damage.”
The Government referred to a judgment (see paragraphs 40 and 51 below) in which the Budapest Surroundings High Court examined claims for compensation brought by a former detainee on account of the alleged infringement of his personality rights. That case originated in a civil action brought by a Mr A.B. who argued that he had not received adequate medical care in detention, that he had been detained in overcrowded cells without the necessary personal space, that his freedom of religion had been restricted and that he had not received dietary nutrition prescribed for him.
In its decision, the court recognised the right of a detainee under section 84(1), read in conjunction with section 339 of the [Old] Civil Code, to lodge a civil claim against the detention facility for damage resulting from overcrowding and inadequate health conditions in a detention establishment. It held that the detention facility had acted unlawfully when it infringed section 137 of Decree no. 6/1996. by failing to secure 3 square metres space per inmate. The court concluded that the plaintiff had suffered, during his detention, a disadvantage not inherent in a sentence of imprisonment, on account of the aggregation of overcrowded prison conditions and the lack of medical care, and awarded him 250,000 Hungarian forints (HUF) (approximately 750 euros (EUR)) as non-pecuniary damage for the violation of his personality rights.
.  In further cases cited by the applicants, the domestic courts dismissed the plaintiffs’ actions and refused compensation essentially on the ground that the domestic authorities, in particular the detention facilities, had not been liable for damages arising out of conditions of detention.
On 17 October 2012 the Kúria held, relying on the case-law of the Court, that detention as such could not deprive detainees of other fundamental rights, including the right to dignity. It sustained the claim of the plaintiff alleging a violation of his personality rights on account of the overcrowded prison conditions. It found that the breach of the legal provisions on detention, in particular of those concerning living space, constituted an infringement of the plaintiff’s personality rights. Nonetheless, the Kúria dismissed the plaintiff’s claim of non-pecuniary damages.
In a case where the plaintiff was held in detention for ten days in conditions incompatible with section 137 of Decree no. 6/1996, the Kúria held, in a judgment delivered on 21 November 2012, that prison authorities had no discretion to decide on the admission of inmates and could not refuse any new admission on the ground of overcrowding. In the view of the Kúria, the sole fact that the plaintiff had been accommodated in a cell where the minimum living space could not be ensured did not establish the authorities’ liability.
In another case brought against Vác Prison, the National Penitentiary Department and the State by a detainee who complained about cramped living space, summer heat in the cell and the refusal to grant leave to use his own television, the Kúria found in its judgment of 16 January 2013 that the inadequate living space and sanitary conditions were in breach of the plaintiff’s personality rights. The court emphasised that one of the criteria as to whether or not to award compensation for a breach of personality rights was the damage actually caused by the respondent’s unlawful conduct. The infringement of the plaintiff’s personality rights did not in itself establish the prison facility’s liability for compensation. According to the Kúria, the prejudice suffered by the plaintiff had been caused by the deprivation of liberty itself and no such additional damage had arisen from the conditions of detention as to require the payment of non-pecuniary damages.
On 8 April 2013 the Kúria found for a plaintiff who alleged a violation of his personality rights on the ground that the prison had not ensured him the requisite living space and that the door of his cell had always been locked, although he had been in low-security detention, which had deprived him of free movement within the block during the day. The Kúria upheld the lower courts’ finding that the overcrowding did not entail compensation liability. Nonetheless, it awarded the plaintiff partial compensation on account of the fact that the door of his prison cell had always been locked.
In two leading cases, the Pécs Court of Appeal and the Szeged Court of Appeal dismissed the plaintiffs’ actions in damages on account of overcrowding. In the case before the Pécs Court of Appeal, it was established that the plaintiff, a non-smoker, had been held, during the period between 11 November 2004 and February 2005, in a prison cell measuring 21.66 square metres. He had shared the cell with up to 14 other inmates, some of whom had smoked despite a smoking ban.
The Court of Appeal overturned the first-instance judgment ordering the respondent detention facility to pay the plaintiff HUF 200,000 (approximately EUR 650) in non-pecuniary damages for a violation of his personality rights on account of overcrowding. It held that the respondent was not liable for the alleged illegal conduct, since the latter had occurred for objective reasons, and the respondent had no discretionary power to decide on the admission of new inmates.
The same conclusion was reached in the case before the Szeged Court of Appeal, where the plaintiff lodged an action in damages for his placement first in a cell measuring 25 square metres and accommodating 12 inmates and then in two other cells measuring 8 square metres and accommodating 4 inmates.
In a judgment of 20 September 2011 the Szeged Court of Appeal dismissed a claim for non-pecuniary damages brought against the National Headquarters of Penitentiary Institutions, the State, the Attorney General and Szeged Prison by an inmate held in the special security department for those sentenced to life. The court reiterated that one of the main criteria in assessing whether to award compensation for a breach of personality rights was the degree of culpability on the part of a respondent, which, in the given case, could not be established. It further argued that the term “in so far as possible” concerning the three square metre living space in section 137 of Decree no. 6/1996. (VII.12.) (see paragraph 13 above) referred only to what was desirable, rather than mandatory, in terms of the conditions of detention. It noted that given the lack of financial resources the capacities of the detention facility could not be improved and the management was not in a position to refuse new admissions on the ground that the facility was overcrowded.
As to the liability of the State, the court found that the State was to ensure the functioning of a number of sectors with limited financial resources, thus no fault could be attributed to it. Similarly, the court excluded the liability of the Attorney General on the ground that it had no jurisdiction over the material conditions of detention. As regards the remainder of the claim directed against Szeged Prison, the court dismissed it as unsubstantiated.
In a judgment of 4 November 2011 the Debrecen Court of Appeal established that although the plaintiff had been detained in overcrowded cells without adequate sanitary facilities, Hajdú-Bihar County Prison was not liable for the alleged damages since the overcrowding had been caused by objective reasons outside its scope of liability. The court held that no fault could be attributed to the prison administration since it was not in a position to refuse new admissions even when the average capacity of a detention facility had been exceeded. It also noted that the plaintiff had failed to substantiate any non-pecuniary damage requiring compensation.
In a case against Baracska Prison and the State, the Budapest Court of Appeal endorsed, in a judgment of 22 May 2012, the first-instance court’s finding that although the respondent prison could not ensure the requisite conditions of detention as prescribed by Decree no. 6/1996. (VII.12.), this had not been in violation of the plaintiff’s personality rights. According to the court, the respondent had proved that it had acted in a manner that could generally be expected in the given situation, since it had no leeway to decide on the admission of detainees. Furthermore, even though the plaintiff had been held in the period 13 to 18 January 2010 in a cell the door of which had been locked all the time, the impugned conditions were not of a gravity or length that would have resulted in the deterioration of the plaintiff’s physical or mental health, thus the infringement of his personality rights did not entail the payment of compensation. As to the liability of the State for damages, the court noted that there was neither a civil law contract between the State and the plaintiff nor any other special legal basis that would have entailed the State’s liability.
These conclusions were confirmed in the court’s judgment of 7 November 2013 concerning the claims of another detainee held in overcrowded prison cells between 8 March 2007 and 13 September 2010 at the same prison.
In a further case against Baracska Prison, the Budapest Court of Appeal held, in a judgment of 2 July 2013, that the placement of the plaintiff in overcrowded prison cells did not in itself entail the infringement of his right to physical integrity, health or dignity, and that overcrowding was an inevitable inconvenience of several people being accommodated together. According to the court, the cumulative effect of other alleged grievances, that is poor sanitary conditions, lack of baths and adequate diet did not result in any injury to the plaintiff’s personality rights either.
In a judgment of 11 April 2013 the Budapest Court of Appeal held that the plaintiff had been detained in conditions in breach of Decree no. 6/1996. (VII.12.) as regards the living space and sanitary conditions in prison. Nonetheless, it stated that it was not up to the prison facilities to decide on the admission of detainees and found that they could not be held liable for any breach of the relevant provisions on conditions of detention.
On 24 October 2013 the Szeged Court of Appeal upheld a detainee’s claim against a detention facility in relation to the failure of the prison administration to enforce the smoking ban in prison cells, to provide him with clothing and shoes, and in relation to the humiliating nature of body searches. The court dismissed the remaining claims, in particular the one concerning overcrowding, reiterating the same reasoning as in its judgment of 20 September 2011 (see above in paragraph 23).
In its judgment of 7 November 2013, the Debrecen Court of Appeal established that the respondent prison had infringed the plaintiff’s personality rights by holding him for the periods 21 April to 2 June 2008 and 23 June to 19 December 2009 in a cell not offering 3 square metres living space. It dismissed the plaintiff’s claim for non-pecuniary damage since the prison facility’s culpability could not be established in that it was not the fault of the facility that it could meet its statutory obligation to admit detainees only in violation of the regulations on the conditions of detention. In the court’s view, it was up the State to adopt the necessary legislation and provide adequate financial means to ensure the legality of the conditions of detention. The State’s failure to do so would entail its liability.
In three separate proceedings pending before the Budapest High Court, the judge requested the Constitutional Court to establish that section 137 of Decree no. 6/1996. (VII.12.), as amended with effect from 24 November 2010, was unconstitutional and in breach of international law.
On 27 October 2014 the Constitutional Court held, in decision no. 32/2014. (XI. 3.), that the prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment, as enshrined in Article 3 of the Convention and Article III (1) of the Constitution, entailed an obligation to guarantee to detainees held in multi-occupancy cells a minimum living space and space for activities that would ensure the respect of their rights to human dignity. Thus, in the Constitutional Court’s view, it was the duty of the State, in particularly that of the legislature, to regulate, in an obligatory manner, the minimum living space to be ensured to detainees. Given that Decree no. 6/1996. (VII.12.), following its amendment of 2010, did not contain any cogent requirements, it was found unconstitutional and to be contrary to international obligations.
The Constitutional Court declared the impugned legislation null and void with effect from 31 March 2015.
On 21 June 2012 the Commissioner inspected Márianosztra Prison in the framework of a project to enforce detainees’ fundamental rights. His visit focused on the conditions of detention, in particular the size of prison cells, health and psychological care, education, nutrition, reintegration, sport facilities and the rights of national minorities.
At the time of the Commissioner’s visit, the facility had a capacity of 444 people and accommodated 645 detainees, a situation resulting in 160 per cent overcrowding. Inmates were placed in cells measuring 910 square metres and accommodating up to three persons or in cells including two communicating rooms of 10-11 square metres each and accommodating eight persons. According to the report, these circumstances, aggravated by the fact that inmates in strict regime wards had very limited possibilities to move around within the building, were detrimental to the detainees’ right to human dignity and their physical and mental health. The report further noted that in the strict regime wards toilets were separated from the living area only with a curtain and the sanitary conditions were poor.
On 4 April 2013 the Commissioner inspected Sopronkőhida Prison. At the relevant time the prison facility had an overall capacity of 500, but accommodated about 800 inmates. According to the report, overcrowding reached the average level of 150 per cent. If holding more than 750 men, the prison made use of triple bunk beds and up to three inmates were held in single occupancy cells. Detainees were allowed to have showers once a week and hung their laundry to dry within their cells. In the Commissioner’s view, these elements infringed the inmates’ right to dignity.
On 17 May 2011 the Commissioner inspected Budapest Prison. In his report, he noted that the overcrowding reached 130 per cent, but was nonetheless below the national average. The capacity of the facility was 953 persons and at the time of the visit 1,248 detainees were accommodated. Detainees held in the “A” building were entitled to one hour outdoor exercises, while those held in the “B” building could use the outdoor facilities at all times during the day. Inmates took their meals within their cells. In the “A” building, not all the toilets were separated from the living space.
“10. All accommodation provided for the use of prisoners and in particular all sleeping accommodation shall meet all requirements of health, due regard being paid to climatic conditions and particularly to cubic content of air, minimum floor space, lighting, heating and ventilation...
In all places where prisoners are required to live or work,
(a) The windows shall be large enough to enable the prisoners to read or work by natural light, and shall be so constructed that they can allow the entrance of fresh air whether or not there is artificial ventilation;
(b) Artificial light shall be provided sufficient for the prisoners to read or work without injury to eyesight.
The sanitary installations shall be adequate to enable every prisoner to comply with the needs of nature when necessary and in a clean and decent manner.
Adequate bathing and shower installations shall be provided so that every prisoner may be enabled and required to have a bath or shower, at a temperature suitable to the climate, as frequently as necessary for general hygiene according to season and geographical region, but at least once a week in a temperate climate.
All pans of an institution regularly used by prisoners shall be properly maintained and kept scrupulously clean at all time.
Prisoners shall be required to keep their persons clean, and to this end they shall be provided with water and with such toilet articles as are necessary for health and cleanliness.
...
Every prisoner shall, in accordance with local or national standards, be provided with a separate bed, and with separate and sufficient bedding which shall be clean when issued, kept in good order and changed often enough to ensure its cleanliness.
(1) Every prisoner shall be provided by the administration at the usual hours with food of nutritional value adequate for health and strength, of wholesome quality and well prepared and served.
(2) Drinking water shall be available to every prisoner whenever he needs it.
(1) Every prisoner who is not employed in outdoor work shall have at least one hour of suitable exercise in the open air daily if the weather permits.
...
.. (2) The transport of prisoners in conveyances with inadequate ventilation or light, or in any way which would subject them to unnecessary physical hardship, shall be prohibited ...”
Relevant extracts from the General Reports prepared by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“CPT”) read as follows:
“46. Overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the CPT’s mandate. All the services and activities within a prison will be adversely affected if it is required to cater for more prisoners than it was designed to accommodate; the overall quality of life in the establishment will be lowered, perhaps significantly. Moreover, the level of overcrowding in a prison, or in a particular part of it, might be such as to be in itself inhuman or degrading from a physical standpoint.
A satisfactory programme of activities (work, education, sport, etc.) is of crucial importance for the well-being of prisoners... [P]risoners cannot simply be left to languish for weeks, possibly months, locked up in their cells, and this regardless of how good material conditions might be within the cells. The CPT considers that one should aim at ensuring that prisoners in remand establishments are able to spend a reasonable part of the day (8 hours or more) outside their cells, engaged in purposeful activity of a varied nature...
Specific mention should be made of outdoor exercise. The requirement that prisoners be allowed at least one hour of exercise in the open air every day is widely accepted as a basic safeguard... It is also axiomatic that outdoor exercise facilities should be reasonably spacious and whenever possible offer shelter from inclement weather...
Ready access to proper toilet facilities and the maintenance of good standards of hygiene are essential components of a humane environment...
The CPT would add that it is particularly concerned when it finds a combination of overcrowding, poor regime activities and inadequate access to toilet/washing facilities in the same establishment. The cumulative effect of such conditions can prove extremely detrimental to prisoners.
It is also very important for prisoners to maintain reasonably good contact with the outside world. Above all, a prisoner must be given the means of safeguarding his relationships with his family and close friends. The guiding principle should be the promotion of contact with the outside world; any limitations upon such contact should be based exclusively on security concerns of an appreciable nature or resource considerations...”
“13. As the CPT pointed out in its 2nd General Report, prison overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the Committee’s mandate (cf. CPT/Inf (92) 3, paragraph 46). An overcrowded prison entails cramped and unhygienic accommodation; a constant lack of privacy (even when performing such basic tasks as using a sanitary facility); reduced out-of-cell activities, due to demand outstripping the staff and facilities available; overburdened health-care services; increased tension and hence more violence between prisoners and between prisoners and staff. This list is far from exhaustive.
The CPT has been led to conclude on more than one occasion that the adverse effects of overcrowding have resulted in inhuman and degrading conditions of detention...”
“28. The phenomenon of prison overcrowding continues to blight penitentiary systems across Europe and seriously undermines attempts to improve conditions of detention. The negative effects of prison overcrowding have already been highlighted in previous General Reports...
In a number of countries visited by the CPT, particularly in central and eastern Europe, inmate accommodation often consists of large capacity dormitories which contain all or most of the facilities used by prisoners on a daily basis, such as sleeping and living areas as well as sanitary facilities. The CPT has objections to the very principle of such accommodation arrangements in closed prisons and those objections are reinforced when, as is frequently the case, the dormitories in question are found to hold prisoners under extremely cramped and insalubrious conditions... Large-capacity dormitories inevitably imply a lack of privacy for prisoners in their everyday lives... All these problems are exacerbated when the numbers held go beyond a reasonable occupancy level; further, in such a situation the excessive burden on communal facilities such as washbasins or lavatories and the insufficient ventilation for so many persons will often lead to deplorable conditions.
The CPT frequently encounters devices, such as metal shutters, slats, or plates fitted to cell windows, which deprive prisoners of access to natural light and prevent fresh air from entering the accommodation. They are a particularly common feature of establishments holding pre-trial prisoners. The CPT fully accepts that specific security measures designed to prevent the risk of collusion and/or criminal activities may well be required in respect of certain prisoners... [E]ven when such measures are required, they should never involve depriving the prisoners concerned of natural light and fresh air. The latter are basic elements of life which every prisoner is entitled to enjoy; moreover, the absence of these elements generates conditions favourable to the spread of diseases and in particular tuberculosis...”
“Considering that prison overcrowding and prison population growth represent a major challenge to prison administrations and the criminal justice system as a whole, both in terms of human rights and of the efficient management of penal institutions;
Considering that the efficient management of the prison population is contingent on such matters as the overall crime situation, priorities in crime control, the range of penalties available on the law books, the severity of the sentences imposed, the frequency of use of community sanctions and measures, the use of pre-trial detention, the effectiveness and efficiency of criminal justice agencies and not least public attitudes towards crime and punishment...
Recommends that governments of member states:
- take all appropriate measures, when reviewing their legislation and practice in relation to prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, to apply the principles set out in the appendix to this recommendation...
Basic principles
Deprivation of liberty should be regarded as a sanction or measure of last resort and should therefore be provided for only where the seriousness of the offence would make any other sanction or measure clearly inadequate.
The extension of the prison estate should rather be an exceptional measure, as it is generally unlikely to offer a lasting solution to the problem of overcrowding. Countries whose prison capacity may be sufficient in overall terms but poorly adapted to local needs should try to achieve a more rational distribution of prison capacity...
Coping with a shortage of prison places
In order to avoid excessive levels of overcrowding a maximum capacity for penal institutions should be set.
Where conditions of overcrowding occur, special emphasis should be placed on the precepts of human dignity, the commitment of prison administrations to apply humane and positive treatment, the full recognition of staff roles and effective modern management approaches. In conformity with the European Prison Rules, particular attention should be paid to the amount of space available to prisoners, to hygiene and sanitation, to the provision of sufficient and suitably prepared and presented food, to prisoners’ health care and to the opportunity for outdoor exercise.
In order to counteract some of the negative consequences of prison overcrowding, contacts of inmates with their families should be facilitated to the extent possible and maximum use of support from the community should be made...
Measures relating to the pre-trial stage
Avoiding criminal proceedings - Reducing recourse to pre-trial detention
Appropriate measures should be taken with a view to fully implementing the principles laid down in Recommendation No R (87) 18 concerning the simplification of criminal justice, this would involve in particular that member states, while taking into account their own constitutional principles or legal tradition, resort to the principle of discretionary prosecution (or measures having the same purpose) and make use of simplified procedures and out-of-court settlements as alternatives to prosecution in suitable cases, in order to avoid full criminal proceedings.
The application of pre-trial detention and its length should be reduced to the minimum compatible with the interests of justice. To this effect, member states should ensure that their law and practice are in conformity with the relevant provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights and the case-law of its control organs, and be guided by the principles set out in Recommendation No R (80) 11 concerning custody pending trial, in particular as regards the grounds on which pre-trial detention can be ordered.
The widest possible use should be made of alternatives to pre-trial detention, such as the requirement of the suspected offender to reside at a specified address, a restriction on leaving or entering a specified place without authorisation, the provision of bail or supervision and assistance by an agency specified by the judicial authority. In this connection attention should be paid to the possibilities for supervising a requirement to remain in a specified place through electronic surveillance devices.
In order to assist the efficient and humane use of pre-trial detention, adequate financial and human resources should be made available and appropriate procedural means and managerial techniques be developed, as necessary.”
“1. All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
Prison conditions that infringe prisoners’ human rights are not justified by lack of resources.
...
1. The European Prison Rules apply to persons who have been remanded in custody by a judicial authority or who have been deprived of their liberty following conviction.”
“18.1. The accommodation provided for prisoners, and in particular all sleeping accommodation, shall respect human dignity and, as far as possible, privacy, and meet the requirements of health and hygiene, due regard being paid to climatic conditions and especially to floor space, cubic content of air, lighting, heating and ventilation.
2. In all buildings where prisoners are required to live, work or congregate:
the windows shall be large enough to enable the prisoners to read or work by natural light in normal conditions and shall allow the entrance of fresh air except where there is an adequate air conditioning system;
artificial light shall satisfy recognised technical standards; and
there shall be an alarm system that enables prisoners to contact the staff without delay.
4. National law shall provide mechanisms for ensuring that these minimum requirements are not breached by the overcrowding of prisons.
5. Prisoners shall normally be accommodated during the night in individual cells except where it is preferable for them to share sleeping accommodation.
...
3. Prisoners shall have ready access to sanitary facilities that are hygienic and respect privacy.
4. Adequate facilities shall be provided so that every prisoner may have a bath or shower, at a temperature suitable to the climate, if possible daily but at least twice a week (or more frequently if necessary) in the interest of general hygiene.
...
1. Prisoners shall be provided with a nutritious diet that takes into account their age, health, physical condition, religion, culture and the nature of their work.
...
4. There shall be three meals a day with reasonable intervals between them.
5. Clean drinking water shall be available to prisoners at all times.
...
1. Every prisoner shall be provided with the opportunity of at least one hour of exercise every day in the open air, if the weather permits.
2. When the weather is inclement alternative arrangements shall be made to allow prisoners to exercise.”
From 3 until 12 April 2013 the CPT visited, amongst other detention facilities, Sopronkőhida Prison, Szeged Prison and Somogy County Prison (Kaposvár). In its ensuing report (CPT/Inf (2014) 13), published on 30 April 2014, the CPT noted the following:
“37. The Hungarian prison authorities indicated that action to combat prison overcrowding has continued to be a major issue. Indeed, the prison population has followed an upward trend over recent years: it stood at 18,120 inmates for the available accommodation of 12,573 places at the time of the 2013 visit, as compared with 15,367 prisoners for 12,566 places during the previous visit in 2009. In other words, the overpopulation rate doubled in four years (i.e. from 22 % to 44 %).
Several interlocutors explained such a situation by, among other things, stricter criminal policies, the underuse of alternatives to imprisonment and the failure to increase substantially the number of places in prison to meet the demand.
The delegation also learned with concern that, following a 2010 amendment to the rules on enforcement of prison sentences and pre-trial detention, the observance of 3 m² of living space per male prisoners and of 3.5 m² of living space per juvenile or women in cells (not counting floor space taken up by cell equipment) was no longer a strict legal requirement but more an objective.
Most of the delegation’s interlocutors, including senior prison officials, indicated that the situation was likely to worsen with the entry into force, in July 2013, of a number of new criminal provisions which may well result in an even higher number of persons being sent to prison and/or being imprisoned for far longer terms...
Not surprisingly, overcrowding was evident in the cells seen by the delegation (e.g. ten inmates sharing a cell of some 27 m², including the space taken up by the toilet, at Somogy County Prison; three inmates in a cell of about 8 m² at Sopronkőhida Prison).
At Sopronkőhida Prison, a large number of cells were already substandard for single occupancy (i.e. as small as 5 m², including the in-cell toilet, and with no more than 1.5 m between the walls) and were in fact accommodating two inmates ... It should be added that many inmates were accommodated in such conditions for up to 23 hours a day and for years on end.
In both establishments, the situation could be particularly bad in the transit cells where each inmate could have as little as 1.6 m² of living space for days on end, including at weekends (e.g. while awaiting departure on the following Monday).
The CPT recommends that the Hungarian authorities strive to combat overcrowding and ensure that cells are of an appropriate size for their intended occupancy at Somogy County and Sopronkőhida Prisons, in the light of the recommendations made in paragraphs 40 and 77. As regards transit cells at Sopronkőhida Prison, organisational steps should be taken to ensure that they are not used at weekends.”
In their response, the Government made the following observations concerning overcrowding:
“The CPT delegation’s position is that since their last visit in 2009, prison overcrowding has doubled – they made this observation based on the fact that the overpopulation rate (the rate exceeding the 100%) has grown double (from 122% to 144% in a national average). Such a presentation of accommodation can be misleading because – though mathematically correct –in superficial interpretation it could suggest that the overcrowding (that is, the number of the prisoners) has doubled. To avoid this, but still properly emphasizing the magnitude and the gravity of the accommodation problem it is recommended to specify that in the course of the last 4 years the overcrowding of the prisons has increased by a further 22%, to 144% .
The Report also notes that during the visits the CPT received adequate information about the causes of overcrowding, and about the method of handling it. It should be emphasized that the Prison Service is under the general obligation of providing accommodation, and it cannot significantly affect either the number or the temporal and geographical distribution of the admissions. The Government has worked out a new standpoint about subsequent adjustments with a view to long-term planning; by starting a new, comprehensive, multi-year programme for capacity expansion, and by placing the execution of the tasks of the Prison Service on new footing.
The aim of the programme is the uniform distribution of the additional responsibilities among the institutions. While agreeing with the fact that the programme is neither the sole nor the long-term solution, it should be emphasized that the work invested in it is not in vain, because it prevents much more serious – with the wording of the Report – problems than those caused.
The overcrowding “balancing” programme gives high priority to the principles of regionalism and individuality, the transfer of each prisoner is dealt with individually with the aim of not to weaken contacts with relatives, but the number of transfers should not increase significantly because of ensuring possibility to maintain contacts.
The CPT’s proposal, in which it recommends to increase the minimum size of the inmates’ living space, is currently controlled by suitable legal standards, which include regulations with specific figures concerning the airspace and sufficient room to be provided. Following the 2010 amendment to the Act, the Government clearly stated that they intend to take decisive actions to eliminate overcrowding, because accommodation cannot be provided according to the previous regulations with the present number of inmates.
At this moment the standards for minimum size of the inmates’ living space are regulated in paragraph 137 of the Decree of the Ministry of Justice no. 6/1996 (VII. 12.) on the execution of imprisonment and pre-trial detention as it follows:
Number of convicted persons in a cell or living space should be determined in a way that ensures at least 6 m3 airspace and if it is possible in case of men 3 m3 and in case of juvenile or women 3, 5 m2 space per person.
In case of determination of place for movement floor space occupied by objects that reducing fitting area should be ignored In case of single placement; floor of the cell (living space) should be at least 6 m2.
The concrete extent of the minimum size of movement area and also the minimum size of airspace should be determined in decree level in the future as well. However, the basic rules for placement is included in the CEP as follows:
Prisoners can be placed together but if it is possible, the prisoner shall be placed alone. The prisoners should be provided with sheets in a single bed and, this can be otherwise only in exceptional cases in the absence of other options.”