The application concerns the applicant’s alleged ill-treatment by police and the lack of an effective investigation into his complaints.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Ulyanovsk. He was represented by Ms Ye. Fetisova, a lawyer practising in Ulyanovsk.
The Government were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Government to the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by Mr M. Galperin, his successor in that office.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
At around 2 p.m. on 15 February 2004 the applicant was apprehended in his parents’ apartment, in their presence, by police officers of the Zheleznodorozhnyy district police department of Ulyanovsk. He was taken to the police station.
The applicant submitted the following account of events at the police station. At around 5 p.m. he was taken to an office, where three police officers physically assaulted him by beating him and stifling his breathing with a gas mask (противогаз). They demanded that he confess to the murder of Ms L. An investigator in the murder case, V.L., from the Zheleznodorozhnyy district prosecutor’s office, and the head of a unit at the Zheleznodorozhnyy district police department, A.T., were allegedly in the office next door and witnessed the applicant’s ill-treatment. V.L. allegedly went to the office in which the applicant was being tortured and told him that he would not have suffered had he confessed. The applicant denied committing the murder.
From 7 p.m. to 7.40 p.m. V.L. questioned the applicant as a witness in the murder case.
According to police records, from 8.20 p.m. to 9.05 a.m. the following day the applicant was detained at the police station for the administrative offence of petty hooliganism.
According to the applicant’s father, on 16 February 2004 he saw the applicant at the police station. The applicant had sustained several injuries. The father hired a lawyer, who insisted on the applicant undergoing a forensic medical examination, which was ordered by V.L.
On the same day the police officer S.R. took the applicant to the Ulyanovsk regional forensic medical bureau, where he was examined by a forensic medical expert. According to the expert’s report, the applicant explained that at about 6 p.m. or 7 p.m. on 15 February 2004, at the Zheleznodorozhnyy police station, three unknown persons in civilian clothing had punched and kicked him all over his body. He stated that prior to the incident he had not suffered any kind of physical assault or been involved in any fighting. He complained of a headache and of pain in his forehead, upper jaw and lips, as well as on both sides of his body.
The forensic medical expert reported the following injuries on the applicant: (i) a cut on the left side of the forehead; (ii) a scratch on the upper lip; (iii) a haemorrhage under the skin measuring 7 cm by 4 cm behind the left ear; (iv) an abrasion on the outside part of the left ear; (v) a bruise on the corner of the right eye; (vi) bruises on both lips; (vii) two bruises on the right upper forearm; (viii) two bruises on the chest; and (ix) various bruises on the upper and lower parts of the back.
The expert concluded that the applicant’s injuries had been caused by the impact of a hard, blunt object, between one and three days before the examination. Replying to a question from the investigator as to whether the injuries could have been received on the night of 13 to 14 February 2004, when L. had been murdered, the expert stated that that possibility could not be excluded.
According to the expert’s report, the forensic medical examination commenced at 11.20 a.m. on 16 February 2004 and was concluded on 18 February 2004.
According to the official records in the murder case, at 6.45 p.m. on 16 February 2004 the applicant was arrested as a suspect and at 7.05 p.m. he was questioned. He refused to give statements.
On 2 September 2004 the Zheleznodorozhnyy District Court of Ulyanovsk convicted the applicant of murder and other crimes and sentenced him to eleven years’ imprisonment. On 20 October 2004 the Ulyanovsk Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal. There is no indication in the judgment that on the night of 13 to 14 February 2004 the applicant had been involved in a violent fight with the victim (L.), of whose murder he was convicted.
On 17 February 2004 the applicant’s complaint of alleged illtreatment by the police officers was lodged with the Zheleznodorozhnyy district prosecutor’s office of Ulyanovsk. Other similar complaints were lodged later by the applicant and his father. The applicant alleged that the violence he had suffered included being subjected to stifling with a gas mask and having a burning cigarette pressed onto his hand. The applicant stated that one of the police officers who had tortured him was Officer S.R. He alleged that S.R. had spoken to the forensic medical expert, who in turn had not recorded all the injuries.
Investigators from the Zheleznodorozhnyy district prosecutor’s office, and later the Zheleznodorozhnyy inter-district investigation unit of the investigative committee at the Ulyanovsk regional prosecutor’s office, carried out a pre-investigation inquiry and, under Article 24 § 1 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”), issued a number of refusals to open a criminal case and carry out an investigation into the applicant’s alleged ill-treatment. They referred (in particular with regard to the refusals dated 21 September 2006, 8 December 2006 and 8 October 2007) to the absence of any evidence of a crime under Article 286 of the Criminal Code. Those refusals were revoked by the investigating authority and an additional pre-investigation inquiry was ordered on each occasion, most recently on 8 April 2011.
On 16 May 2011 the investigation unit of the investigative committee for the Zheleznodorozhnyy district of Ulyanovsk (“the Zheleznodorozhnyy district investigation unit” or “the investigation unit”) opened a criminal case under Article 286 § 3 (a) of the Criminal Code (“abuse of power” – see paragraph 48 below). On 5 July 2011 the applicant was granted victim status and questioned.
On 9 March 2012 a reconstruction of the alleged crime was carried out during which the applicant described the violence he had allegedly suffered at the hands of the police officers on 15 February 2004. He stated, in particular, that he had been kicked while lying on the floor. He had been punched, the fingers on his right hand had been bent back, and his breathing had been stifled by having a gas mask placed over his head, cutting off his access to air for two to three minutes. The stifling had been carried out five or six times. When he had tried pretending to lose consciousness, one of the officers had twice pressed a burning cigarette onto his right hand. The officers had demanded his confession to the murder of L.
On 10 March 2012 the applicant was questioned as a victim.
During identification parades, the applicant identified two police officers, S.R. and A.N., as the perpetrators of the violence he had suffered.
On 2 April 2012, following an order issued by D.Kh., one of the investigators from the Zheleznodorozhnyy district investigation unit, a commission of forensic medical experts from the Ulyanovsk regional forensic medical bureau examined the previous forensic medical documentation in the applicant’s case and issued a report answering the investigator’s questions. They stated that the number of alleged traumatic impacts was much higher than the number of injuries recorded, and that the applicant had no recorded injuries consistent with his allegations of having his fingers bent back, having a burning cigarette pressed onto his hand or being stifled. It followed from the injuries recorded that the applicant had received no less than fifteen blows from a hard, blunt object (for example, someone’s fist), including at least five blows to the head. The injuries had been inflicted between one and three days before the applicant’s examination by the forensic medical expert on 16 February 2004, that is between 13 and 15 February. It was impossible to establish the precise time when the injuries had been sustained. The experts further stated that the injuries to the head had been received more than twenty-four hours before the applicant’s examination by the expert on 16 February 2004; therefore, they could have been received on the night of 13 to 14 February and not on 15 February. The remaining injuries could have been inflicted on the night of 13 to 14 February or on 15 February.
On 5 April 2012 D.Kh. suspended the preliminary investigation in the case for failure to identify the possible perpetrators.
On 17 September 2012 the deputy head of the investigation unit dismissed the applicant’s complaint, stating that the investigator’s decision had been lawful and based on a comprehensive investigation.
The applicant lodged an appeal under Article 125 of the CCrP.
On 19 August 2013 the Zheleznodorozhnyy District Court of Ulyanovsk upheld the applicant’s appeal, finding the investigator’s decision of 5 April 2012 unsubstantiated and unlawful. In particular, the court noted that the applicant had identified S.R. and A.N. as two of the police officers who had physically assaulted him. The investigator had not looked into this fact and had not substantiated his conclusion that it had been impossible to identify the persons who had applied unlawful investigative measures in relation to the applicant. On 9 December 2013 the Ulyanovsk Regional Court upheld that decision in an appeal lodged by S.R. and A.N.
The applicant lodged a civil action claiming compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage in relation to the delayed investigation into his complaints of police abuse. On 10 December 2013 the Zheleznodorozhnyy District Court dismissed his claim on the grounds, inter alia, that the applicant had failed to prove D.Kh.’s guilt or a cause-and-effect relationship between the latter’s inaction and any suffering sustained by the applicant.
On 20 April 2012, under Article 24 § 1 (2) of the CCrP, D.Kh. terminated the criminal proceedings in relation to Officers S.R., A.N. and S.Zh. for lack of the constituent elements of the crime in their actions; D.Kh. also suspended the preliminary investigation into the case for failure to identify any officials who might have been responsible for the applicant’s ill-treatment. The investigator’s decision described, inter alia, the following investigative measures which had been carried out in the case.
The applicant identified, among others, A.T., the head of the criminal search unit of the Zheleznodorozhnyy district police department, who on several occasions had allegedly gone to the room where the applicant had been tortured and told him to confess to the murder of L. The applicant was “confident” in identifying A.T. and Officer S.R. (the latter as one of the perpetrators of the violent actions against him), and confirmed his statements during confrontations with them. During an identification parade, the applicant did not identify officer S.Zh. Later, however, the applicant stated during a confrontation that S.Zh. had also participated in his ill-treatment.
The forensic medical expert who had carried out the examination of the applicant on 16 February 2004 stated that the applicant had been examined in the presence of Officer S.R.
According to statements by the applicant’s parents, the applicant had had no injuries when he was apprehended in their apartment.
V.L. stated that in February 2004, as an investigator in charge of the case concerning L.’s murder, he had checked to see who L.’s acquaintances were. On 15 February 2004 the applicant had been taken to the Zheleznodorozhnyy district police station for questioning. In the course of his questioning, the applicant had displayed injuries on his face which were minor and barely noticeable and which he said he had received during a brawl with unknown people the day before.
On 27 December 2013 D.Kh., of the Zheleznodorozhnyy district investigation unit, ordered that the preliminary investigation be resumed and a request for its extension until 27 January 2014 be submitted to the deputy head of the investigation unit. The request was granted on the same day.
Also on 27 December, D.Kh. issued another decision, suspending the investigation owing to a failure to identify the possible perpetrators. He stated that it had been necessary to institute the criminal proceedings in order to carry out a proper investigation into the applicant’s allegations of police ill-treatment, thus allowing identification parades, confrontations, searches, seizures and expert examinations to be conducted which would not have been possible in a pre-investigation inquiry. Those various measures had been duly carried out.
D.Kh. ruled out the possibility that the applicant’s injuries had been caused as a result of the alleged ill-treatment.
The investigator concluded that all the investigative measures that had been possible in the absence of a suspect or accused had been carried out. However, it had not been possible either to refute entirely the applicant’s allegations that he had been subjected to prohibited investigative methods, or to identify the person or persons who may have inflicted injuries on him.
The applicant lodged an appeal under Article 125 of the CCrP against the decision of 27 December 2013 to suspend the investigation. He complained of the inaction of D.Kh., as the investigator, and of the head of the investigation unit, deploring, inter alia, the fact that the police officers S.R. and A.N. had not been charged. A representative of the investigation unit and some assistant prosecutors of the Zheleznodorozhnyy district prosecutor’s office submitted their objections.
On 19 June 2014 the Zheleznodorozhnyy District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint and fully endorsed the investigator’s decision, stating that all the investigative measures that had been possible in the absence of a suspect or an accused had been carried out.
On 11 August 2014 the Ulyanovsk Regional Court upheld that decision on appeal, stating that it was duly reasoned and lawful. The fact that the applicant had identified the police officers S.R. and A.N. as having allegedly physically assaulted him was considered to be insufficient evidence to open criminal proceedings against them. The allegations had not been confirmed by other evidence. However, the court found it established that the applicant had sustained injuries. The investigator had therefore been right in suspending the criminal proceedings concerning the alleged abuse of authority and not terminating them.
On 14 November 2014 a deputy prosecutor of the Ulyanovsk region annulled the decision to suspend the investigation and ordered an additional investigation.
On 9 December 2014 K.L., an investigator of the Zheleznodorozhnyy district investigation unit, refused to institute criminal proceedings against, in particular, the police officers S.R., A.N. and S.Zh. The investigator held that the applicant’s injuries could clearly have been sustained before his arrest and that his allegations of police ill-treatment had been false.
On the same date the investigator concluded that there was no evidence of a crime under Article 286 of the Criminal Code and reclassified the criminal acts committed against the applicant during the period from 13 to 15 February 2004 from abuse of power (Article 286 § 3 (a) of the Criminal Code) to battery (Article 116 § 1 – see paragraph 45 below).
The applicant referred to an incident of ill-treatment which had allegedly taken place in November 2004 at the same police station, involving another person. According to the applicant, Officer S.R. and one of his colleagues had tortured that other person in their office in the same manner in which they had tortured the applicant. In April 2005 Officer S.R. and his colleague were convicted of abuse of power. During the investigation of that case, the prosecutor’s office found gas masks in S.R.’s office. The case was reported on in a local newspaper.
Article 286 § 3 (a) of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, provided that actions undertaken by a public official which clearly exceeded his or her authority and entailed a substantial violation of an individual’s rights and lawful interests, committed with violence or the threat of violence, were punishable by three to ten years’ imprisonment, together with a ban on occupying certain posts or engaging in certain activities for a period of up to three years.
Battery (побои) was a form of assault causing physical pain without resulting in actual bodily harm. It was punishable by a fine, community work or up to three months’ detention (Article 116 § 1 of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time). The decision to initiate prosecution of the offence was at the personal discretion of the victim. The perpetrator of the offence had to be a physical person of sound mind aged 16 or over.