The case concerns the question whether a criminal investigation into a woman’s allegations of “stranger rape”, accepted as credible by the authorities, was sufficiently thorough and effective to meet the requirements of Articles 3 and 8 and of the Convention. In particular, the issue is whether the investigating and prosecuting authorities directed enough effort towards identifying who had committed the rape, or whether they failed to follow an obvious line of inquiry resulting from the DNA evidence in the case.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Haskovo. She was not legally represented.
The Government were represented by their Agents, Ms A. Panova and Ms V. Hristova of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties and as they emerge from the material in the domestic case file provided by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
According to the applicant and the conclusions of the prosecuting authorities based mainly on her allegations, at about 11.30 p.m. on 10 July 2013, when she was on a trip to Sofia and (following an argument with the friend at whose home she had been staying for the previous eight days, since 2 July 2013) seeking accommodation for the night, an unknown man to whom she had briefly chatted at a bus stop and agreed to follow to a nearby train station assaulted her in a poorly lit field on the outskirts of Sofia and raped her. He pushed her to the ground, covered her mouth with his hand, pulled down her trousers and briefs and penetrated her digitally and then with his penis. He then walked away.
At about five past midnight on 11 July 2013 the applicant called the emergency police number and two officers arrived at the scene shortly afterwards.
An investigation was opened immediately. The police inspected the scene and recovered four tissues, the applicant’s mobile telephone, receipts, a t-shirt, a polo-style blouse and a bag of antibacterial wipes. The applicant also gave them her briefs, trousers, blouse and shoes so that they could be tested.
The investigation was taken up by the eighth regional department of the Sofia police and the Sofia district prosecutor’s office.
The investigator assigned to the case immediately ordered a medical report to establish the extent of the injuries suffered by the applicant. A forensic medical expert examined her at 3.30 a.m. that same morning and found that she had traumatic injuries to her vagina consistent with her allegations of rape, as well as an injury to her lower lip consistent with her allegation that the assailant had covered her mouth.
The applicant was interviewed between 5 and 5.55 a.m. and again between 10 and 10.40 a.m. She gave a description of the alleged assailant.
Over the following four days the investigator asked (a) two forensic experts to test the items recovered from the scene of the alleged rape and from the applicant (clothes and swabs from her vaginal and anal areas) for traces of blood, hair or semen; (b) other forensic experts to test the applicant’s blouse and briefs and a swab from her vaginal area for traces of DNA; and (c) a psychiatrist and psychologist to say whether the applicant suffered from any kind of mental disorder and whether she was capable of giving reliable evidence about what had happened to her.
Four days into the investigation, on 15 July 2013, the police organised two successive identity parades, with four participants in each. It is not entirely clear on what basis the participants were chosen, but it appears that one of the men selected for the first parade, Mr X, who was born in 1977 and employed as a furniture maker, had been chosen because he lived in a lodging house located a few hundred metres from the scene of the rape and his features matched the applicant’s description of her assailant; the police had already arrested him on that basis on 11 July 2013. The applicant identified Mr X as the man who had assaulted her, adding that she had recognised him by his facial features, height and build. Mr X denied being the assailant, maintaining that he had been home at the time of the assault on the applicant.
The psychiatric and psychological report, filed nine days after the start of the investigation, on 20 July 2013, stated that the applicant, though not suffering from a mental disorder or an intellectual disability, could not give reliable evidence about what had happened to her because she had poor eyesight and a “querulous” personality, with a tendency to quickly pinpoint culprits without even being certain, in order to fulfil her desire for revenge.
The forensic report, filed two and a half weeks after the start of the investigation, on 29 July 2013, said that the applicant’s briefs and the swab from her vaginal area bore traces of human blood and semen. The applicant’s blouse also bore traces of blood, but it could not be determined whether it was human.
The following day, 30 July 2013, the investigator asked several mobile telephone operators to provide information about the calls made from six mobile telephone numbers of relevance to the case. The operators did so less than a week later, on 5 August 2013. It appears that this was necessary because the applicant had stated that, shortly before assaulting her, the assailant had been speaking on his mobile telephone.
No fingerprints were found on the applicant’s mobile telephone and, pursuant to a court order, it was given back to her in October 2013.
The DNA report became ready about five months after the start of the investigation, on 14 December 2013. It found no discernible traces of DNA on the applicant’s blouse and only traces of her own DNA on the swab from her vaginal area. By contrast, her briefs bore traces of the DNA of a man whose profile featured in the national police DNA database: a Mr Z, who was born in 1975 and had a previous conviction for an unspecified offence. No traces were found of Mr X’s DNA (he had been swabbed for a DNA sample when taken to the police station on 11 July 2013).
Meanwhile, on 5 November 2013 the investigator asked a hospital to provide information about cataract surgery the applicant had undergone in 2005 with a view to establishing the quality of her eyesight. On 13 January 2014 the hospital provided all the medical documents relating to her operation.
On 22 January 2014 the investigator asked the relevant authorities to establish Mr Z’s whereabouts. He was located and questioned on 11 March 2014. He said that he was a construction worker, that he had been divorced for eleven years, that he did not have a permanent girlfriend and that his work did not leave him with enough free time to have relationships with women. He also said that at the time of the alleged assault he had had no sexual contact and that he did not know the applicant. He added that at the relevant time he had been living above a Chinese restaurant in a neighbourhood about three kilometres from where the applicant had been assaulted, that he had finished work at about 10 or 11 p.m. and had gone home by bicycle, and that he had no recollection of being in the area of the alleged assault. He gave the number of the mobile telephone that he had been using at the time.
It appears that during that period the investigator also interviewed the caretaker of the lodging house where Mr X was living and the friend at whose home the applicant had been staying in the days before the incident.
In February 2014 the applicant requested that the case be assigned to another prosecutor, citing, among other things, delays in the investigation. In March 2014 the Sofia city prosecutor’s office refused her request, saying that there had been no unwarranted delays to date. The applicant appealed, but in April and August 2014 respectively the Sofia City appellate prosecutor’s office and the Supreme Cassation Prosecutor’s Office upheld the refusal.
In March 2014 the applicant asked the prosecutor to replace the investigator. On 10 April 2014 the prosecutor refused her request.
On 9 June 2014 the prosecutor instructed the investigator to carry out a fresh identity parade with the participation of Mr Z, hold a face-to-face confrontation between him and the applicant, question them both – specifically about whether and how they knew each other, what the nature of their relationship was and whether they had ever had sexual contact – and obtain a medical report on the applicant’s eyesight. It appears that in the past both Mr Z and the applicant had failed to comply with subpoenas, which prompted the prosecutor to say that they should be compelled to attend and fined if necessary. It appears that the investigator was unable to carry out those instructions because the applicant refused to comply with the subpoena sent to her and Mr Z was not at the address which he had provided earlier.
On 18 March 2015 the investigator asked the police in Haskovo, where the applicant was living, to request the applicant to attempt to identify her alleged assailant from photographs. The investigator reiterated her request on 4 May 2015, and asked the Haskovo police to obtain a medical report on the applicant’s eyesight with a view to determining whether she had been capable of properly making out her assailant.
That same day the investigator asked a psychiatric clinic in Haskovo whether the applicant had undergone treatment there. On 19 May 2015 the clinic confirmed that the applicant had been admitted there on 10 March 2015 and had undergone voluntary inpatient treatment for forty-eight days, until 27 April 2015, having been diagnosed with a delusional disorder. She had previously been seen by a psychiatrist for two years.
On 5 June 2015 a police officer in Haskovo interviewed the applicant on behalf of the investigator. The applicant said that she could recognise the man who had assaulted her. Before the assault he had been on the same bus as her, sitting on a seat just behind hers, and she had seen his face when getting off the bus. He had been about one metre seventy-five centimetres tall, of medium build, with short hair. He had looked about thirty-five years old. He had been wearing workman’s clothes, but she could not remember whether they had been clean or dirty. She had not managed to make out the exact colour of his skin or hair either. Nor could she describe his nose, eyes or mouth, as she had not been paying attention and it had been dark.
Straight after the interview the officer presented the applicant with a photograph album and asked her whether she recognised any of the four men whose pictures featured in it – one of whom was Mr Z – as her assailant. The applicant said that none of the men looked like her assailant.
Immediately afterwards the officer interviewed the applicant again. She said that none of the men featured in the album was her assailant, that she had already recognised him at the identity parade in July 2013, and that she would definitely recognise him if she saw him in the flesh. She refused to have her eyesight tested by medical experts. She admitted to suffering from eyesight problems, particularly when she was tired or stressed, but insisted that they were not serious enough to have prevented her from making out her assailant.
On 3 August 2015 the investigator asked a medical expert to state, based on the documentary evidence, whether the applicant suffered from any eyesight problems and whether they were of such a nature as to have prevented her from making out her assailant’s face and other features. In his report, filed three days later, on 6 August 2015, the expert said that although the applicant had had cataracts in both eyes, they had been surgically removed in 2005. There was nothing to suggest that she had had any eyesight problems since, or that she had been unable to make out the facial features of her assailant, particularly given how close up an assailant’s face would be during a typical rape.
On 23 September 2015 the prosecutor instructed the investigator to obtain, if possible, expert evidence about the approximate date on which the DNA on the applicant’s briefs had been deposited. The investigator asked an expert to indicate whether this could be done. In his report, filed on 9 December 2015, the expert replied that there was no scientific method that could be used to ascertain when biological material had been deposited on an item.
On 9 February 2016 the material in the case file was presented to the applicant by the police in Haskovo. This appears to have been done because the applicant had on several earlier occasions refused to go to Sofia to consult the material. She challenged the expert evidence and insisted that Mr X be charged.
On an unknown date in February or March 2016 the material in the case file was also presented to a lawyer appointed by the investigating authorities on an unknown earlier date to represent the applicant in view of her psychological vulnerability. It appears that the lawyer did not make any objections or requests; there is no information about whether he ever contacted the applicant.
On 11 March 2016 the investigator recommended that the investigation be discontinued, saying that despite all the steps taken to date, it was impossible to establish with any degree of certainty that an offence had been committed.
On 23 March 2016 the prosecutor of the Sofia district prosecutor’s office in charge of the case instead decided to suspend the investigation pursuant to Article 244 § 1 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 60 below). He stated that the applicant’s allegations of rape were consistent with the medical evidence – the medical report had confirmed bruises to her vagina and her lower lip – and that her statements about the way in which the assault had happened were sufficiently detailed and credible.
Nevertheless, despite the investigation’s efforts, it was impossible to come to a safe conclusion about the assailant’s identity. In particular, the applicant’s allegations in relation to Mr X were not credible. Her descriptions of the assailant’s features during her interviews and just before the identity parade had been vague and fluctuating. She had also said that she had been unable to properly see the assailant’s face, and at the identity parade had failed to describe any of his specific features. The psychological and psychiatric report had stated that she had a querulous personality with a tendency to quickly pinpoint culprits without even being certain, just so that she would have an actual person to blame.
Mr X had categorically denied being the assailant and said that at the time of the assault on the applicant he had been at the lodging house where he had been renting a room. That alibi was confirmed by the lodging house’s caretaker, who had been on duty from 5 p.m. on 10 July 2013 until 8 a.m. the following morning. He had given evidence to the effect that he had seen Mr X entering the building at about 10 or 10.30 p.m. on 10 July 2013, about an hour before the assault, and that he was certain that Mr X had not gone out after that. He had also said that the door where he had been on duty was the only possible way out, and that he had not fallen asleep at any point during his shift. The caretaker had no links with Mr X and therefore there was no reason to doubt his evidence.
Nor was there any physical evidence, such as fingerprints or DNA, putting Mr X at the scene of the rape, or communications data showing that his mobile telephone had been used nearby (according to the applicant, the assailant had been speaking on his mobile telephone shortly before she had been assaulted). There was therefore no basis on which to suppose that he had been the assailant.
The DNA traces recovered from the applicant’s briefs had belonged to another man, Mr Z, but the applicant had not named him as the assailant. He himself had also denied this, and the experts could not pinpoint the time when his DNA had been deposited on the applicant’s briefs and thus confirm with certainty that it had happened at the time of the assault. Nor was there any other evidence to suggest that he could have been the assailant. The DNA evidence alone was not sufficient to reach such a conclusion.
There was no reason to doubt the expert evidence, some of which had been challenged by the applicant. All the experts were recognised specialists in their respective fields, and had carried out their duties with due care.
In those circumstances, the evidence available was not sufficient to charge anyone. It was therefore appropriate to suspend the investigation and instruct the police to continue with their efforts to identify the assailant.
The applicant sought judicial review of the suspension of the investigation. She challenged the credibility of the expert evidence and the way in which the investigating and prosecuting authorities had conducted the proceedings and assessed the evidence, arguing that the prosecutor in charge of the case had failed properly to carry out his duties.
In a decision of 4 May 2016, which was not amenable to appeal, the Sofia District Court overruled the suspension of the investigation. It held that although the investigating authorities had taken a considerable number of steps, they had not done everything possible to elucidate the facts. In particular, they had not interviewed the police officers who had arrived first at the scene. It was necessary to do so and obtain any contemporaneous notes from them. It was also necessary to interview two witnesses – Mr X’s partner and a friend who had been living in the same lodging house as him – who, according to Mr X, had been with him on the evening of the rape.
On 10 May 2016 the prosecutor of the Sofia district prosecutor’s office sent the case back to the investigator with instructions to carry out the steps outlined in the Sofia District Court’s decision. On 7 June 2016, after receiving a letter from the applicant claiming that she had participated as a certification witness in an earlier identity parade relating to an alleged vehicle theft also involving Mr X, the prosecutor supplemented his instructions, asking the investigator to check whether any such parade had taken place, as it would have presumably tainted the results of the identity parade on 15 July 2013.
On 11 August and 19 December 2016 respectively the investigator interviewed the two witnesses who, according to Mr X, had been with him on the evening of the rape – his partner and the friend who had been living in the same lodging house as him. They both said that on the evening of the rape they had all arrived home at about 10 p.m. and not gone out until the following morning.
The investigator questioned Mr X again on 21 October 2016. He said that he fully stood by his earlier statements, and denied having taken part in any other identity parades.
On 15 November 2016 and 7 February 2017 respectively the investigator interviewed one of the first responders to the scene and another officer who had spoken to the applicant shortly after her arrival at the police station in the early hours of 11 July 2013. The officer from the station could not recall the events very well. The first responder said that when he and his colleague had gone to the lodging house, which was not far from the scene of the incident, the caretaker had told them that Mr X, who matched the applicant’s description of the assailant, had come home at about 11.30 p.m. on 10 July 2013. When interviewed on 30 August 2017, the officer’s colleague said that he had no recollection of these events. This prompted the investigator to question the first officer again, and in his second interview, which took place on 10 November 2017, the officer said that at his first interview he had not expressed himself correctly and that in actual fact he had not managed to find out from the lodging house’s caretaker at what precise time Mr X and his friend had come home. Only the caretaker could say more about the matter.
In the meantime, on 12 October 2017 the investigator questioned Mr X again. He insisted that on the evening in question he had gone home earlier than the alleged rape and had not left the lodging house again that night. He reiterated that this could be confirmed by his partner, his friend and the lodging house’s caretaker.
On 17 May 2017 the material in the case file was presented to the applicant by the police in Haskovo. She requested new DNA tests and another identity parade with the participation of Mr Z, even though she still insisted that her assailant had been Mr X. On 7 August 2017 the prosecutor refused her requests, saying that all the items recovered from the scene had already been submitted for DNA analysis and that it was impossible to carry out a repeat identity parade as the applicant had already seen a photograph of Mr Z.
On 2 April 2018 the material in the case file was again presented to the applicant by the police in Haskovo. The applicant requested that Mr X be charged and reiterated that Mr Z had nothing to do with the case. On 24 April 2018 the prosecutor refused the applicant’s request in relation to Mr X, saying that he would decide whether or not to press charges against anyone at the close of the investigation.
That same day the prosecutor instructed the investigator to interview four other police officers who had worked on the case and obtain their notebooks, if they were still available. He also asked the investigator to check whether an earlier identity parade involving the applicant and Mr X had taken place.
The investigator interviewed three of those officers on 21 May, 8 June and 3 July 2018 respectively. None of them could recall the events in question. The fourth officer could not be interviewed because he had moved to the United States of America.
On 26 June 2018 the investigator interviewed Mr X again. He said that he had no recollection of taking part in another identity parade apart from the one on 15 July 2013. When interviewed on 23 July 2018, his friend and neighbour also said that he had no information of Mr X ever taking part in another identity parade. The police station records made no mention of any such parade either.
On 24 August 2018 the material in the case file was presented to the applicant by the police in Haskovo. The applicant reiterated her request that Mr X be charged. On 4 September 2018 the prosecutor refused, saying that he would decide how to proceed with the case at the close of the investigation.
On 17 October 2018 the material in the case file was also presented to the applicant’s legal representative in the proceedings. He did not make any objections or requests.
In June 2018 the applicant complained to the Sofia city prosecutor’s office about delays in the investigation. It obtained from the Sofia district prosecutor’s office information about the course of the proceedings and in July 2018 dismissed the applicant’s complaint. It found that the investigation had not been unduly protracted, particularly given the complexity of the case. The applicant appealed to the Sofia appellate prosecutor’s office. In September 2018 it overruled the decision of the Sofia city prosecutor’s office on the basis that it was not competent to deal with the matter, referring it to the Inspectorate attached to the Supreme Judicial Council. In a report issued in October 2018 the Inspectorate did not find any problems with the duration or conduct of the proceedings.
On 17 October 2018 the investigator again recommended that the prosecuting authorities discontinue the investigation, saying that despite all the additional steps taken after its resumption, it was still not possible to establish with any degree of certainty that an offence had been committed.
On 6 November 2018 the Sofia district prosecutor’s office again decided to suspend the investigation rather than discontinue it. It opined that although the Sofia District Court’s instructions in its first decision to overrule the suspension had been pointless, because compliance with them had not led to the alleged rapist being identified, and they had also possibly been in excess of the court’s jurisdiction in such proceedings, the investigator had followed all of those instructions. Predictably, though, none of the new steps taken by the investigator had led to any fresh leads about the identity of the alleged rapist. It remained the case that the evidence available – including the statements of Mr X’s partner and friend and those of the police officers who had worked on the case – did not implicate Mr X and indeed even confirmed his alibi. There was still not enough evidence to implicate Mr Z either, for the same reasons as those given in the earlier decision to suspend the investigation (see paragraph 37 above), or to charge anyone else. It was thus still appropriate to suspend the investigation pursuant to Article 244 § 1 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 60 below), and instruct the police to keep up their efforts to identify the assailant.
The applicant sought judicial review of the suspension of the resumed investigation. She again contested the way in which the investigating and prosecuting authorities had conducted the proceedings and assessed the evidence, arguing that there had been undue delays in the investigation.
In a decision of 11 February 2019, which was not amenable to appeal, the Sofia District Court upheld the suspension of the resumed investigation. It found that throughout it the investigator had complied with all the instructions given by the judge who had first overruled the suspension. The evidence available still excluded the possibility that Mr X could be the alleged assailant, and no evidence had come to light to suggest who the assailant could have been.
The substantive criminal law in Bulgaria relating to rape has been set out in detail in M.C. v. Bulgaria (no. 39272/98, §§ 74-86, ECHR 2003-XII).
Article 244 § 1 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the prosecuting authorities must suspend an investigation if the identity of the alleged perpetrator has not been established. Their decision to do so is amenable to judicial review at the request of, among others, the victim of the alleged offence. The relevant first-instance court must examine the claim on the papers, and its decision is not amenable to appeal (Article 244 § 5).
Article 245 § 1 of the same Code provides that when the prosecuting authorities suspend an investigation on the basis that the identity of the alleged perpetrator cannot be established, they must send the case material to the police, the National Security Agency or the customs authorities, as the case may be, in order for them to continue inquiries in that regard. If and when the obstacle blocking the pursuit of the investigation disappears, the proceedings must be resumed (Article 245 § 2).