.  The case originated in an application (no. 49645/09) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Ms Angelica Camelia Bălşan (“the applicant”), on 4 September 2009.
.  The applicant was represented by Ms E. Medveş, a lawyer practising in Petroşani. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
.  The applicant alleged that she had been subjected to violence by her husband and that the State authorities had done little to stop or prevent it from happening again.
.  The application was communicated to the Government on 20 March 2014. The respondent Government and the applicant each filed written observations. On 12 May 2016 the President of the Section to which the case had been allocated decided under Rule 54 § 2 (c) of the Rules of Court to ask the parties to submit further observations on whether there had been a violation of Article 14 of the Convention, read in conjunction with Article 3, owing to alleged discrimination against women in matters concerning domestic violence.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Petroşani.
She married N.C. in 1979 and they had four children, born in 1980, 1988, 1992 and 1999. According to the applicant, N.C. was violent towards her and their children on numerous occasions throughout their marriage. In 2007, assaults against the applicant intensified during their divorce proceedings. The divorce was finalised on 6 December 2008.
On 24 June and 3 September 2007 the applicant was physically assaulted and threatened by her husband.
According to a forensic medical certificate issued on 28 June 2007, the applicant had numerous bruises on her face, arms, back and thorax, which required five to six days of medical care. A second forensic medical certificate, issued on 6 September 2007, stated that the applicant had an excoriation (scratches) on her ear lobe and several bruises on her arm and thighs. It was possible the injuries had been caused on 3 September. They required two to three days of medical care.
On 8 September 2007 the applicant was again physically assaulted by her husband. After the arrival of the police, she was taken to hospital by ambulance. She was diagnosed with an open facial trauma and a contusion of the nasal pyramid. According to a forensic medical certificate issued on 13 September 2007, the injuries might have been caused by impact with or on a hard object and required nine to ten days of medical care.
In their duty reports for the above dates, the police officers called by the applicant noted that she had been injured in a domestic dispute and that they had informed her that she could lodge formal complaints against N.C. In the report drafted on 24 June 2007, the police officer on duty also mentioned that when he had arrived at the scene of the incident he had found that N.C. had locked the applicant out of their joint residence.
On 3 August and 2 October 2007 the applicant lodged complaints with the prosecutor’s office attached to the Petroşani District Court, alleging that she had been physically assaulted by her husband in their home, in the presence of their children, on 24 June, and 3 and 8 September 2007. She attached copies of the medical certificates drawn up after the incidents.
On 28 August 2007 the applicant also sent a letter to the Hunedoara County police chief, in which she alleged that she had been the victim of repeated acts of violence by her husband, who often assaulted her in the presence of their children. She mentioned that on several occasions he had locked her out of their home and asked for help from the police in solving these problems.
On 11 September 2007 the applicant gave a detailed statement describing the three assaults to the policeman in charge with the investigation. She stated that on 24 June 2007 her husband had come home around noon and had started punching her in the face and head and threatened to kill her. She had managed to flee, but when she had returned an hour later her husband had refused to let her back into the apartment. She also mentioned that he had told the children not to speak about it.
In statements dated 12 September 2007, the applicant’s mother and brother told the police that throughout 2007 the applicant had very often come to their house, complaining that N.C. had beaten her, threatened to kill her or that he had locked her out of their apartment.
On 15 November 2007 the applicant’s and N.C.’s adult daughters, C.B.A. and C.C.A., told the police that the applicant used to drink and that she became aggressive when she got drunk. They also stated that their father had not hit their mother. C.C.A. mentioned that although she earned her own living, her father had always given her money. Her mother, on the other, had constantly been short of money and had debts to banks.
On 19 November 2007 N.C. was questioned by the police. He stated that he had argued with the applicant over their divorce, but had not laid a hand on her. He added that the applicant had not been cleaning the house properly and had a drinking problem. He also stated that “I did not hit her so hard as to cause her injury” and that “she may have fallen in the bathroom”. He alleged that the medical certificates submitted by the applicant had been forged.
On 13 and 19 December 2007 the applicant wrote to the head prosecutor of the prosecutor’s office attached to the Petroşani District Court, complaining that N.C., who had moved out of their apartment and had taken two of the children with him, had threatened to kill her when they had accidentally met on the street a week before. She stated that she feared for her life and asked for the proceedings to be speeded up and for protection from N.C.
On the same date, the prosecutor’s office attached to the Petroşani District Court decided not to press criminal charges against N.C. and imposed an administrative fine of 200 Romanian lei (RON) (approximately 50 euros (EUR)) on him. The prosecutor held that the applicant had provoked the disputes after drinking alcohol and referred to N.C.’s statements and those of the applicant’s two adult daughters. As regards the alleged threats, it was considered that the applicant had failed to prove her accusations.
The prosecutor concluded that, although N.C. had committed the crime of bodily harm, his actions had not created any danger to society, because he had been provoked by the victim, had no previous criminal record and was a retired person (pensionar).
The applicant’s complaint against that decision was rejected as illfounded on 25 March 2008 by the superior prosecutor.
On 21 April 2008 the applicant lodged a complaint against the prosecutors’ decisions of 19 December 2007 and 25 March 2008 with the Petroşani District Court, asking that N.C. be charged with bodily harm, be convicted and ordered to pay non-pecuniary damages for the suffering she had endured. She alleged that the administrative fine, which N.C. had refused to pay, had not had a deterrent effect on him as he had continued to assault her after the prosecutor’s decision of 19 December 2007. She also asked the court to impose criminal sanctions on him and requested permission to submit a recording of a conversation with N.C. in order to prove that she had been assaulted and threatened by him in September 2007. In the last paragraph of her submission, the applicant stated that she feared for her life and asked the court to “punish [N.C.] as provided for by law ... to forbid him from entering the apartment ... and to forbid him from coming near [her] ...”.
At the second hearing before the Petrosani District Court, the applicant applied to be given a court-appointed lawyer because she did not have the financial means to hire one. The court dismissed the application, holding that the subject matter of the case did not require representation by a lawyer.
By an interlocutory judgment of 23 June 2008, the Petrosani District Court decided to partially quash the prosecutor’s decision of 19 December 2007 in respect of the crime of bodily harm and the penalty imposed for it and to examine that part of the case on the merits. The prosecutor’s findings in respect of the threats were upheld. The recording was not admitted as evidence because the court considered that it had no relevance to the case.
The applicant and N.C. gave statements before the court. N.C. explained that on 8 September 2007 the applicant had been drunk and had threatened him with a knife. In order to defend himself, he had pushed her but he denied having ever hit the applicant.
On 10 February 2009 the court heard a statement from the applicant’s daughter, C.B.A., who testified as follows:
On 17 February 2009 the Petroşani District Court decided to acquit N.C. of the crime of bodily harm. The court considered that C.B.A.’s statement could not be taken into consideration, without mentioning any reasons for that decision. The court concluded as follows:
The court further dismissed the applicant’s claims for damages as
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law (recurs) against that judgment. She alleged, among other arguments, that N.C. was a violent person who continued to assault her, even after being punished with an administrative fine by the prosecutor on 19 December 2007.
On 12 May 2009 the Hunedoara County Court dismissed as illfounded the applicant’s appeal on points of law and upheld the decision of 17 February 2009. The court held that the acts of violence committed by N.C. had been provoked by the applicant and had therefore not reached the level of severity required for them to fall within the scope of the crime of bodily harm. For the same reason, an award for damages was not justified.
Between 19 February and 21 April 2008 the applicant made five complaints to the Petroşani police concerning new incidents of assault or threats by N.C. to which she attached medical reports.
In the meantime, on 27 March 2008, the applicant asked the Hunedoara County police to apply the measures provided by law in order to stop the constant assaults she was being subjected to by N.C. She stressed that she felt that her life was in danger. A similar request was sent by the applicant to the police on 11 April 2008.
On 29 September 2008 the prosecutor’s office attached to the Petroşani District Court decided not to press charges against N.C. for the five incidents described by the applicant. He was however punished with an administrative fine of RON 100 (approximately EUR 25).
The applicant’s letter of 27 March 2008, requesting the police to take the necessary measures in order to stop the constant assaults against her, was not taken into consideration. The prosecutor found that it could not be considered a formal complaint because, unlike the other complaints, it did not refer to a specific assault.
The applicant did not lodge any further complaints against the above-mentioned decision.
The relevant provisions of the Romanian Criminal Code in force at the time are as follows:
Administrative sanctions
Bodily harm
Threats
Law no. 217/2003 on preventing and combating domestic violence entered into force on 29 May 2003. In the version in force at the time of the events, Article 26 of the law provided for measures to protect victims of domestic violence. One measure was to offer shelter in special centres, while the courts also had the power to order the aggressors to be held in a psychiatric institution or undergo medical treatment, or to ban them from entering the family home. Protective measures could be taken at the request of the victim, or by the authorities or courts of their own motion. The law also provided that personnel specialised in investigating cases of domestic violence had to be appointed at local level by ministries and other public administration authorities. A possibility for the courts to issue a protection order was only included in the law from 12 May 2012.
Further relevant provisions of the law, as in force at the time of the events in the current case, are as follows:
Government Decision no. 1156/2012 on adopting a national strategy for preventing and combating domestic violence, covering the period 2013 to 2017, was published in the Official Journal of
Information published on the website of the National Agency for Equal Opportunities for Women and Men shows that Romania had sixty-two shelters for victims of domestic violence in 2017. Eight of the country’s forty-one counties had no shelter while most counties had only one or two. Four counties had three shelters, one had four while Bucharest had six, although they were not present in all of the capital’s six districts.
.   was adopted in 1979 by the United Nations General Assembly and ratified by Romania on 7 January 1982.
.  The CEDAW defines discrimination against women as “... any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality of men and women, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field.” As regards the States’ obligations, Article 2 of the CEDAW provides, in so far as relevant, the following:
In its thirty-fifth session held between 15 May and 2 June 2006 the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (“the CEDAW Committee”) made the following remarks in its concluding comments in respect of Romania:
The Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (“the Istanbul Convention”) was ratified by Romania on 16 March 2016 and entered into force on 1 September 2016.
The relevant parts of the Convention provide as follows:
The European Union
On 8 December 2008 the Council of the European Union adopted EU guidelines on violence against women and girls. The document describes violence against women as one of the major human rights violations of today and focuses on reminding States of their dual responsibility to prevent and respond to violence against women and girls.
The guidelines also highlight the following:
According to an EU-wide survey carried out between March and September 2012 by the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) 30% of Romanian women stated having suffered physical and/or sexual violence from a partner or a non-partner, while 39% of Romanian women stated having suffered some form of psychological violence by a partner. The report concluded that throughout Europe most violence against women is carried out by a current or former partner, with 22% of women in relationships reporting partner abuse.
In its 2016/2017 annual report on Romania, Amnesty International stated:
In a communication submitted in the context of the supervision of the execution of the Court’s judgment in the case of E.M. v. Romania (no. 43994/05, 30 October 2012), the Network for Preventing and Combating Violence Against Women (VAW), an informal grouping of twenty-four organisations active in the field of promoting women’s rights in Romania, stated that 91% of requests for a protection order between 2012 and 2015 had been made by women. In 2014 alone there had been 155 victims of homicide in situations of domestic violence, an increase of 32.5% on the period between 2004 and 2012.