The case originated in an application (no. 63955/00) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Kirill Yuryevich Sukhovoy (“the applicant”), on 8 August 2000.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms E. Liptser, a lawyer with the International Protection Centre in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions of his detention amounted to a violation of Article 3 of the Convention.
By a decision of 24 November 2005 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1982 and lives in .
On 6 January 2000 the applicant was remanded in custody on suspicion of having committed robbery. By a final judgment of the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Ivanovo of 26 June 2000 he was convicted of robbery and sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment. On 20 July 2000 the  upheld the judgment.
From 8 January 2000 to 2 August 2000 the applicant was held in pretrial detention facility IZ 33/1 in , also referred to as SIZO 33/1. He was first held in cells no. 50 and no. 53 and then, from 10 May 2000, in cell no. 42.
The parties’ descriptions of the conditions of detention in IZ 33/1 were different.
The applicant’s cell held thirty-five detainees instead of the eight for whom it was designed. As the number of detainees exceeded the number of beds the detainees slept in turns, having five hours’ sleep at most. Cells were poorly lit and ventilated and were infested with bed-bugs and lice. In many cells the floor was made of concrete. Unhygienic conditions promoted the fast spread of skin and other diseases. Food and medical care were below standard.
On 12 March 2004 the applicant’s lawyer obtained statements from two individuals, M and T, who were detained in SIZO 33/1 at the same time, from January 2000 to June-July 2000.
According to M, thirty-five persons were held in cell no. 82, in which there were 14 bunks. Therefore the detainees slept in turns. The floor was made of concrete. There were bed-bugs and lice. All the detainees were infected with scabies more than once. The only access to medication was if supplied by families. Bedding was also supplied by families. Three shower cubicles were made available for thirty-five detainees for a maximum of twenty minutes.
According to T, there were 14 bunks in a cell while the number of people was two or three times higher. Therefore people slept in turns. Medication was supplied by families. The cell was infested with bed-bugs and lice. The 20 to 25 minutes allowed for a shower was insufficient.
Following the applicant’s complaint about the conditions of his detention, the prosecutor’s office of the Ivanovo Region examined his allegations. Its letter no. 17-81-2000 of 16 October 2000 stated as follows:
“... In connection with significant overcrowding of the detention facility [IZ 33/1] at present, particularly during a period before July 2000, not all prisoners were provided with an individual bunk and bedding. At the same time, all prisoners under the age of 18 were provided with an individual bunk and bedding...”
The prosecutor’s office further stated that food complied with standards. The medical centre was sufficiently supplied with medicines. The premises were regularly disinfected. The conditions of detention were subject to the regional prosecutor’s monthly inspections to ensure their compliance with statutory standards.
According to the Government, cell no. 50 measured 29.4 square metres and had 12 beds, cell no. 53 measured 22.6 sq. m and had 10 beds and cell no. 42 measured 20.46 sq. m and had 16 beds.
The average number of detainees in the facility was 1311 while its maximum accommodation capacity was 1030 detainees. The average living space per person was about 3.14 sq. m. The statutory standard of four sq. m. per person could not be complied with during the period in question for reasons beyond the prison administration’s control. The exact number of inmates could not be established because the relevant documents had been destroyed after the expiry of the time-limit for their storage.
All juvenile detainees had an individual bed and bedding. They had at least two hours’ daily exercise outside their cells and access to bathing facilities for 15 to 20 minutes a week.
The sanitary condition of the cells was satisfactory. They were cleaned daily and disinfected weekly. Natural and electrical lighting complied with standards. Clothing and bedding were regularly subjected to disinfection treatment. No infectious or parasitic diseases were registered in the cells in question.