The case originated in an application (no. 6887/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Russian nationals, Mr Eldar Nasrula oglu Imanov (“the first applicant”) and his brother Mr Azhdar Nasurulla oglu Imanov (“the second applicant”), on 4 February 2002.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were initially represented by Mr Z. Babayev and subsequently by Mr N. Abdullayev, lawyers practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev and Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representatives of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been ill-treated by the police, that the investigation into their allegations of ill-treatment had been inadequate and ineffective and that they had been detained in inhuman conditions.
On 6 February 2007 the President of the First Section decided to communicate the above complaints to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicants were born in 1953 and 1962 respectively and live in .
According to the applicants, on 5 September 1998 at about 4 p.m. the police entered their house, searched it and seized their belongings. The police officers searched the applicants, handcuffed them and took them into the police car. On the way to the car the police officers allegedly struck the applicants on the neck and back with gun butts and shouted obscene words at them. The police officers also aimed their guns at the applicants and shouted that “all dark-faced Caucasians should be killed”. The applicants were taken to  police station no. 1. They were not informed about the reasons for their arrest.
The first applicant was held at  police station no. 1 for more than twenty-four hours. He was allegedly not given any food or drink, and was not allowed to go to the toilet or sleep. The police officers hit him several times on the neck and threatened to kill him. On 6 September 1998 he was placed in a temporary detention centre.
As to the second applicant, three hours after the arrest he was transferred to  police station no. 4. On the way there the police officers allegedly beat him on the head many times. In the morning of 6 September 1998 the second applicant was transferred to  police station no. 3, where he was held until the next morning. He was not allowed to sleep and was not given any food. On 7 September 1998 the second applicant was placed in a temporary detention centre.
According to the Government, the applicants were arrested on 6 September 1998. On the same day they were placed in the temporary detention centre of .
On 9 September 1998 the prosecutor of  authorised the applicants’ detention.
On 15 or 16 September 1998 the applicants were charged with the attempted murder of the mayor of .
During the investigation the applicants were allegedly repeatedly illtreated by police officers, who sought to make them confess. In particular, the officers threatened to kill the applicants and their relatives. They kicked the first applicant in the stomach and kidneys, put a gas-mask on him and made him inhale cigarette smoke, put plastic bags on his head and blocked access to the air until he fainted, and raped him with a truncheon. The first applicant alleged that as a result of the ill-treatment his ears had bled and he had urinated blood.
The second applicant contended that the police officers had beaten him on the head, and in the stomach and kidneys, put a plastic bag on him and suffocated him, put him handcuffed on the floor and stepped on his back. They had also put a gas-mask on him and made him inhale cigarette smoke. On several occasions in September 1998 the police officers had blindfolded him and put him on the floor of a police car. The police officer Mr Sh. had pushed his head against the floor with his feet. He had been taken to a cemetery where the police officers ill-treated him and threatened to kill him. They had put a gun against his head and shot blanks.
On 14 September 1998 the second applicant was taken to  police station no. 1, where he was allegedly beaten up by four drunken police officers until he lost consciousness. They also threatened to sodomise him with a truncheon.
On 15 and 17 September 1998 the applicants confessed to the attempted murder. However, once questioned in the presence of counsel they retracted their confessions.
On 25 December 2001 the applicants were released on an undertaking not to leave the town.
On 13 August 2002 the criminal proceedings against the applicants were discontinued. The investigator noted that the confessions had been given without the benefit of legal assistance and that the applicants had complained about ill-treatment. As they had indeed received injuries during the investigation, their confessions were not reliable evidence. There was no other evidence against them.
The first applicant submitted his medical records from remand centre no. IZ-68/5 of .
It appears from the records that upon his arrival at the remand centre on 6 October 1998 the first applicant was examined by a doctor. The doctor found no injuries.
On 19 October 1998 the first applicant complained to the facility doctor about headaches, aches in his left wrist, wrist swelling and a hearing impediment. He also repeatedly complained about his aching spine.
On 5 April 1999 the first applicant was X-rayed. The examination revealed that he had a deformed spinal disc, possibly as a result of trauma.
On the same day the doctors noted old abrasions on the first applicant’s wrists, oedema of the wrists and fingers, and a sprained left wrist. He was diagnosed with a post-traumatic spinal osteochondrosis and periarthritis of the shoulder joint.
On 4 July 2001 the first applicant was diagnosed with post-traumatic spondylitis (inflammation of a spine vertebra ).
In January 2002, after his release, the first applicant was examined by doctors who diagnosed him with a post-traumatic cataract, post-traumatic arthritis of the left wrist, and deformation of a spinal disc, possibly of traumatic origin. They also suspected a wrist fracture.
It appears from the second applicant’s medical records that on 30 October 1998 he arrived at remand centre no. IZ-68/5 of . He was examined by a doctor, who found no injuries. He was again examined on 8 December 1998 and on an unspecified date in February 1999. No injuries were noted.
Between 1999 and 2002 the applicant regularly complained to the facility doctor about headaches and dizziness. His medical records do not contain any indications that those symptoms were of traumatic origin.
In January 2002, after the release, the second applicant was diagnosed with post-traumatic encephalopathy (a brain disease).
On an unspecified date the first applicant asked the prosecutor’s office of  to initiate criminal proceedings against the police officers who had ill-treated him.
On 19 October 1998 the first applicant was examined by a medical expert. The expert noted a bruise on his right knee, abrasions on his forehead, right knee and wrists, sprained fingers on both hands, and a left shoulder sprain.
On 20 November 1998 the prosecutor’s office of  refused to initiate criminal proceedings. Despite his repeated requests, the applicant was not served with a copy of the decision.
On 11 June 1999 the prosecutor’s office of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region set aside the decision of 20 November 1998 and ordered an additional inquiry.
On 25 June 1999 the prosecutor’s office of  refused to initiate criminal proceedings. The parties did not submit a copy of that decision.
On 20 August 1999 the first applicant was examined by a medical expert, who found no traces of ill-treatment.
Between 1999 and 2002 the first applicant filed many complaints with prosecutors of different levels describing the details of the ill-treatment and the injuries sustained. In particular, he complained about his sprained left arm and aching spine. He asked to initiate criminal proceedings against the head of the  police station, his deputy and the subordinate police officers.
In October 2002 the Interior Department of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region conducted an internal inquiry. The investigator questioned one of the police officers of the  police station, who denied beating the first applicant. It was not possible to interview the other police officers who had arrested and questioned the applicant, as they had been dismissed from the police and moved to another region of . Nor was it possible to question the head of the  police station or his deputy as they were on annual leave.
The investigator also questioned the first applicant’s co-detainees, who testified that they had seen marks of beatings on the first applicant’s body and heard him complaining of ill-treatment. One of the warders of the temporary detention centre in which the first applicant had been held also stated that he had seen numerous bruises on the first applicant’s skin.
On 23 October 2002 the Interior Department of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region found that the evidence was contradictory and that an investigation and a medical expert’s examination were necessary to verify the first applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment. The materials of the inquiry were forwarded to the prosecutor’s office of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region.
On 26 October 2002 the prosecutor’s office of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region refused to initiate criminal proceedings with reference to the decision of 25 June 1999. The prosecutor noted that the first applicant had not submitted any new information.
The applicant complained to the Prosecutor General of the .
By letter of 9 January 2003 the Prosecutor General’s office informed the applicant that the decision of 26 October 2002 had been set aside and that criminal proceedings had been opened.
On 26 May 2003 the prosecutor’s office of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region recognised the first applicant as a victim. In his decision the prosecutor noted that “the inquiry had established that [the first applicant] had indeed been subjected to violence during the investigation in criminal case no... in which he had been a defendant”.
On 5 June 2003 the criminal proceedings were suspended because it was not possible to identify the perpetrators.
The first applicant complained about that decision to the prosecutor’s office of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region. On 9 March 2007 a deputy prosecutor of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region confirmed the decision, finding that it had been lawful.
According to the second applicant, from the date of his arrest and until 8 February 1999 he had no access to legal assistance and was not allowed to send any correspondence. He was therefore prevented from lodging a complaint about ill-treatment. From February 1999 onwards he repeatedly complained about ill-treatment to the prosecutor’s office of . He described the details of the ill-treatment and named the police officers who had beaten him. He asked the prosecutor’s office to appoint a medical expert to examine him and to initiate criminal proceedings against the police officers. Copies of those complaints were seized by the detention facility officials in April 1999.
In reply to the second applicant’s complaints, on 24 February 1999 the prosecutor’s office of  ordered a medical expert’s examination.
On 6 and 7 May 1999 the second applicant was examined by medical experts, who found no traces of ill-treatment.
By letter of 28 May 1999, the prosecutor’s office of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region informed the applicant that an inquiry had not revealed any evidence of ill-treatment.
On 10 November 1999 the prosecutor’s office of  refused to initiate criminal proceedings. The parties did not submit a copy of that decision.
The second applicant continued to complain about ill-treatment to the prosecutor’s officers at various levels.
On 29 June 2003 the  prosecutor’s office for a second time refused to initiate criminal proceedings concerning the second applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment. The prosecutor noted that the second applicant had had no injuries and the police officers in charge of the criminal case against him had denied beating him.
The second applicant challenged the decision before the . He complained that the prosecutor’s office of  had not questioned his co-detainees who had seen marks of beatings on him.
By letter of 1 September 2003, the prosecutor’s office of the KhantyMansiysk Region informed the second applicant that the decision of 29 June 2003 had been set aside and an additional inquiry had been ordered and that the second applicant was not entitled to receive information about the outcome of the inquiry as his procedural status was that of a witness.
According to the Government, between 5 September 1998 and 25 December 2001 the applicants were repeatedly transferred between the temporary detention centre of  and remand centre no. IZ86/1 in . It was not possible to establish the periods of their detention in each of those facilities, as the registers for that period had been destroyed on expiry of the statutory storage time-limit. For the same reasons it was not possible to describe in detail the conditions of detention in each cell. The Government, however, submitted certain documents outlining the general conditions of detention in each of those facilities.
It appears from an undated report by the Ministry of the Interior, submitted by the Government, that the applicants were intermittently held at the temporary detention centre of  in 1998 and 1999. They were detained in cells nos. 4 and 8. Cell no. 4 measured 6.5 sq. m and housed two to three inmates, while cell no. 8 measured 13.6 sq. m and housed ten to eleven inmates. The cells were not equipped with a lavatory bowl and had no running water. There was forced ventilation and central heating in the cells. The average temperature inside was 19 to 21ºC. The lighting level met the statutory norms. Inmates were provided with bedding, tableware, food and drinking water. The cells were cleaned every day. Inmates took daily outdoor exercise. The temporary detention centre had a medical unit. It was not possible to establish whether the applicants received medical treatment because the medical records had been destroyed on expiry of the statutory storage time-limit. The report stated, in conclusion, that the conditions of the applicants’ detention did not meet the requirements of the Detention of Suspects Act.
The same information is contained in the report of 19 April 2007 prepared by the Interior Department of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region and produced by the Government.
Further, it appears from sanitary inspection reports of 1998, 2000 and 2007 submitted by the Government that the temporary detention centre of  did not meet the statutory sanitary norms. In particular, it was overcrowded and the number of bunks was insufficient, the inmates were not provided with clean bedding, the lighting level was below the statutory minimum, two showers out of the three available were out of order, the walls were shabby, the cells were not equipped with wash basins, the ventilation was insufficient and the disinfection was irregular.
The Government also produced a certificate issued by the head of the temporary detention centre of  on 16 April 2007. The certificate indicates that the temporary detention centre is always overpopulated. Although the designed capacity is for thirty-four persons, the temporary detention centre houses fifty inmates on average. The cells have no running water and are not equipped with lavatory bowls. Inmates use aluminium cans to relieve themselves. The cans are emptied every morning into a pit in the walking yard.
Finally, the Government submitted black and white photographs of cells nos. 4 and 8. The photographs show bare concrete walls and windows covered with thick metal grills and shielded by wooden plates. Cell no. 4. has two two-tier wooden beds with mattresses. Cell no. 8 has a plank bed covered with blankets which occupies the entire cell with the exception of a narrow passage of about 0.5 m in width. Both cells have shelves with tableware. There are also large aluminium cans in the cells. No other equipment is visible.
According to certificates of 14 September 2007 issued by the remand centre management and produced by the Government, the first applicant was held in cells nos. 4 and 6, while the second applicant was held in cells nos. 26, 27, 30 and 31. Cell no. 4 measured 17.3 sq. m and housed four inmates on average. Cell no. 6 measured 21.5 sq. m and housed five inmates on average. Cell no. 26 measured 18.2 sq. m and housed four inmates on average. Cell no. 27 measured 17.8 sq. m and housed four inmates on average. Cell no. 3 measured 15.8 sq. m and housed four inmates on average. Cell no. 31 measured 14.1 sq. m and housed three inmates on average. It was not possible to submit confirming documents as they had been destroyed on expiry of the statutory storage time-limit.
It can be seen from the same certificates that inmates suffering from contagious diseases were held separately from healthy inmates. All inmates had separate bunks and were provided with bedding and tableware. Inmates were allowed to take a shower once a week and had an hour-long daily walk. They were provided with hot food three times a day. They were also supplied with drinking water. They received adequate medical care on demand. All cells were equipped with forced ventilation. Inmates could also open the windows to air the cells. The cells were sufficiently lit by electric lamps. There was a lavatory bowl and cold-water taps in each cell. The lavatory bowls were separated from the living area by a partition. All cells had central heating. The average inside temperature was 18 to 25ºC. Inmates were allowed to have two family visits per month. The above information was confirmed by written affidavits of 14 September 2007 by the remand centre officials.
According to the applicants, they were repeatedly held at the temporary detention centre of  for long periods of time. They were held together with detainees suffering from tuberculosis, HIV and other contagious diseases. Food was distributed once a day. No medical assistance was provided. During the entire detention period the relatives were not allowed to visit the applicants. They were also prohibited from going outside into the exercise yard. Their sister complained to the prosecutor’s office of  about the ban on visits and on outdoor exercise. By letters of 15 December 1998 and 23 March 1999, a deputy prosecutor of  confirmed that family visits and outdoor exercise were not allowed to the applicants.
The applicants described cells nos. 4 and 8 in which they had been held as follows. Cell no. 4 was equipped with four bunks. It housed five to nine inmates. Cell no. 8 measured about 18 sq. m. It accommodated fourteen to twenty-six inmates. It was equipped with a plank bed of 2 metres by 2.5 metres. As it could not accommodate all the inmates, some of them had to sleep on the floor. Inmates were not provided with bedding. There was no lavatory bowl and inmates used a metal bucket to relieve themselves. The bucket was filthy and was not separated from the rest of the cell by any partition. Both cells were extremely stuffy and smoky. They were infested with cockroaches, lice and rats. The inmates were allowed to take a cold shower once a week. The first applicant was not treated for hypertension, prostatitis or skin diseases.
On 26 August 1999 counsel for the first applicant complained to the prosecutor’s office of the Khanty-Mansiysk Region that the first applicant had been held in inhuman conditions. In particular, his detention at the temporary detention centre for almost a year violated the Detention of Suspects Act in accordance with which no one could be held at a temporary detention centre for more than ten days in a month. The first applicant was not provided with bedding, had no outdoor exercise and was deprived of medical assistance. It appears that he did not receive a reply.
In November 2003 the first applicant sued the local office of the Ministry of Finance for compensation in respect of pecuniary and nonpecuniary damage incurred through unlawful prosecution and detention, the allegedly inhuman conditions of detention and ill-treatment. He described the details of his ill-treatment and the conditions of his detention at the temporary detention centre. Finally, he asked for compensation for the loss of earnings and for his property that had been seized or destroyed by the police.
On 24 March 2004 the Nizhnevartovsk Town Court of the KhantyMansiysk Region partly allowed the claims. It awarded the first applicant 751,632.68 Russian roubles (RUB) for the loss of earnings (the amount was established on the basis of a certificate from the employer showing his salary before the arrest), RUB 20,000,000 in compensation for the non-pecuniary damage sustained as a result of unlawful detention, the inhuman conditions of detention “which [were] well known to be incompatible with sanitary and hygienic norms” and damage to his reputation, and RUB 180,725 for legal costs and expenses. The court rejected his claims for compensation in respect of ill-treatment as unsubstantiated. It also rejected his claims for compensation for the seized or destroyed belongings, because he had not proved his ownership.
On 14 October 2004 the  held, on appeal, that the first applicant had not proved that the conditions of his detention had been inhuman or that there had been any damage to his reputation. Therefore, it reduced the amount of compensation for non-pecuniary damage to RUB 500,000 (about 13,945 euros). It further quashed the award for the loss of earnings because the tax authorities had no data about the amount of his salary before the arrest. It upheld the remainder of the judgment.
The second applicant also sued the local office of the Ministry of Finance. He submitted the same claims as the first applicant.
On 12 March 2004 the Nizhnevartovsk Town Court of the KhantyMansiysk Region partly allowed his claims. It awarded the second applicant RUB 619,444.34 for the loss of earnings, and RUB 20,000,000 in compensation for the non-pecuniary damage sustained as a result of the unlawful detention, the inhuman conditions of detention “which [were] well known to be incompatible with sanitary and hygienic norms” and the damage to his reputation. The court rejected the remainder of his claims for pecuniary damage as unsubstantiated.
The second applicant appealed. In particular, he complained that the first-instance court had not awarded him any compensation for ill-treatment.
On 10 June 2004 the  held on appeal that the second applicant had not proved that he had been ill-treated, that the conditions of his detention had been inhuman or that there had been any damage to his reputation. Therefore, it reduced the amount of compensation for non-pecuniary damage to RUB 600,000. It further reversed the award for the loss of earnings because the tax authorities had no data about the amount of his salary before the arrest. It upheld the remainder of the judgment.
On 10 December 2004 the Presidium of the  considered the award excessive and reduced the compensation for non-pecuniary damage to RUB 200,000 (about 5,360 euros).
The Federal Law on Detention of Suspects and Defendants charged with Criminal Offences (“the Detention of Suspects Act” no. 103-FZ of 15 July 1995) provides that suspects and defendants detained pending investigation and trial are held in remand centres (section 8). They may be transferred to temporary detention centres (ИВС) if it is necessary for the purposes of the investigation or trial and if transportation between a remand centre and a police station or courthouse is not feasible because of the distance between them. Such detention at a temporary detention centre may not exceed ten days per month (section 13).
Detainees should be given free food sufficient to maintain them in good health according to standards established by the Government of the  (section 22 of the Detention of Suspects Act). Detainees should be kept in conditions which satisfy sanitary and hygienic requirements. They should be provided with an individual sleeping place and given bedding, tableware and toiletries. Each inmate should have no less than four square metres of personal space in his or her cell (section 23).
According to the Internal Regulations of Temporary Detention Centres, approved by Order No. 41 of the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation on 26 January 1996 (in force at the time of the applicants’ detention), the living space per detainee should be four square metres (para. 3.3 of the Regulations). All cells must be equipped with a table, lavatory bowl, running tap water, shelf for toiletries, drinking water tank, radio and dustbin (para. 3.2 of the Regulations). Furthermore, the Regulations made provision for the detainees’ right to outdoor exercise for at least one hour per day in a designated exercise area (para. 6.1, 6.40, and 6.43 of the Regulations).
Abuse of office associated with the use of violence and weapons and entailing serious consequences carries a punishment of three to ten years’ imprisonment and a prohibition on occupying certain positions for up to three years (Article 286 § 3 (a,b,c) of the Criminal Code).
Until 1 July 2002 the investigation of criminal offences was governed by the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure of 27 October 1960 (the “old CCrP”). It established that a criminal investigation could be initiated by an investigator on a complaint by an individual or on the investigative authorities’ own initiative, where there were reasons to believe that a crime had been committed (Articles 108 and 125). A prosecutor was responsible for overall supervision of the investigation and could order specific investigative actions, transfer the case from one investigator to another or order an additional investigation (Articles 210 and 211). If there were no grounds for initiating or continuing a criminal investigation, the prosecutor or investigator issued a reasoned decision to that effect which had to be served on the interested party. The decision was amenable to appeal to a higher-ranking prosecutor or to a court of general jurisdiction (Articles 113 and 209).
The Code of Criminal Procedure of the  in force since 1 July 2002 (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001, the “CCrP”), establishes that a criminal investigation may be initiated by an investigator or prosecutor upon the complaint of an individual (Articles 140 and 146). Within three days of receiving such complaint, the investigator or prosecutor must carry out a preliminary inquiry and take one of the following decisions: (1) to open criminal proceedings if there are reasons to believe that a crime has been committed; (2) to refuse to open criminal proceedings if the inquiry reveals that there are no grounds to initiate a criminal investigation; or (3) to refer the complaint to the competent investigative authority. The complainant must be notified of any decision taken. The refusal to open criminal proceedings is amenable to appeal to a higher-ranking prosecutor or a court of general jurisdiction (Articles 144, 145 and 148). A prosecutor is responsible for overall supervision of the investigation (Article 37). He can order specific investigative actions, transfer the case from one investigator to another or order an additional investigation. Article 125 of the CCrP provides for judicial review of decisions by investigators and prosecutors that might infringe the constitutional rights of participants in proceedings or prevent access to a court.
Article 1064 § 1 of the Civil Code of the  provides that damage caused to the person or property of a citizen must be fully compensated for by the tortfeasor. Pursuant to Article 1069, a State agency or a State official is liable towards a citizen for damage caused by their unlawful actions or failure to act. Such damage is to be compensated for at the expense of the federal or regional treasury. Articles 151 and 10991101 of the Civil Code provide for compensation for nonpecuniary damage. Article 1099 states, in particular, that non-pecuniary damage must be compensated for irrespective of any award for pecuniary damage.