The case originated in an application (no. 37735/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms A (“the applicant”), on 14 April 2009. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request to grant her anonymity (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented initially by her mother, and subsequently by Ms O.A. Sadovskaya, a lawyer practising in Nizhniy Novgorod. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that by carrying out her father’s violent arrest in her presence, the authorities had breached her rights under the Convention.
On 11 September 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1998 and lives in Apsheronsk.
On 31 May 2008 the applicant’s father (B), a police officer employed by the Apsheronsk police department at the time, was arrested by the Krasnodar regional branch of the Federal Service for Drug Control (“the FSKN”), following a test purchase of drugs. The undercover operation had been organised by an FSKN unit in Tuapse and the Belorechensk unit of the Krasnodar regional department of the Federal Security Service. B’s car was searched and a bag containing money was seized. Criminal proceedings were brought against him on the same day by an FSKN investigator, A.F., on the basis of the record of the test purchase of drugs, which had been prepared by FSKN officers. B was charged with selling cannabis to E.N., an undercover officer of the FSKN unit in Tuapse, who had acted as a buyer. The prosecution alleged that B had handed the drugs over to E.N. on 30 May 2008 and had received money from him on 31 May 2008, immediately before his arrest.
The arrest was carried out in the presence of the applicant, who was nine years old at the time. On that day, B had taken her to school for an event marking the end of the school year. At about 8.45 a.m. the applicant, accompanied by B, left the school and was getting into their car when B was approached by E.N., with whom he had previously worked at the Apsheronsk police department, and they talked. The parties’ accounts of the events which followed differ.
According to the applicant, E.N. asked B to look after his bag while he went to buy cigarettes at a nearby kiosk. B took the bag and E.N. left. Several men then ran up to B. One of them knocked him to the ground and started beating him. The applicant jumped out of the car and shouted that they should stop beating her father. One of the men shouted at her: “Shut your mouth and get into the car!” The applicant, scared, obeyed. For some time she sat in the car watching her father being beaten up and arrested. She felt unwell and needed more air. She tried to get out of the car but the men held the doors of the car from the outside so that she could not get out. At some point, when they were no longer standing near the car, she opened the car door and ran home. When approaching her house she saw men she did not recognise coming out. That also scared her and she ran towards her grandmother’s house nearby. While running she started to feel giddy and thought that she would fall over. Her uncle, V.K., saw her in the street and took her to his home. She was in a state of shock and could not explain well what had happened.
The applicant submitted her father’s written statement. She also submitted her own statement, her mother’s and other witnesses’ statements recorded by a lawyer, R.V., from the interregional NGO “Mothers in defence of the rights of detainees, defendants and convicts” (межрегиональная общественная организация «Матери в защиту прав задержанных, подследственных и осужденных») and signed by the interviewees.
According to B’s statement of 20 July 2008, at 7.45 a.m. on 31 May 2008 he took his daughter A (the applicant) to school no. 1 for a school event. Shortly after 8 a.m. he received a call from E.N. asking where he was. He replied that he was at school with his child. When he and A came out of the school, E.N. was waiting for him. A got into their car, and he talked to E.N. Then E.N. asked B to look after his bag while he went to buy cigarettes at a nearby kiosk. E.N. left and B went back to his daughter, who was waiting for him to go home. As E.N. had not come back, B put the bag in the boot of the car and was about to get into the car himself. At that moment a car stopped nearby and several men wearing tracksuits jumped out. They knocked him to the ground and started kicking him. He tried to protect his face by covering it with his hands. Then they handcuffed him and lifted him from the ground. During the beating they tore his shirt. His daughter saw him being beaten. V.E., a deputy head of the FSKN unit in Tuapse, told him that he had been arrested for selling drugs. B asked V.E. to let A go home or back to her school teacher. V.E. refused. A herself tried to get out of the car but two officers, standing at either side of the car, blocked the car doors. When the officers opened the boot of his car, he saw that A was very frightened. He pleaded with V.E. and the others to let her go but they refused. He tried to calm her down and asked her to be patient. All of this lasted for about an hour. When the officers were busy and not looking, A got out of the car and ran away in the direction of her home.
According to the applicant’s statement of 15 August 2008 made in the presence of her mother and describing the events of 31 May 2008, a man ran up to B and pushed him in the back. B fell and the man started kicking him. B asked the men to let her go home or to call her mother so that she could come and fetch her, but the men would not listen. The applicant provided some details concerning the appearance of the men who had arrested B.
According to the statement given by the applicant’s mother on 2 August 2008, when leaving home for school at about 7.45 a.m. on 31 May 2008, her daughter A (the applicant) and her husband (B) had had no injuries and had not complained of any health problems. Later that morning she found her daughter at their relatives’ home. She was in a state of shock, unable to speak and having breathing difficulties. She was shaking, and her hands and face were trembling. The FSKN officers brought her husband home in a car that morning, in order to carry out a search. He was handcuffed. His jeans were dirty and dusty. His shirt was open, torn in some places and the buttons had been ripped off. His face was pale.
According to a statement of 2 August 2008 given by witness R.G., an electrician of the limited liability company Energoservis, at about 8.30 a.m. on 31 May 2008 he was checking the traffic lights at the pedestrian crossing near school no. 1. After replacing a light bulb, he climbed down from the traffic lights and saw police officer B approaching a car from the driver’s door side. A girl was sitting in the back seat of the car. At that moment an FSKN officer, S.K., wearing a blue tracksuit, approached B and hit him from behind so that he fell face down, and started kicking him. B was trying to protect himself from the blows by covering his head with his hands. S.K. did not stop until someone shouted at him to do so. The girl was also shouting. An FSKN chief officer and another man were present when S.K. was beating B. Immediately thereafter R.G. left in his company car to check other traffic lights. R.G. knew the names of the police officers because he had worked on the electrical system at the local police station and the FSKN premises.
According to a statement of 15 August 2008 given by V.K., a police officer of the Apsheronsk police department and B’s cousin, on his way home after work at about 10.30 a.m. on 31 May 2008 he met B’s daughter, A, who was running somewhere. She saw him and stopped and told him that someone was beating her father. She was very frightened, stuttering and gasping for air. V.K. took her to his home and called her mother.
According to a statement of 15 August 2008 given by G.A., the applicant’s violin teacher, before the events of 31 May 2008 the applicant had been a sociable, cheerful, hardworking, able and promising student. After those events she became slow and reserved, as opposed to the quick learner she had been before. She became tired easily and wanted to abandon her violin studies.
The applicant’s mother submitted photographs of the shirt B had been wearing during his arrest. Except for three buttons on the lower part of the shirt, the other buttons on the shirt were missing. The shirt was torn in the places where the buttons had been.
According to the Government, no physical force was used against B during his arrest and the applicant was not treated in the way alleged by her. They referred to records from the detention facility in which B had been detained after his arrest (see paragraph 27 below), and to “explanations” submitted by FSKN officers S.K., V.D., A.O., V.E., E.N. and S.S. (see paragraphs 24, 36 and 38 below), Federal Security Service officer S.P. (see paragraph 39 below), Apsheronsk police officers K.A. and M.I. (see paragraph 37 below), attesting witnesses A.Sh. and P.M. (see paragraphs 31 and 35 below), and FSKN officer A.Z., who had carried out the FSKN internal investigation (see paragraph 40 below).
The applicant described her state of health after the incident of 31 May 2008 as follows. She started screaming at night, wetting herself and suffering panic attacks when left alone. She stopped communicating with other children, became reserved, lost her vivaciousness, had difficulties speaking and developed a tremor affecting her face and limbs. She lost her interest in music, despite having previously been a successful violin student.
On 3 June 2008 the applicant was examined by a neurologist and diagnosed with a neurological disorder and neurosis-like enuresis. On 6 June 2008 she was examined by a psychologist, to whom she complained that her stress had caused screaming at night, fears and unsociability. She was diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder, high levels of anxiety and fixation on the stressful situation. The diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder was confirmed on 25 June 2008 by children’s psychiatrists and psychologists at Specialised Clinical Psychiatric Hospital no. 1 in Krasnodar and the Krasnodar regional children’s hospital. On the same day a neurologist from the regional children’s hospital also diagnosed her with neurogenic hyperreflective urinary bladder. A cardiologist from the same hospital confirmed her previously known diagnosis of mitral valve prolapse. She received out-patient treatment and was supervised at the Apsheronsk central district hospital. She was again seen by doctors for her posttraumatic stress disorder in July and August 2008.
It follows from a record of the applicant’s statements to a lawyer of 12 October 2017 that her state of health improved after her father’s release. Her enuresis almost ceased but her nightmares continued for about two more years. She confirmed that she was currently not suffering any health problems.
According to a preliminary conclusion of psychologist D.S. from “Independent Expert Examination Bureau Versia” based in Moscow and St Petersburg, who interviewed the applicant on 15 February 2018 and examined her medical records, there could have been a cause-and-effect relationship between the events of 31 May 2008 and the medical condition she developed immediately thereafter, which lasted for more than two years. In order to substantiate such a conclusion, complex psychological and psychiatric examinations needed to be carried out on the applicant with the involvement of her parents. A psychiatrist would be competent to carry out a clinical assessment of the consequences of the impact which the events of 31 May 2008 had had on her health. D.S. provided details of the cost and duration of the proposed examination.
An “experimental psychological examination” was carried out on the applicant by psychologist D.T. from the non-commercial organisation “Sotsialnaya Sfera” based in Nizhniy Novgorod. According to D.T.’s report of 7 March 2018, the results of the examination could be interpreted as indicating the presence of elements of post-traumatic stress disorder and a number of other conditions (high level of anxiety and low level of adaptability, “sub-depression or masked depression” and experiencing phobic disorders) as a consequence of the events of 31 May 2008 and the ensuing inquiry.
On 10 July 2008 the applicant’s mother lodged an application with the Apsheronsk district prosecutor’s office, complaining that the FSKN officers had beaten up her husband, B, in the presence of her daughter, A, which had caused harm to A’s health. B had not resisted arrest. His clothes had been torn during the beatings. A had been kept in a car and had thus been deprived of her liberty. The application was transferred to the Belorechenskiy interdistrict unit of the investigative committee at the Krasnodar regional prosecutor’s office (the “investigative committee”), which carried out a preinvestigation inquiry.
On 10 July 2008 FSKN officers S.K., V.D. and A.O., who had apprehended B, and deputy head of the FSKN unit in Tuapse V.E., who had been present at the time, submitted identical written “explanations” to the head of the investigative committee, claiming no physical force had been applied to B during his arrest. They stated that they had apprehended B near his car in which his daughter, A, had been sitting, and that after the arrest B himself had forced her to get out of the car and sent her home.
Relying on the FSKN officers’ explanations, on 14 July 2008 investigator M.V. refused to institute criminal proceedings against them on the grounds that their actions lacked the elements of a crime under Article 286 of the Criminal Code (abuse of power). The investigator noted that given A’s young age and the fact that she suffered from heart disease, her father’s arrest as such could have provoked her post-traumatic stress disorder.
The investigator’s decision was annulled as unlawful and unfounded, and an additional pre-investigation inquiry was ordered.
The investigator obtained records from the temporary detention facility at the Tuapse police station, in which B had been detained after his arrest. According to those records, B had not made any complaints, had not asked for medical aid and no injuries on him had been recorded.
The investigator interviewed the applicant and her mother, V.K. and his wife, G.A. and A.Sh.
V.K., a police officer of the Apsheronsk police department, stated that at about 10.30 a.m. on 31 May 2008 he was going home after his shift. He already knew about his cousin B’s arrest by FSKN officers. He saw B’s daughter, A, running down the street. She was frightened. She told him that some people were beating her father. According to V.K.’s wife, an investigator at the Apsheronsk police department, she had been at home at about 10 a.m. on 31 May 2008. At some point thereafter her husband came home with A, who was frightened and in a state of shock.
According to G.A., the applicant’s violin teacher, after the events of 31 May 2008 the applicant, previously a successful student and winner of a regional competition, was unable to play the violin as before.
According to A.Sh. (interviewed on 19 August 2008), on 30 May 2008 he was approached by two individuals who asked him to participate in a test purchase operation as an attesting witness. He agreed. The operation lasted two days. On 31 May 2008 he witnessed B’s arrest near school no. 1. An FSKN officer, E.N., handed over a bag containing money to B, after which B was approached by several persons in civilian clothing who showed him their documents and took him to their car. There was another car nearby in which a girl was sitting. B told the girl quickly to go home. The FSKN officers did not shout at the girl, did not close the doors of the car in which she was sitting, or block her way out. About fifteen minutes later they started searching the car and the girl came out. She was frightened but was not hysterical and did not cry. She walked away and then ran. The officers did not use any physical force against B.
On 21 August 2008 investigator M.V. again refused to institute criminal proceedings against the FSKN officers on the grounds that their actions lacked the elements of a crime under Article 286 of the Criminal Code. He stated that it had not been established that physical force had been used against B or that A had been forcibly kept in a car. The doors of the car had been open and she had been able to leave the car on her own afterwards. No physical or psychological violence or threats had been used against her. The FSKN officers’ presence near the car had not obstructed her freedom of movement. After she had run away, she had not been pursued and there had been no attempts to return her in order to hold her in the car and restrict her liberty. Having taken note of medical certificates concerning A’s state of health after the events of 31 May 2008, the investigator stated that the FSKN officers’ actions aimed at arresting A’s father, the uncertainty of what exactly had been going on and how to act in such a situation, the mistaken assessment of the police officers’ behaviour as deliberate restriction of her freedom of movement, together with A’s well-developed imagination and sensitivity, had served as a powerful source of stress to her, which could have caused her subsequent health disorder.
The investigator’s decision was annulled again and an additional round of the pre-investigation inquiry was ordered.
Investigator M.V. obtained the transcript of B’s examination by an investigator of the investigative committee in the presence of a lawyer on 24 July 2008. According to B’s statement, S.K. and other FSKN officers had knocked him to the ground, delivered several blows to his torso and handcuffed him. While apprehending him they had torn his shirt. B had not resisted arrest. The blows he had received had not left bruises on his body.
On 22 August 2008 investigator M.V. interviewed P.M., another attesting witness of the test purchase of drugs carried out in relation to B. According to P.M.’s explanations, which were essentially similar to those of A.Sh. (see paragraph 31 above), the arresting officers were in civilian clothing. B behaved calmly, his shirt was unbuttoned but not damaged, and there were no injuries on him. B talked to [A] firmly. The FSKN officers asked him why he was ordering her to go home, stating that they could take her along with him when going to his house to carry out a search. B disagreed.
According to an operational officer of the FSKN unit in Tuapse, E.N., who acted as a buyer in the drugs test-purchase operation (interviewed by investigator M.V. on 24 August 2008), on 30 May 2008 B gave him drugs and they agreed that he would pay B the following day. The transfer was watched by the attesting witnesses from a car. At about 8.30 a.m. on 31 May 2008 near school no. 1, after a telephone conversation between them, E.N. handed over a bag with money to B. B’s daughter was sitting in a car nearby. After the transfer of the money, E.N. and B were arrested by approximately eight persons in civilian clothing who had jumped out of two cars. They introduced themselves and produced their documents. They were from the FSKN and the Federal Security Service. No physical force, strongarm tactics or holds were used against B during his arrest. B behaved calmly and did not resist arrest. No physical or psychological violence or threats were used against B’s daughter. Nobody blocked the doors of the car in which she was sitting.
According to Apsheronsk police officers K.A. (interviewed on 22 August 2008) and M.I. (interviewed on 1 September 2008), on 31 May 2008 they were passing by school no. 1 in a car and saw their colleague, B. They stopped, got out of the car and walked towards him. Their way was blocked by several persons in civilian clothing who explained that they could not go any further since there was an operation underway. B was about ten metres away. His shirt was open and apparently slightly torn. The buttons on the shirt were missing. They did not see any bodily injuries on B. The situation was calm, and they left.
According to FSKN officer S.S. (interviewed on 24 August 2008), on 31 May 2008 he arrived at the place of the arrest after B’s apprehension and went to B’s house together with his colleagues. He saw the applicant approaching her house and then going away.
According to S.P., an operational officer of the Belorechensk unit of the Krasnodar regional department of the Federal Security Service (interviewed by investigator R.Z. from the investigative committee on 29 August 2008), who had been present during B’s arrest, physical force was used against B because he had been trying to flee the scene of the crime. The force used was necessary and not excessive, that is it did not involve B being beaten up. B’s daughter was sitting in B’s car. B was invited to inform his wife that she should come and take the girl away. However, B insisted that the girl should run home. The girl listened to her father and ran home. No one held her or chased her.
On 29 August 2008 investigator M.V. also interviewed A.Z., a senior operational officer of the internal security unit of the FSKN’s Krasnodar regional branch, who had carried out (from 30 July 2008 to 7 August 2008) an internal investigation following the complaint lodged by the applicant’s mother with the FSKN. A.Z. related his findings as follows. According to explanations received from FSKN officers S.K., V.D., A.O. and V.E., as well as individuals P.M., I. and G., B was not beaten up during his arrest, and A was not held forcibly in a car. B himself ordered her to get out of the car and she ran away. No one chased her or used measures of psychological influence against her. R.G., an electrician working for Energoservis, was checking traffic lights at the intersection near the place of the arrest. He confirmed having seen FSKN officer S.K. apprehending B and delivering several blows to his body. However, given that the director of Energoservis had not “officially” confirmed whether R.G. had been working that day, and that R.G. had been registered since 25 February 2007 as a drug user and had been repeatedly arrested by the FSKN for administrative offences involving drugs consumption, he could have given false statements aimed at discrediting the FSKN officers. According to a “specialist” consulted in relation to A’s medical documents, A was highly sensitive, emotionally unstable, selective in her contacts, and had a high level of anxiety. Taking into account her pre-existing neurological pathology, even a minor stressful situation, especially involving her father, would have sufficed to cause her psychological trauma. Her father might not necessarily have been beaten up in her presence. The fact that she had been in a car for a long time was irrelevant for the stress she had suffered. Therefore, the internal investigation did not establish the FSKN officers’ guilt in relation to the temporary damage to A’s health which had occurred during B’s arrest.
On 1 September 2008, relying on the above material and using the same reasoning as in his previous decision, investigator M.V. refused to institute criminal proceedings against FSKN officers S.K., V.D., A.O., V.E., E.N. and S.S. He added that in the absence of intent to harm A’s health, the FSKN officers’ lawful and justified actions in arresting B lacked the elements of a crime.
In proceedings conducted under Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure on 12 September 2008, the Apsheronsk District Court dismissed an appeal lodged by the applicant’s mother against the investigator’s decision of 1 September 2008, holding that the decision had been lawful and wellfounded because it was supported by a comprehensive and objective preinvestigation inquiry and complied with the Code of Criminal Procedure. On 22 October 2008 the Krasnodar Regional Court upheld the District Court’s decision on the applicant’s appeal. It stated that in certain circumstances force could be used lawfully by law-enforcement officers. Moreover, no injuries had been recorded on B. The conclusion of the FSKN internal investigation about the lack of guilt on the part of the FSKN officers in the applicant’s temporary health disorder had been based on a specialist’s opinion concerning her reaction to a conflict situation. The District Court had therefore rightly assessed the investigator’s refusal to institute criminal proceedings.
On 30 December 2009 investigator R.K. from the investigative committee of the Krasnodar regional prosecutor’s office terminated the criminal proceedings against B for lack of the elements of a crime in his actions, on the grounds that evidence in the case had been obtained unlawfully. The original copy of the record of the test purchase of drugs, on the basis of which the criminal proceedings had been instituted, was missing. The available copy of the record was different from the original (in particular, indicating a different place at which E.N. had handed over the drugs to the FSKN officers) and therefore fictitious. In order to establish the circumstances of the drugs sale, investigator R.K. questioned P.M., one of the attesting witnesses to the sale of drugs. According to P.M.’s witness statement, he had testified falsely, at the request of the FSKN officers, to having seen the transfer of drugs from B to E.N. and from E.N. to the FSKN officers on 30 May 2008. That day P.M. had not met the FSKN officers and had not witnessed any transfers of drugs. On 31 May 2008 FSKN officer S.S. had taken him and another attesting witness, A.Sh., to a place near school no. 1 in Apsheronsk. When they had arrived, B had been standing handcuffed near a car. There had been a bag containing money in the car. P.M. had not seen who had put it there. Then they had gone to B’s home in order for a search to be carried out, but they had not been let in by B’s wife. They had gone to the FSKN office where P.M. had been shown a plastic bag and had been told that the bag with drugs had been sold by B to E.N., who had then handed it over to the FSKN officers. P.M. remembered signing documents at the FSKN officers’ request without reading them.
Investigator R.K. noted that there were no video recordings or any other evidence which could objectively confirm that B had transferred drugs to E.N. Therefore, it was impossible to establish the circumstances of a sale of drugs. Furthermore, the criminal proceedings against B had been instituted by investigator A.F. in breach of Article 151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which provided that criminal cases concerning crimes committed by police officers were to be investigated by investigative committees of the prosecutor’s office. The FSKN officers had been aware of B’s status as a police officer. Therefore, the investigative actions carried out by the FSKN investigator A.F. had been unlawful and the evidence obtained had been inadmissible.