The case originated in an application (no. 1167/15) against the Hellenic Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 24 December 2014 by eighteen applicants of various nationalities, whose names appear in the annexed list.
The applicants were represented by Mr K. Tsitselikis and Mr A. Spathis, lawyers practising in Thessaloniki. The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent’s delegates, Ms E. Tsaousi and Ms A. Dimitrakopoulou, legal counsellor and senior advisor at the State Legal Council respectively.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the conditions of their detention in the Prison Hospital had violated their right not to be subjected to degrading or inhuman treatment.
On 7 November 2016 the application was communicated to the Government. The Albanian and Georgian Governments did not make use of their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicants were or are still detained in Korydallos Prison Hospital (“the Prison Hospital”). They all suffer from HIV infection, apart from the third applicant who suffers from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
The first applicant, Dimitrios Zabelos, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 6 March 2014 until 17 June 2015, when he made use of the remedy provided for by Article 110A of the Criminal Code.
The second applicant, Adriatik Berberaj, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 6 April 2010 until 21 January 2011 and from 7 February 2012 until 1 July 2015, the date on which he was released following use of the remedy provided for by section 12 of Law no. 4322/2015, having served one third of his sentence.
The third applicant, Dimitrios Berberidis, was detained in the Prison Hospital on 6 December 2012 and was released on 11 June 2015 following use of the remedy provided for by section 12 of Law no. 4322/2015, having served one third of his sentence.
The fourth applicant, Pola Honein, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 18 December 2012 until 1 July 2015. He was released after having made use of the remedy provided for by Article 110A of the Criminal Code.
The fifth applicant, Theodoros Iliopoulos, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 8 January 2013 until 2 June 2015, the date on which he was released following use of the remedy provided for by section 12 of Law no. 4322/2015, having served two fifths of his sentence.
The sixth applicant, Marouf Kamoli, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 30 December 2013 until 19 May 2015, the date on which he was released following use of the remedy provided by section 11 of Law no. 4274/14, having served two fifths of his sentence.
The seventh applicant, Davit Khutsishvili, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 1 July 2014 until 27 October 2016. He was released after having made use of the remedy provided for by section 12 of Law no. 4322/2015.
The eighth applicant, Roustam Konstantinidis, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 23 August 2013 until 14 December 2015. He was released following an application on the basis of section 3 of Law no. 4322/2015.
The ninth applicant, Ioannis Machos, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 1 November 2012. He was still in detention when the parties submitted their observations.
The tenth applicant, Andreas Martzaklis, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 28 May 2013 until 3 August 2015, when he was released after he lodged an application on the basis of section 12 of Law no. 4322/2015. He was again detained in the Prison Hospital from 22 January 2016, and was still in detention there when the parties submitted their observations.
The eleventh applicant, Saeed Hamo Moradyan, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 8 February 2013 until 27 January 2016, the date on which he was released on the basis of section 12 of Law no. 4322/2015, having served one third of his sentence.
The twelfth applicant, Antonios Oikonomakos, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 27 November 2013 until 30 September 2015, when he was released, having served one tenth of his sentence, on the basis of section 12 of Law no. 4322/2015. He was again detained from 6 November 2015 until 23 December 2015 when he was released, having served two fifths of his sentence, on the basis of the same provision.
According to the documents before the Court, the thirteenth applicant, Nikolaos Papadopoulos, was detained in the Prison Hospital for significant periods of time from 4 April 2014 until 16 July 2015.
The fourteenth applicant, Spiridon-Xenofon Pirpiniadis, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 20 December 2013 until 13 August 2015, when he was released on the basis of section 12 of Law no. 4322/2015, having served two fifths of his sentence.
The fifteenth applicant, Sabri Sabrioglou, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 22 January 2013 until 24 December 2014 and from 11 February until 20 October 2015.
The sixteenth applicant, Dimitrios Samlidis, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 8 July 2014 until 26 February 2015, when he was released, after having made use of the remedy provided for by Article 110A of the Criminal Code.
The seventeenth applicant, Emmanouil Toufektsis, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 30 October 2013 and was still in detention there when the parties submitted their observations.
The eighteenth applicant, Chrisovalantis Tsiriklos, was detained in the Prison Hospital from 4 July 2013 until 8 July 2015, when he was released after having made use of the remedy provided for by Article 110A of the Criminal Code. He was again detained on 21 August 2015 and was still in detention there when the parties submitted their observations.
The applicants submitted that the Prison Hospital had been overcrowded which, in addition to causing poor sanitary conditions, had resulted in the deterioration of their already fragile health. They maintained that all of them had been detained in hospital wards which had measured 44 sq. m and which had been occupied by twelve detainees on average for the period between 2013 and 2015. In addition, the second and third applicants had been detained in cells measuring 17 sq. m and which had held four inmates. They further argued that they had not been able to move freely within the wards owing to the space occupied by furniture. In particular, bunk beds were not used in the Prison Hospital and extra furniture, such as medical equipment, was required; therefore half the area of each ward had been occupied by furniture, which had resulted in them having a personal space in which they could move freely of below 2 sq. m.
The above-mentioned conditions had led them to receiving inadequate health care. There had been a high risk of infection with contagious diseases as there had not been effective separation of detainees according to the disease from which they had suffered. In addition, only four toilets had been available for the detainees in a total of five wards on the first floor.
Meals had been insufficient and of poor quality and the absence of recreational activities had affected their psychological health. Central heating had been inadequate and collection of rubbish, especially in the kitchens, had not been sufficient, creating hygiene problems and resulting in bad smells and the presence of pests. The applicants also complained of the lack of medical staff and properly equipped laboratories for their medical examinations. In particular, during the period 2013-14 only one general practitioner had been available to the hospital.
The applicants acknowledged that the conditions of their detention had improved in mid-2016 and that the medical-staff numbers had increased, resulting in conditions which met the requirements of Article 3 of the Convention but only for the period after June 2016.
On 18 December 2014 the applicants lodged a complaint with the Prison Board under Article 6 of the Penal Code (Law No. 2776/1999), to which they have not received any reply to date.
According to the Government, the Prison Hospital’s official capacity was sixty patients and at the time of the applicants’ detention the hospital had held between 180 and 220 patients. Specifically as regards the applicants, some of them had been detained in wards 7 and 8 on the first floor of the hospital and some others in wards 1, 2 and 3 on the second floor. The wards measured 44.40 sq. m each, and each of them hosted eight to thirteen detainees. Therefore, the personal space available to them ranged from 3.4 sq. m to 5.5 sq. m. It was also noted that toilets had been in the corridors, not inside the wards, which had remained unlocked so as to ensure unobstructed access to the bathrooms.
The Prison Hospital was an establishment providing primary medical care by operating as a clinic. Detainees who required more intense or specialised care were referred to public hospitals, a procedure which was used for the third, fourth, ninth, fifteenth and seventeenth applicants. The patients were separated by disease. They were examined regularly by doctors and they were submitted often to general and specialised laboratory examinations.
Wards were sufficiently ventilated and heated and had adequate natural light via six large windows. Hot water was ensured by solar water heaters and by boilers which operated for four hours per day. Wards were regularly cleaned by cleaning crews consisting of detainees and disinfected by specialist companies. The hospital’s social service provided personal hygiene products to detainees who could not afford them. All wards and corridors had rubbish bins which were emptied regularly.
As regards detainees’ meals, they were designed under medical supervision to ensure that patients received all necessary nutrients. The Government submitted the menu of two random weeks to demonstrate that they had been comprised of a variety of food.
According to the Government, detainees were not obliged to spend all day in the wards; on the contrary, they could move along the corridors and spend time in the yard. Various recreational activities were organised and detainees had had the opportunity to enrol in educational programmes since October 2015. Detainees were also granted days of leave that they could spend outside the prison hospital; the third, fifth and eleventh applicants had benefitted from such leave.
Lastly, according to the Government, during 2015 and 2016 conditions of detention in the Prison Hospital were drastically improved. That was mainly due to measures taken to reduce overcrowding in prisons under Law no. 4322/2015, which provided for early release schemes. In November 2014 a women’s ward had been opened at the hospital and work had been carried out to improve the facilities. In addition, new and updated medical equipment was procured and medical-staff numbers had been reinforced by the recruitment of three new doctors of various specialties. The Government specified that all the above-mentioned improvements had made the Prison Hospital a detention facility significantly different to the image given in the Greek Ombudsman’s (Συνήγορος του Πολίτη) report, which had been prepared on the basis of a visit in February 2012, that is to say on a date that had no relevance to the present case.
The relevant domestic law and practice is described in the Court’s judgment in Martzaklis and Others v. Greece (no. 20378/13, §§ 33-39, 9 July 2015) and the Court’s decision in Chatzivasiliadis v. Greece ((dec.) no. 51618/12, §§ 17-21, 26 November 2013).
In addition, the Ombudsman of the Hellenic Republic (Συνήγορος του Πολίτη – hereinafter “the Ombudsman”) is an independent administrative authority provided by Article 103 § 9 of the Constitution. It was established by Law no. 2447/1997 and it is currently governed by the provisions of Law no. 3094/2003. The Ombudsman intervenes with the administration on behalf of citizens for the protection of their rights and respect for the principles of legality and equality. It makes recommendations and proposals to the administration. It does not impose sanctions and cannot annul illegal acts of the administration (see Kaja v. Greece, no. 32927/03, § 34, 27 July 2006).
Article 11 of Law no. 4274/2014 provided for exceptional measures to relieve overcrowding in prisons. Under that provision, detainees who at the time the Law came into force had been sentenced to up to ten years’ imprisonment and had served two fifths of their sentences were to be released following an order issued by the public prosecutor. Article 12 of Law no. 4322/2015 provided for similar measures. Under that provision, detainees who at the time of publication of the Law had been sentenced to up to three years’ imprisonment and had served at least one tenth of it were automatically released and those who had been sentenced to up to five years’ imprisonment were automatically released if they had served one fifth of their sentences. Detainees who had been sentenced to up to ten years’ imprisonment and those who had been sentenced to more than ten years’ imprisonment had the right to be released under certain conditions following an order of the public prosecutor, if they had served two fifths and one third of their sentences respectively.
On 24 October and 9 November 2011, twenty-eight people infected with HIV and detained at the Prison Hospital submitted a complaint to the Ombudsman about the conditions of their detention. On 8 February 2012, a delegation from the Ombudsman’s office visited the premises. In a report issued on 26 October 2012 following this visit, the Ombudsman emphasised that the wards were overcrowded, that the detainees did not have at their disposal any recreational activities and that the resources and infrastructure were inadequate. In particular, as regards detainees infected with HIV, the Ombudsman mentioned that the prescription of medication was not regular and that despite the fact that they were hospitalised in order to have easier access to medical care, their continuously growing numbers had led to worse conditions of detention (see Martzaklis and Others v. Greece, no. 20378/13, § 40, 9 July 2015).
In a press release issued on 6 March 2014, the Greek Ombudsman reiterated his findings concerning the Prison Hospital and urged the authorities to take measures.
On 26 June 2013 the Parliamentary Assembly adopted Resolution 1946 (2013) entitled “Equal access to health care” in which it pointed out that inequalities in access to care particularly affect vulnerable groups, including persons in detention. While preparing her report, Liliane Maury Pasquier (Switzerland, SOC), PACE rapporteur on equal access to health care, visited Greece and noted the negative impact of austerity measures on access to health care. On 4 March 2014, Ms Maury Pasquier, alarmed by the living conditions at the Prison Hospital in Athens, called on the Greek authorities to improve the situation as soon as possible. In particular she noted the following:
“I am very concerned at the insalubrious conditions of inmates at [the Prison Hospital] in Athens, reported in the media. The hospital, which was designed to cater for 60 persons, is said to currently be housing 200 prisoners, most of whom are allegedly HIV-positive or suffering from contagious diseases such as tuberculosis and hepatitis. In such conditions, it is impossible to ensure that prisoners receive appropriate treatment, not to mention the fact that overcrowding obviously contributes to the spreading of contagious diseases, thereby endangering the lives of all prisoners in the hospital.
The right to health is a fundamental human right and the State must guarantee everyone equal access to appropriate health care. This applies in particular to prisoners who are entirely under the authority and responsibility of the State. I therefore call on the Greek government to improve the living conditions of prisoners at [the Prison Hospital] as soon as possible. The possible release of some prisoners from the hospital, as announced by the Minister of Justice, would only make sense if the Greek government were to guarantee that, on release, they would receive the treatment they require.”
Following its visit to Greece in April 2015, the CPT published its report dated 1 March 2016 (CPT/Inf (2016) 4). It stated, inter alia, the following:
“89.  The conditions in [the Prison Hospital] have been the subject of several media reports, and images depicting the appalling state of affairs in the establishment have been posted online. However, at the time of the CPT’s visit, urgent action had still not been taken to remedy the situation which was so drastic that the place could be compared to a dumping ground for sick prisoners who are subsequently neglected and not provided with the care required. Such an appalling state of affairs cannot be permitted to continue.
The hospital has an official capacity of 80 beds and on the day of the visit was accommodating 141 prisoners, not including the 47 HIV positive prisoners in Korydallos Women Prison who were under the responsibility of the hospital. This is certainly an improvement from the period prior to November 2014, when some 220 patients were held in the hospital, but the hospital remains severely overcrowded. For example, in the smaller rooms, five patients were held in 17m² while the larger rooms of 43m² were accommodating 10 or 11 patients with beds crammed together; in a hospital setting, Greek law fixes a standard of 6m² of living space per person. In addition to the cramped conditions, the rooms were filthy and cluttered and hygiene was extremely poor.
Moreover, the current drastic understaffing makes it impossible to provide all patients with the proper care they require. The four resident doctors (a general practitioner, a surgeon and two microbiologists) worked Mondays to Fridays from 7h00 to 14h30, and a separate duty resident doctor rota of eight doctors covered the hours of 14h30 to 7h00 and weekends. Approval has apparently been obtained to recruit five additional physicians, which is sorely required. Further, after an absence of two years, a dentist now visits the hospital twice a week.
In addition, a number of specialists visit the hospital (psychiatrists, dermatologists, ophthalmologist, cardiologist and an ear, nose and throat surgeon). However, there is a lack of formal process in exchanging information on patients between the specialists and the treating doctors, and much depends on the individual relationships between doctors.
As regards the nursing complement, 11 of the 14 posts were filled at the time of the visit. Typically, this resulted in four nurses on duty during weekday mornings and two in the afternoons, and at weekends one in the mornings and two in the afternoons. At night, there is only ever one nurse on duty who, in addition to the hospital, has to provide cover for Korydallos Men’s and Women’s Prisons as well as for the psychiatric hospital (i.e. more than 2,500 prisoners). As a result of the lack of nurses, a number of prisoners were employed as auxiliaries, not only to undertake janitorial duties, but also to provide care to patients such as assistance with feeding and personal hygiene. The delegation received detailed accounts inter alia of how fellow patients had provided care for a cancer patient in the period prior to his death in the hospital in February 2015, and how he was not provided with pain relieving medication until just before his death. It also came across patients who had been neglected and not provided the follow-up care required, such as a prisoner with a post-surgery lax anal sphincter causing him faecal incontinence; once his case was brought to the attention of the doctor, steps were taken to address his problem. Otherwise, nursing staff only had time to distribute medication (including at Korydallos Women’s Prison) and undertake complex dressings.
At the end of the visit, the CPT’s delegation requested that the Greek authorities, as a matter of urgency, undertake a full review of the prison hospital and put in place a plan to resurrect it as a place of care, where prisoners are treated for their illnesses and provided the necessary care in decent conditions. If this review has not yet been conducted, given the very serious right to life issues under Article 2 ECHR as well as the serious ill-treatment concerns under Article 3 ECHR, the CPT recommends that immediate steps are taken to carry out this review. Further, the Committee wishes to be informed of the outcome of the review and the follow-up steps planned to remedy the current situation.”