The case originated in an application (no. 36140/11) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Michał Korgul (“the applicant”), on 25 May 2011.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr P. Sendecki, a lawyer practising in Lublin. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the “dangerous detainee” regime to which he had been subjected had breached Article 3 of the Convention. He also complained, under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, about his release savings fund.
On 7 July 2014 the complaints concerning the lengthy imposition of the “dangerous detainee” regime and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention concerning the release savings fund were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant requested an oral hearing. The Chamber decided that it was not necessary to hold a hearing before adopting the present judgment (Rule 59 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1987 and is detained in Lublin.
In 2005 the applicant was on two occasions convicted and sentenced to two terms of one year’s imprisonment, which were suspended on probation. On 30 September 2008 the applicant was convicted and sentenced to two years’ imprisonment, which were again suspended. On 24 September 2009 the applicant was again sentenced to two terms of imprisonment. The latter judgments became final and enforceable on 10 October 2009. All the above convictions concerned charges of burglary, theft and robbery.
From 8 May 2009 the applicant was detained on remand on suspicion of having committed several armed robberies.
In July 2009 he was indicted before the Lublin District Court. He was charged with several counts of armed robbery.
On 24 February 2011 the Lublin District Court gave a judgment in the applicant’s case (IX K 79/11). Following an appeal by the applicant, it appears that in 2011 the Lublin Regional Court examined the decision (Vka 370/11). On 11 October 2011 the applicant received two consecutive sentences of one year and ten months’ imprisonment and of two years and eight months’ imprisonment.
On 24 February 2011 the Lublin Remand Centre Prison Commission classified the applicant as a “dangerous detainee”. The measures applied in the applicant’s case comprised confinement in a special high-security prison wing and increased supervision of his movements within and outside the cell, which meant that he had to wear joined shackles whenever he was taken out of his cell. The measures involved his segregation from the prison community and restrictions on contact with his family. Also, every time he left or entered his cell he was routinely subjected to a “full strip-search” – a thorough inspection of his body and clothes in which he was required to strip naked and make deep squats in order to enable an examination of his anus. In addition, his cell, including the sanitary facilities, was constantly monitored via a closed-circuit television system.
It its decision of 24 February 2011 the commission relied on the fact that the applicant had assaulted a prison guard (Article 88a § 2 (2 b) of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences). The governor of the Lublin Remand Centre, in his application to impose the regime, stated that on 21 February 2011 the applicant had refused to undergo a strip-search, had been aggressive and had attempted to hit a prison officer in the face.
The incident of 21 February 2011 was notified to a prosecutor who investigated whether an offence had been committed. It appears that the applicant was originally convicted of the offence but the judgment was quashed by the Lublin District Court. The outcome of this set of proceedings is not known.
The applicant appealed against the decision of 24 February 2011, but on 27 April 2011 the Lublin Regional Court upheld it. The court held that the applicant posed a serious danger to the security of the Lublin Remand Centre.
The Lublin Remand Centre in its subsequent applications to extend the measure against the applicant underlined that his behaviour had not improved and he had remained unpredictable.
On 18 August 2011 the Commission reviewed and upheld its decision classifying the applicant as a “dangerous detainee”.
The applicant appealed against that decision. On 26 October 2011 the Lublin Regional Court upheld the decision.
On 15 November 2011 the governor of the Lublin Remand Centre applied to the Commission to lift the measure against the applicant. The governor noted that the applicant’s behaviour had improved and he no longer posed a danger to the security of the remand centre. The applicant, as noted by the prison officers and a psychologist, was calm, disciplined, and following the internal regulations.
On 16 November 2011 the Commission, having heard evidence from the applicant, lifted the measure.
On 5 December 2011 the applicant was transferred to Opole Lubelskie Prison.
On 3 January 2012 the governor of Opole Lubelskie Prison applied to the Prison Commission to impose the “dangerous detainee” regime on the applicant. He submitted that since the applicant’s arrival at the prison he had been aggressive towards the prison officers and had been trying to gain prominence in the prison community by plotting to assault a senior officer of the service. The applicant had been aggressive and his behaviour was interfering with order in the prison. Overall, he posed a real danger to the prison officers and to the security of the prison.
On 3 January 2012 the Prison Commission of Opole Lubelskie Prison decided to impose the “dangerous detainee” regime on the applicant. The decision stated as follows:
“[The applicant] has threatened to assault a senior prison officer or other officers in order to re-establish himself in the criminal prison community and secure for himself a position of high esteem within its structure. There exists a real risk to the security of the prison. During his stay in the Lublin Prison [the applicant] was excluded from the prison community and is eagerly trying to enter it again. Because of his high level of demoralisation, the nature of the offences committed by him, his tendency to want to gain control over others and his personal character, he remains determined to return to the criminal structure and poses a real risk to those surrounding him. The applicant shows an aggressive attitude, directed at the prison officers. Since the beginning of his stay in the prison he has been notorious for causing difficulties of an educational nature and relating to maintaining order; his behaviour is highly reprehensible. His negative attitude is a destructive influence on the atmosphere and order in the wing and in the prison. In view of the information collected, there is a real risk of him carrying out an active assault on a prison officer, as has happened in the past.”
The applicant appealed but on 14 February 2012 the Lublin Regional Court upheld the decision.
The governor of Rzeszow Prison (to which the applicant had in the meantime been transferred) subsequently requested the extension of the regime imposed on the applicant. In his first request of 3 April 2012 he noted that the applicant had been given a disciplinary punishment for insulting a prison officer and had been taking his daily walks individually. The applicant remained interested in joining the prison community and remained a serious risk to the security of the prison. On the same date the Prison Commission of Rzeszow Prison extended the regime, stating that the applicant “should consolidate his positive behaviour and carry out a deeper reassessment of his previous conduct”.
In his second request of 28 June 2012 the governor of Rzeszow Prison pointed out that another disciplinary sanction had been imposed on the applicant for disobeying an order to leave his cell. The prison authorities acknowledged that the applicant had also received rewards for good behaviour and had started to take his daily walks with another inmate in order to see how he would function in a group. The governor considered that the applicant remained interested in belonging to the prison community and that his behaviour continued to pose a risk to the security of the prison. On 28 June 2012 the commission extended the regime, citing the same justification as in its previous decision of 3 April 2012.
On 27 September and 27 December 2012 the governor of Rzeszow Prison made further requests to extend the measure imposed on the applicant. The governor noted that the applicant had received some punishments and three rewards, but that it could still not be guaranteed that he would function correctly in the prison. He considered that the applicant continued to pose a serious danger to the security of the prison as he identified with the “prison subculture”, had behaved immorally and had not shown any remorse for the offences he had committed. On 27 September and 27 December 2012 the prison commission extended the application of the regime on the applicant. The decisions reiterated that the applicant “should consolidate his positive behaviour and carry out a deeper reassessment of his previous conduct”.
On 27 March 2013 the governor of Rzeszow Prison applied to the Prison Commission to lift the measure. The applicant’s behaviour had improved, he complied with internal regulations and was no longer aggressive towards the prison officers. According to the authorities he no longer posed a threat to the security of the prison. The regime was lifted on 27 March 2013.
Between 17 June 2009 and 9 December 2011 the applicant accumulated 372 Polish zlotys (PLN) in his release savings fund. In December 2012 he obtained further PLN 150 out of which half (PLN 75) was placed in his release savings fund.
The applicant did not open a deposit or a savings account and it appears that he did not receive any payments afterwards.
Article 88a § 2 (2) of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences (“the Code”) allows the imposition of the regime on a convicted person who poses a danger to the security of a prison by having:
“b) committed an assault on a prison officer or another person employed in a prison or a remand centre.”
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning the release savings fund are set out in the Court’s judgment in the case Siemaszko and Olszyński v. Poland (nos. 60975/08 and 35410/09, § 30, 13 September 2016, not final). In particular, Article 126 of the Code provides that 50% of the funds obtained by a convicted person, but no more than 4% of the national average monthly salary as established by the Central Statistical Office, should be deposited in his or her release savings fund to be returned to the prisoner upon his or her release. This money is intended to cover travel expenses to the place of residence and initial maintenance outside of the prison. The amount of savings in the fund was limited to one average monthly salary. Article 126 was amended with effect from 1 January 2012 so as to allow prisoners to place their savings in an interest-earning bank account of his or her choice. If a prisoner lacks sufficient funds on the day of his or her release, he or she may apply to the prison governor for a financial help in the amount of up to 30% of the average monthly salary (Article 166 § 3 of the Code).
The European Prison Rules are recommendations of the Committee of Ministers to member States of the Council of Europe as to the minimum standards to be applied in prisons. States are encouraged to be guided in legislation and policies by those rules and to ensure wide dissemination of the Rules to their judicial authorities as well as to prison staff and inmates.
The latest version of those Rules adopted in 2006 (“the 2006 Rules”) provides in so far as relevant:
“26.11 Prisoners shall be allowed to spend at least a part of their earnings on approved articles for their own use and to allocate a part of their earnings to their families.
12 Prisoners may be encouraged to save part of their earnings, which shall be handed over to them on release or used for other approved purposes.”