The application concerns the applicant’s forcible arrest, the lack of an effective investigation into his complaint and his conviction for holding a static demonstration in the vicinity of a court building.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Kazan. He was represented by Mr I.N. Sholokhov, a lawyer practising in Kazan.
The Government were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Government before the European Court of Human Rights, and then by Mr M. Galperin, his successor in that office.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 10 October 2007 the applicant notified the Kazan Town Hall of the intention of a group of dormitory residents to organise a static demonstration (“picket”, пикетирование) to defend their housing rights, between 9 a.m. and 11.30 a.m. on 18 October 2007, at Svoboda Square near the building of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Tatarstan, with around thirty people expected to attend.
On 12 October 2007 the Town Hall refused to approve the demonstration at the proposed location, stating that heavy road traffic and a car park for government vehicles would put the participants’ security in danger. They proposed that the demonstration be held inside the park at Svoboda Square or on the other side of Svoboda Square opposite a theatre.
On an unspecified date the applicant notified the authorities that he disagreed with the proposal to change the location of the demonstration.
Between 9 a.m. and 11.30 a.m. on 18 October 2007 the demonstration was held on the pavement close to Svoboda Square and the building of the Cabinet of Ministers opposite the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Tatarstan.
At 3.45 p.m. the applicant was forcibly arrested at a bus stop, taken to the Yapeyeva police department in the Vakhitovskiy District of Kazan, charged with administrative offences under Article 20.2 § 2 (on account of holding the demonstration in the vicinity of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Tatarstan) and Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) (on account of his “physical resistance” to police officers during his arrest), then released and taken to hospital.
On 20 October 2007 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint about the use of force by the police. In accordance with Article 24 § 1 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (lack of the constituent elements of a crime), the Kazan investigative committee at the prosecutor’s office of the Republic of Tatarstan refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers, concluding that the use of force had been lawful and not excessive. Its last refusal on 2 April 2008 was upheld by the domestic courts: first, the Vakhitovskiy District Court’s judgment of 8 April 2008 was upheld by the Supreme Court of the Republic of Tatarstan in a judgment of 29 April 2008 following appeals lodged by the applicant and the assistant prosecutor of Kazan; and then the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation rejected a request by the applicant for supervisory review of the above-mentioned judgments in a decision of 18 August 2008.
On 12 November 2007 the Justice of the Peace of the 4th Court Circuit of the Vakhitovskiy District of Kazan convicted the applicant of breaching the established procedure for conducting public assemblies (Article 20.2 § 2 of the CAO), on the grounds that the applicant had held the demonstration opposite the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Tatarstan, which was prohibited by law. The applicant was sentenced to a fine of 1,000 roubles (RUB).
On 16 November 2007 the Justice of the Peace of the 5th Court Circuit of the Vakhitovskiy District of Kazan convicted the applicant of disobeying a lawful order of the police (Article 19.3 § 1 of the CAO) and sentenced him to a fine of RUB 800.
The applicant appealed and on 23 and 30 November 2007 the Vakhitovskiy District Court of Kazan upheld the judgments of 12 and 16 November 2007 respectively.
On 11 January 2008 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Tatarstan granted the applicant’s subsequent request for supervisory review of the judgments in the proceedings which had ended with his conviction under Article 19.3 § 1 of the CAO. It held that the record of the applicant’s administrative offence had not contained specific reasons for his arrest, that those reasons had not been established in the course of the administrative proceedings, and that the record of the applicant’s administrative arrest had not been in the case file; thus there had been no lawful grounds for arresting him. It stressed that an administrative arrest was a measure of restraint which could be applied only in the exceptional circumstances provided for by law and that those circumstances had not been present in the applicant’s case. Therefore, there were no grounds for finding the applicant guilty of committing the administrative offence of disobeying a lawful order of the police under Article 19.3 § 1 of the CAO. The Supreme Court quashed the judgments of 16 and 30 November 2007 and discontinued the relevant administrative proceedings against the applicant.
The applicant lodged a civil claim in respect of non-pecuniary damage. On 26 June 2008 the Novo-Savinovskiy District Court of Kazan, relying on the judgment of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Tatarstan of 11 January 2008, established that in forcibly arresting the applicant, escorting him to the police station and bringing administrative proceedings against him under Article 19.3 § 1 of the CAO, the police officers from the Kazan Town Police Department had acted unlawfully, in the absence of legitimate grounds for “escorting” to a police station or an administrative arrest, and without drawing up any records. The applicant had had his passport and driving licence with him and there was nothing to indicate that it had been impossible to draw up a record of the administrative offence under Article 20.2 § 2 of the CAO on the spot. As a result of the use of force by the police the applicant had sustained injuries, which had subsequently been confirmed by medical certificates, notably contusion to the soft tissue of the right hand and a haematoma, contusion to the soft tissue of the chest and in the area of the right shoulder and right knee joint, bruises and abrasions to the neck, and haemorrhage in the area of the upper lip.
Relying on the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. 1-P of 25 January 2001 and decision no. 440-O of 4 December 2003, the court held that Article 1070 § 1 of the Civil Code, which provided for the State’s strict liability in certain cases, also applied to situations like the applicant’s in which harm had resulted from other equivalent measures of restraint such as escorting and administrative arrest, the latter being equivalent to the measure of administrative detention expressly included in Article 1070 § 1 because the duration of the administrative detention included the duration of the administrative arrest by virtue of Article 32.8 of the CAO.
It awarded the applicant RUB 10,000 in respect of the nonpecuniary damage sustained by him as a result of the police officers’ unlawful actions, to be paid by the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation.
On 31 July 2008 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Tatarstan upheld the District Court’s judgment on appeal lodged by the respondent.
For a summary of domestic law concerning the conduct of public events, liability for breaches committed during such events, and administrative escorting and arrest, see Lashmankin and Others v. Russia, nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, §§ 216-42, 298-300 and 308-10, 7 February 2017.