The case originated in an application (no. 34742/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a national of Uzbekistan, Mr Fayzullo Yuldashevich Egamberdiyev (“the applicant”), on 30 May 2013.
The applicant was represented by Ms N. Yermolayeva, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that his removal to Uzbekistan would expose him to a high risk of ill-treatment in breach of Article 3 of the Convention. He complained that his detention in the framework of removal proceedings had been incompatible with the requirements of Article 5 § 1 (f) of the Convention.
On 31 May 2013 the Acting President of the First Section decided to indicate to the Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the applicant should not be expelled from Russia for the duration of the proceedings before the Court. The Acting President also decided to give priority to the application under Rule 41.
On 24 September 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1975 in the Andijan Region of Uzbekistan.
The applicant first arrived in Russia in November 2008. In summer 2009 he applied for Russian nationality using a false name and a forged Kyrgyz passport. His application was granted on 16 March 2010.
On 31 July 2009 an investigator from the National Security Service of Uzbekistan issued a decision to charge the applicant with membership of the extremist organisation Nurchilar (also spelled Nurcilar) and possession and dissemination of extremist literature, offences under Articles 244-1(3) and 244-2(1) of the Uzbek Criminal Code. A search warrant was issued on the same date. On 5 August 2009 the Unus-Abad District Court ordered the applicant’s arrest.
On 22 February 2013 the applicant was arrested in Omsk and charged with using a false identity document to cross the Russian border. Once his real identity had been established, he was detained pending extradition proceedings. On 26 February 2013 the Isilkul Town Court of the Omsk Region imposed a custodial preventive measure, which was subsequently extended on 22 March and 22 April 2013 until 22 June 2013.
On 22 March 2013 the Russian Prosecutor General’s office received an extradition request from his Uzbek counterpart. The request stated that the applicant was wanted in Uzbekistan in connection with his membership of an extremist organisation, an offence under Article 244-1(1) of the Uzbek Criminal Code.
On 23 May 2013 the Isilkul town prosecutor lifted the custodial measure that had been imposed in the extradition proceedings. The extradition was adjourned until such time as the criminal proceedings against the applicant on the charge of using a false document had been completed.
As of the date of the applicant’s most recent submission of 6 March 2014, he was not aware of the outcome of the extradition proceedings.
On 23 May 2013, immediately after the applicant’s release from custody, the Isilkul Town Court heard an administrative case against him on the charge of illegal residence in Russia, an offence under Article 18.8 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences. The Town Court found the applicant guilty and sentenced him to a fine and administrative removal from Russia (“expulsion order”). Pending removal, he was to be held in the Centre for Social Adaptation for foreign nationals.
On 29 May 2013 the applicant asked the Court to apply interim measures under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court to prevent his expulsion to Uzbekistan. The Court granted his request on 31 May 2013.
On 11 June 2013 the Omsk Regional Court summarily rejected the appeal against the Town Court’s expulsion order of 23 May 2013.
In the meantime, on 6 June 2013 an investigator with the border control department of the Federal Security Service for the Kurgan and Tyumen Regions had the applicant transferred from the Centre for Social Adaptation to the Kazanskoye police ward in the Tyumen Region pending the criminal proceedings against him on the charge of using a false passport.
On the following day the Kazanskiy District Court of the Tyumen Region issued a detention order against the applicant and he was placed in remand prison IZ-72/2 in the Tyumen Region.
On 17 September 2013 the Kazanskiy District Court found the applicant guilty of using two false passports and of illegally crossing the Russian border, and sentenced him to a fine. He was released in the courtroom.
On 27 March 2013, while in custody awaiting a decision on the extradition request, the applicant applied for refugee status in Russia, claiming that he feared persecution on account of his religious beliefs.
By a decision of 20 June 2013, the Omsk division of the Federal Migration Service (“the FMS”) refused the application, finding that the applicant had waited for about five years after his first entry to Russia before asking for asylum, that he had used false names and documents in order to stay in Russia, and that he had no credible claim of a risk of persecution.
The applicant lodged a hierarchical appeal, which was rejected by the central office of the FMS on 11 September 2013. The decision was notified to his lawyer by letter of 16 September 2013.
Unaware of the refusal, on 18 September 2013 the applicant went to the Omsk office of the FMS for a certificate of pending refugee-status proceedings, which would have allowed him to reside legally in Russia. He was arrested in the office and placed into custody pending expulsion under the expulsion order of 23 May 2013 (see paragraph 13 above).
On 22 January 2014 the Basmannyi District Court of Moscow rejected an appeal lodged by the applicant against the FMS’s decision of 11 September 2013. The District Court found that the applicant had failed to prove that he risked persecution in Uzbekistan.
An appeal against the District Court’s judgment is pending. The applicant is now in custody in the Omsk Centre for Social Adaptation.
Pursuant to section 34(5) of the Foreigners Act (Law no. 115-FZ of 25 July 2002), foreign nationals subject to administrative removal who have been placed in custody pursuant to a court order are detained in special facilities until the execution of the decision on administrative removal.
Article 3.10 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences defines administrative removal as the forced and controlled removal of a foreign national or a stateless person across the Russian border. Under Article 3.10 § 2, administrative removal is imposed by a judge or, in cases where a foreign national or a stateless person has committed an administrative offence upon entry to the Russian Federation, by a competent public official. Under Article 3.10 § 5, for the purposes of execution of the decision on administrative removal a judge may order the detention of the foreign national or the stateless person in a special facility.
Under Article 31.9 § 1 a decision imposing an administrative penalty ceases to be enforceable after the expiry of two years from the date on which the decision became final.
Article 3.9 provides that an administrative offender can be punished with administrative detention only in exceptional circumstances, and for a maximum term of thirty days.
In decision no. 6-R of 17 February 1998 the Constitutional Court stated, with reference to Article 22 of the Constitution concerning the right to liberty and personal integrity, that a person subject to administrative removal could be placed in detention without a court order for a term not exceeding forty-eight hours. Detention for over forty-eight hours was permitted only on the basis of a court order and provided that the administrative removal could not be effected otherwise. The court order was necessary to guarantee protection not only from arbitrary detention of over forty-eight hours, but also from arbitrary detention as such, while the court assessed the lawfulness of and reasons for the placement of the person in custody. The Constitutional Court further noted that detention for an indefinite term would amount to an inadmissible restriction on the right to liberty as it would constitute punishment not provided for in Russian law and which was contrary to the Constitution.
For relevant reports on Uzbekistan by the UN institutions and NGOs until 2011, see Abdulkhakov v. Russia, no. 14743/11, §§ 99-105, 2 October 2012 and Zokhidov v. Russia, no. 67286/10, §§ 107-113, 5 February 2013.
The 2014 World Report published by Human Rights Watch on 21 January 2014, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“Uzbekistan’s human rights record remained abysmal across a wide spectrum of violations. The country is virtually closed to independent scrutiny ...
Torture remains systematic in the criminal justice system. The International Committee of the Red Cross took the unusual step in April of announcing publicly its decision to end prison visits in Uzbekistan. It cited its inability to follow standard procedures for visits, including being able to access all detainees of concern and speaking with detainees in private ...
...
Torture plagues Uzbekistan’s places of detention, where it is often used to coerce confessions and occurs with impunity. Methods include beating with batons and plastic bottles, hanging by the wrists and ankles, rape, and sexual humiliation.
There is no evidence that the introduction of habeas corpus in 2008 has reduced torture in pretrial custody or ensured due process for detainees. Authorities routinely violate the right to counsel. Defense lawyers that take on politically sensitive cases have been disbarred since the passage of a law in 2009 dissolving the independent bar association.
The government regularly denies the existence of torture and has failed to implement meaningful recommendations made by the United Nations special rapporteur in 2003 or similar ones by international bodies in the past decade.
Authorities refuse to investigate torture allegations and Human Rights Watch continues to receive credible reports of torture, including suspicious deaths in custody ...
Authorities continued their campaign of arbitrary detention and torture of Muslims who practice their faith outside state controls. In April, the Initiative Group of Independent Human Rights Defenders estimated there were 12,000 persons currently imprisoned on vague and overbroad charges related to ‘religious extremism,’ with over 200 convicted this year alone.
Followers of the late Turkish Muslim theologian Said Nursi were imprisoned for religious extremism ...
Authorities often extend sentences of prisoners convicted of ‘religious’ offenses for alleged violations of prison regulations. Such extensions occur without due process and add years to a prisoner’s sentence. They appear aimed at keeping religious prisoners incarcerated indefinitely ...”
Amnesty International’s Annual Report for 2012, released on 23 May 2013, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“Concerns remained over the frequent use of torture and other ill-treatment to extract confessions, in particular from those suspected of links with banned religious groups ...
Torture and other ill-treatment of detainees and prisoners by security forces and prison personnel continued to be routine. Scores of reports of torture and other ill-treatment emerged during the year, especially from men and women suspected or convicted of belonging to Islamic movements and Islamist groups and parties or other religious groups, banned in Uzbekistan. As in previous years, the authorities failed to conduct prompt, thorough, and impartial investigations into such reports and into complaints lodged with the Prosecutor General’s Office ...
The authorities continued to seek the extradition of suspected members of Islamic movements and Islamist groups and parties banned in Uzbekistan in the name of security and the fight against terrorism. They also requested the extradition of political opponents, government critics and wealthy individuals out of favour with the regime. Many of these extradition requests were based on fabricated or unreliable evidence. The government offered diplomatic assurances to sending states to secure the returns, pledging free access to detention centres for independent monitors and diplomats. In practice, they did not honour these guarantees. Those forcibly returned to Uzbekistan faced incommunicado detention, torture and other ill-treatment and, after unfair trials, long prison sentences in cruel, inhuman and degrading conditions. The authorities were also accused of attempting assassinations of political opponents living abroad ...”
The report of Amnesty International published on 3 July 2013, entitled “Eurasia: Return to torture: Extradition, forcible returns and removals to Central Asia”, covered the situation of extradition, expulsion and forcible returns from Ukraine and Russia to the countries of Central Asia. The report reads, in so far as relevant:
“Over the past two decades thousands of people across the region have alleged that they have been arbitrarily detained and tortured or ill-treated in custody in order to extract a forced confession or money from relatives. In this period, piecemeal reforms have been introduced in most Central Asia countries with the aim of strengthening the accountability of law enforcement agencies and improving the protection available in the criminal justice system. Nowhere, however, have they had any significant success in eliminating the practices of torture and other ill-treatment that are often used in relation to people suspected of ordinary crimes, and routinely used in relation to political opponents and individuals suspected of involvement in extremism and terrorism-related activities or in banned religious groups ...
In all five republics [Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan], detainees are often tortured and ill-treated while being held incommunicado for initial interrogations. Those detained in closed detention facilities run by National Security Services on charges related to national security or ‘religious extremism’ are at particular risk of torture and other ill-treatment ...”
Amnesty International’s written statement to the 25th session of the UN Human Rights Council (3-28 March 2014), entitled “Uzbekistan: Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in Uzbekistan”, reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“Despite some formal steps toward strengthening safeguards against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, serious concerns remain about Uzbekistan’s failure to implement existing laws and safeguards, to adopt new effective measures toward the prevention of torture, and to hold accountable those responsible for torture. Amnesty International is concerned that impunity prevails in Uzbekistan as the prosecution of individuals suspected of being responsible for torture or other ill-treatment continues to remain the exception rather than the rule.
Amnesty International has continued to receive persistent and credible allegations of routine and pervasive torture and other ill-treatment by security forces during arrest, transfer, in police custody and in pre-trial detention and by security forces and prison personnel in post-conviction detention facilities. These include scores of reports that individuals charged with or convicted of “anti-state” and terrorism-related offences, in particular members or suspected members of political opposition parties and banned Islamic movements or Islamist groups and parties, continue to be particularly vulnerable to being tortured or otherwise ill-treated by security forces.
Methods of torture or other ill-treatment in detention described by former prisoners, including released human rights defenders, include beating detainees with batons, iron rods, bottles filled with water while they are handcuffed to radiators or suspended from ceiling hooks, asphyxiation with plastic bags or gasmasks with the air supply turned off, inserting needles under finger or toenails, electroshock, dousing with freezing water, and rape of both men and women. Amnesty International’s research shows that in the vast majority of cases the authorities have failed to conduct effective investigations into allegations of torture or other ill-treatment by detainees.
...
Torture and other ill-treatment continue to be used specifically to extract confessions and other incriminating information and more generally to intimidate and punish detainees, including human rights defenders, individuals perceived to be political opponents or who have fallen out of favour with the authorities. The courts continue to heavily rely on these so-called “confessions” extracted under torture, duress or deception. Too often judges are willing to ignore or dismiss as unfounded allegations of torture or other ill-treatment, even when presented with credible evidence in court, despite directives by the Plenum of the Supreme Court of Uzbekistan explicitly prohibiting the use of torture to extract confessions and the admissibility of such tainted evidence in court proceedings. Such directives have been issued twice in the last decade, but have had virtually no effect.”