The case concerns the alleged unlawful arrest and illtreatment of the applicant by police officers.
The applicant was born in 1990 and lives in Visoca. She was represented by Mr V. Jereghi, a lawyer practising in Chișinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Grosu.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 5 April 2009 general elections took place in Moldova. The preliminary results of those elections were announced on 6 April 2009. The results indicated that the ruling Communist Party of Moldova had narrowly won the elections.
On 6 April 2009 growing discontent with the results of the elections and with alleged electoral fraud was expressed, notably in various online forums. At 6 p.m. several hundred people, mostly young, gathered in front of the Stephen the Great (Ştefan cel Mare) monument in the centre of Chişinău. Half an hour later there were already approximately three to four thousand people assembled in the centre. They began to protest against the alleged electoral fraud, doing so in front of the Presidential Palace and the Parliament buildings and then returning to the Great National Assembly Square. A bigger demonstration was then announced for 10 a.m. the next day.
On 7 April 2009 the protest recommenced with the participation of some five to six thousand people. While the demonstration was peaceful at the beginning, several hundreds of the participants gradually became violent. As established by the subsequently created parliamentary inquiry commission tasked with the elucidation of the causes and consequences of the events following the general election held on 5 April 2009 in Moldova (“the Commission”), two incidents of poorly planned interventions by a fire engine and riot police brought the crowd to a point beyond which massive violent acts could no longer be prevented. Following violent attacks and stone throwing, which met with very weak police resistance, approximately 250 violent protesters were eventually able to take over the lower floors of the Presidential Palace and the Parliament buildings. They looted those floors and set the canteen in the Presidential Palace alight. During the night, several fires broke out in the Parliament building.
At approximately 1 a.m. on 8 April 2009 various police and Special Forces units started a massive operation aimed at re-establishing public order. However, as established by the Commission, excessive force was used and all those still present in the main square were arrested regardless of whether they had acted violently or not. The arrests continued for several days. The media reported cases and showed video footage of young people being arrested and/or beaten by both uniformed police and plain-clothed officers in the city centre on 8 April and the days that followed, long after the protests ended on the evening of 7 April 2009.
On the evening of 7 April 2009 the applicant went, together with her roommate R., to the Great National Assembly Square (Piaţa Marii Adunări Naţionale, hereinafter “PMAN”) in Chişinău because of rumours about protests going on there. At PMAN they met the applicant’s relative, Mr V. Boboc, with whom they stayed until late at night.
According to the applicant, Mr Boboc, R. and herself were part of a group of around fifty young people who stood peacefully in the street and discussed the events of the day. At around 1 a.m. in the morning of 8 April 2009 their group was surrounded by the police protecting the Government’s building, a special forces battalion in masks and plain-clothed officers armed with automatic rifles and rubber sticks. The youngsters were ordered to lie down on the ground and were kicked and severely beaten with rubber sticks and rifles. She had her head hit against the pavement and then received several blows. Following that they were taken by police cars to various police detention centres. While being taken to the police car, the applicant and R. saw the police kicking Mr Boboc, who was unconscious and no longer reacting to the beatings. Several days later it became known that Mr Boboc had died.
On 13 April 2009 the applicant gave an interview to the television channel PRO-TV Chişinău, stating what she had witnessed the impugned event. Her identity was concealed in the video. Following the airing of that interview, the authorities asked journalists from PRO-TV to reveal the applicant’s identity, which they refused to do. Mr V. Boboc’s father and his lawyer were also asked by the prosecution to reveal the applicant’s identity.
On 14 April 2009 the applicant went to a medical specialist in order to obtain medical confirmation of the nature and extent of her injuries. She was afraid for her life and therefore declared that she had been attacked by an unknown person on the street on 7 April 2009. The doctor found one injury to her right foot (16 by 15 centimetres).
In a complaint to the Prosecutor General, on 4 May 2009, the applicant wrote about the events of the night of 7 to 8 April 2009, including the beatings to which she, R. and Mr Boboc had been subjected at PMAN. Having been brought to the Buiucani police station, all the individuals arrested (approximately twenty young men and three young women, including the applicant and R.) had been ordered to stand against the wall with their hands up against the wall and had been beaten every time they tried to speak or move. One by one the young men had been taken to one of the offices and ordered to take down their trousers. This had been followed by sounds of beating and the victims’ screams. All the young men returning from the office had had clear signs of ill-treatment and one of them had been completely naked when released. All three young women had been taken together to the office and had been insulted and shouted at, but no physical violence had been used. No explanation had been given to them about the reason for their arrest.
At approximately 5 a.m. on 8 April 2009 the young women had been released and had been advised to leave the city. R. had declared that she had feared for her life and had thus decided to leave the city and change her mobile phone number. She had also refused to undergo a medical examination. The applicant asked the Prosecutor General to investigate her complaints thoroughly and to bring to justice those responsible for her illtreatment and unlawful detention for over five hours without explaining to her the reasons for her arrest or allowing her to inform her relatives about her detention.
Between 4 and 15 May 2009 the applicant was examined by doctors from the Memoria Rehabilitation Centre for Torture Victims, a nongovernmental organisation financed by the European Union and a member of the General Assembly of the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims (IRCT). She underwent detailed medical tests and examinations by various medical specialists at the aforementioned centre. In a document entitled “Extract from the medical file” (Extras din Fişa Medicală), dated 15 May 2009, issued by the centre, it was stated, inter alia, that the applicant was suffering from headaches, vertigo, and insomnia; she had nightmares with scenes from the traumatic events, heartache, especially during emotional or physical exertion, anxiety and obsessive flashbacks. Using several methods of psychological examination, the experts determined that the applicant had suffered a series of traumatic events and showed clear signs of post-traumatic stress disorder. Provisional medical results showed that the applicant was suffering from, inter alia, the consequences of cranial trauma.
On 1 June 2009 the applicant was interviewed – her identity was concealed – by an investigating judge in respect of Mr Boboc’s death. On the same day she was interviewed by a prosecutor about her allegations of 4 May 2009.
On an unknown date the prosecutor rejected the applicant’s lawyer’s request to offer her witness protection, indicating that concealing her identity was sufficient. On 4 June 2009 the applicant’s lawyer informed the media that he had interviewed a person who had witnessed the killing of Mr Boboc by the police.
On 26 June 2009 the respondent Government were notified of the application.
On 22 July 2009 the military prosecutor’s office initiated a criminal investigation into the applicant’s allegations made on 4 May 2009. According to the Government, the applicant had not left her address or contact number and she could only be reached via her lawyer.
On 23 March 2010 the criminal investigation initiated on 22 July 2009 was joined to another one, concerning a number of alleged beatings by the police and special forces during the relevant events.
On 15 January 2013 the criminal investigation mentioned in the preceding paragraph was suspended. According to that decision, some 200 members of the Fulger special forces battalion had been questioned, victims and witnesses had been interviewed and numerous video recordings, public and private, had been examined. Despite all these actions, it was impossible to determine specifically which officer had applied physical force to which victim and whether such use of force had been required under the circumstances.
In parallel to the criminal investigations mentioned in paragraphs 1719 above, a number of other investigations were initiated against various officers, in which the applicant appeared as a witness. One such officer (G.) was acquitted by the first-instance court on 11 October 2011.
That judgment was overturned by the Chișinău Court of Appeal on 2 November 2015. The court found G. guilty of negligence, having established that he had been on duty at Buiucani police station on 7-8 April 2009. He had not carried out his lawful duties when witnessing a number of young people, including the applicant and R., being brought to the police premises where some were ill-treated. On 18 May 2016 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld that judgment, also referring, inter alia, to witness accounts of the events at the police station, including the statements by the applicant and R.
On 14 November 2012 the Government adopted its decision no. 853 to help individuals who had suffered as a result of the events of April 2009. The individuals mentioned in that decision received compensation in the amounts of between 3,000 and 7,000 Moldovan lei (MDL – the equivalent of approximately 192 and 447 euros (EUR) respectively). The applicant received MDL 7,000.
Under Article 2872 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the investigating authority has to inform the victim and other interested parties of the decision taken, as well as of their right to challenge it before the investigating judge.
According to the findings of the parliamentary inquiry commission tasked with the elucidation of the causes and consequences of the events following the general elections held on 5 April 2009 in Moldova (“the Commission”) in its 2010 final report, arrests of suspected participants at the events of 7-8 April 2009 continued until 12 April 2009 (page 88 of the report).