The case originated in an application (no. 47137/07) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Ms Surayya Musa gizi Tahirova (Sürəyya Musa qızı Tahirova - “the applicant”), on 28 March 2007.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Mustafayev, a lawyer practising in Sumgayit. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had been beaten up by the police during the dispersal of a demonstration and that the domestic authorities had failed to investigate this incident. She also alleged that the police intervention in the demonstration had constituted a violation of her right to freedom of peaceful assembly.
On 10 November 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Sumgayit.
She is a person with a Category 2 disability and receives a disability pension.
On 6 November 2005 parliamentary elections were held in Azerbaijan.
Following the announcement of the results of the elections, the opposition electoral coalition Azadliq decided to hold demonstrations to protest against alleged irregularities during the parliamentary elections of 6 November 2005.
On 26 November 2005 Azadliq held a demonstration, scheduled from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. at Galaba Square in Baku, to protest against alleged election irregularities. Shortly after 5 p.m. police began an operation to forcibly disperse the demonstrators, because the demonstration had continued beyond the authorised time-limit. The dispersal operation was conducted by riot police units fully equipped with helmets, shields and truncheons.
The applicant and her family participated in the demonstration. According to the applicant, at around 4.45 p.m. she was walking slowly to the edge of the square to wait for her husband to join her so that they could go home. Suddenly, she saw demonstrators beginning to run away from the square in a chaotic manner. At the same moment she was hit on the head and back several times from behind. When she turned round she was kicked in the chest and abdomen area. She managed to see that the persons who had kicked her were police officers in uniform and equipped with shield and truncheon. She lost consciousness and fell to the ground.
Several news agencies managed to take photographs of the applicant lying unconscious on the ground surrounded by police officers. Some of these photographs were published in various newspapers and other news outlets.
The applicant lay in the same spot for an unspecified period of time. She lost and regained consciousness several times. According to the applicant, when she was conscious she saw several civilians trying to help her, but these attempts were actively prevented by the riot police and their police dogs. For a long time the riot police did not allow the ambulance units stationed at the square to provide her with any assistance, and she was finally taken to hospital only after a number of civilians had urged the riot police to allow this.
The applicant was admitted to the hospital at 6.30 p.m. The medical record concerning the applicant reads as follows:
“Tahirova Surayya Musa gizi, born in 1953 and lives in Sumgayit, does not work, admitted at 6.30-35 p.m. on 26 November 2005 and left on 27 November 2005.
Full diagnosis of the main disease, other diseases: blunt trauma of the abdomen and diabetes.
The patient was admitted to the hospital with pain under the left ribs and general weakness. According to her, she was beaten up by police officers at Galaba Square on 26 November 2005 at around 5 p.m. She was taken to the hospital from the scene of the incident by an ambulance. She was examined in the hospital. In the objective examination, in palpation the abdomen is not hard, and is involved in respiration. There is a little sharp pain under the left ribs. Ultrasound examination does not reveal free liquid or traumatic changes in the abdomen. No fracture is apparent in the left part of the rib cage during X-ray examination. The patient was transferred for further examination and dynamic observation to Reanimation and Intensive Therapy Department. On 27 November 2005, at the request of the patient and her relatives, she left the hospital (in a stable condition).”
The applicant spent the night in the hospital and received in-patient treatment. Her condition was stabilised and she was discharged the next morning.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a civil action against the Ministry of Internal Affairs, asking for compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage caused by ill-treatment and breach of her right to freedom of peaceful assembly. She argued that the riot police units of the Ministry of Internal Affairs had used unlawful, unjustified and excessive force against her, and had failed to comply with their duty to provide urgent medical assistance to persons injured as a result of the use of force. In support of her claims she submitted copies of the relevant medical documents and photographs of the incident.
In the course of the proceedings, the representative of the Ministry of Internal Affairs rejected the applicant’s claim. His submissions were as follows:
“Firstly, the duration of the demonstration was determined in advance. The event should have begun at 3 p.m. and end at 5 p.m. However, without taking into consideration the end of this period, the demonstrators stayed there with the intention of continuing unlawfully the demonstration. It should be noted that soldiers of Internal Troops were not there. Only police officers and Riot Police Regiment were at the square. They asked with loudspeakers the demonstrators to leave the square after the end of the demonstration. The police officers did not infringe the requirements of the legislation. On the contrary, numerous demonstrators did not leave the square unlawfully after the end of the period determined in advance.”
The representative of the Ministry of Internal Affairs was silent as to the applicant’s particular complaint on her ill-treatment by the police.
On 31 March 2006 the Sabayil District Court dismissed the applicant’s claim, finding that she had failed to prove her allegations, in particular that she had been beaten or had otherwise sustained physical or psychological damage as a result of the police actions. In this connection, the court held, without further explanation, that the medical record and photographs submitted to the court did not constitute proof of the applicant’s allegations. The court also held that the forcible dispersal of the demonstration was lawful, because the demonstrators had stayed at Galaba Square beyond 5 p.m., the time-limit permitted by the authorities. The relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“Article 7 of the Law on Freedom of Assembly of the Republic of Azerbaijan provides the possibility to place restriction on freedom of assembly for the prevention of disorder or crimes, for the protection of public interests and state security, as well as for the protection of other interests which are necessary in a democratic society.
According to Article 14 of the same law, the police authorities are entitled to warn organisers and participants that force will be used in the event that an order to suspend the assembly and for its participants to disperse is not executed, and to use appropriate force to ensure the suspension of the assembly and the dispersal of its participants...
At the court hearing, the applicant failed to submit any evidence proving that the police dispersed the gathering of 26 November 2005 before 5 p.m. On the contrary, it was established that police officers did not intervene in the demonstration until 5 p.m. and, only after the end of the determined period and following numerous warnings, the demonstrators were dispersed...
Moreover, the applicant failed to submit to the court reliable evidence proving that she was injured because she had been beaten by the police and as a result she lost consciousness and fell to the ground. The medical record and the photographs do not mean that the claim was substantiated.”
On 5 June 2006 the applicant appealed against this judgment, reiterating her complaints. In particular, she noted that the court had not examined in detail copies of the relevant medical documents and photographs, which showed that she had been ill-treated by the police.
On 11 August 2006 the Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s judgment. The Court of Appeal’s judgment is almost identical in its wording to the first-instance court’s judgment and reiterates the same reasons for the dismissal of the applicant’s appeal.
On 12 December 2006 the Supreme Court upheld the lower courts’ judgments.
Article 46 (III) of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan reads as follows:
“No one shall be subjected to torture or ill-treatment. No one shall be subjected to degrading treatment or punishment. ...”
Article 49 of the Constitution provides:
“I. Everyone has the right to freely assemble together with others.
Everyone has the right, upon notification to relevant Government bodies in advance, to assemble peacefully with others, without arms, and to hold rallies, meetings, demonstrations, street marches and pickets.”
The relevant part of the Law on Police reads as follows:
“Special equipments are truncheons, arm-restraining instruments, tear gas, rubber bullets, water cannons, special devices forcible stopping of vehicles and other special equipments provided by the legislation of the Republic of Azerbaijan...”
“VI. According to the requirements of this law, use of physical force, special equipments or firearms in cases of extreme necessity shall be proportionate to the danger posed...
The relevant police authorities must carry out an inquiry into every incident involving the use of physical force, special equipments or firearms by a police officer and must issue a pertinent opinion on its lawfulness.
Unlawful use of physical force, special equipments or firearms by a police officer entails the officer’s responsibility under the relevant legislation.”
“I. The police officer in the course of the implementation of his duties in respect of use of physical force, special equipments or firearms should:
use physical force, special equipments or firearms against a person only in the event of absolute necessity or necessary self-defence, after all other means of coercion have failed to produce the required result, and in proportion to the gravity of the offence and the personality of the offender;
provide the necessary medical aid to anyone injured as a result of the use of physical force, special equipments or firearms;
report to the police office where he or she serves or to the police office of the area where firearms have been used, in writing, on the occasions he or she used physical force, special equipments or firearms;
inform the relevant prosecutor, in writing, of any use of physical force, special equipments or firearms within twenty-four hours.”
The relevant provisions of the CCrP concerning the institution of criminal proceedings read as follows:
“37.1. Depending on the nature and severity of the offence, the criminal prosecution shall be carried out in the form of private, public-private or public charges in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
2. A private criminal prosecution shall take place only upon a complaint by the victim concerning offences under Articles 147 [defamation], 148 [insult], 165.1 [infringement of copyrights and related rights] and 166.1 [infringement of patent and invention rights] of the Criminal Code and shall be discontinued in the event of reconciliation between the victim and the accused before the court deliberates.
3. A public-private criminal prosecution shall take place upon a complaint by the victim or, in the circumstances provided for in Article 37.5 of this Code, on the initiative of the prosecutor for offences under Articles 127 [deliberate infliction of less serious injury to health], 128 [deliberate infliction of minor injury to health], 129.2, 130.2, 131.1 [inflection of less serious injury to health by negligence], 132-134 [beating; ill-treatment; death threat or threat of inflection of serious injury to health], 142.1, 149.1, 150.1, 151, 156-158, 163, 175-177.1, 178.1, 179.1, 184.1, 186.1, 190.1, 197 and 201.1 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan...
5. Where no complaint is made by the victim, a public-private criminal prosecution may be initiated by the prosecutor only in the following cases:
5.2. if the offence was committed by or against a representative of the authority or other officials of State authorities;
6. In respect of other offences which are not provided for in Articles 37.2. and 37.3. of this Code, the criminal prosecution shall be carried out in the form of public charges.”
“39.1. A criminal prosecution may not be launched or, if already launched, shall be discontinued (as well as the criminal case may not be instituted or proceedings in the criminal case shall be discontinued) in the following circumstances:
1.8. if the victim has not lodged a complaint (in the case of a private prosecution or if the prosecutor does not take the initiative in launching the criminal prosecution in the case of public-private charges)...”
“46.1. There shall be proper reason and grounds for the institution of criminal proceedings relating to a public or semi-public prosecution.
2. The reason for instituting criminal proceedings may be an application from an individual, information from a legal entity (official) or the media, or information directly obtained by the investigator or the prosecutor, concerning an offence committed or in preparation.”
Article 7 provides that any restriction on freedom of assembly may be placed only by law and for the purposes of protection of the following interests necessary in a democratic society: 1) for the protection of the interests of public and state security 2) for the prevention of disturbance of public order 3) for the prevention of disorder or crime 4) for the protection of the health of the population 5) for the protection of morals 6) for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
Article 14 sets out the powers and duties of the police in connection with the holding of an assembly. According to Article 14.I.3, the police have the right to suspend an assembly, if the need arises, when the conduct of the assembly does not meet the conditions provided in the prior written notification. Article 14.II also provides that the police have the right to inform organisers of and participants in an assembly of its suspension and dispersal, to order organisers and participants to use all available means for suspension of the assembly and dispersal of participants, to warn organisers and participants that force will be used in the event that an order to suspend the assembly and for its participants to disperse is not executed, and to use appropriate force to ensure the suspension of the assembly and the dispersal of its participants. Use of physical force or special equipments by the police should in any case be proportional to the danger in question (Article 14.6).
The relevant extracts from the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials (adopted by the UN General Assembly Resolution 34/169 of 17 November 1979) read:
“Law enforcement officials may use force only when strictly necessary and to the extent required for the performance of their duty.”
“No law enforcement official may inflict, instigate or tolerate any act of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, nor may any law enforcement official invoke superior orders or exceptional circumstances such as a state of war or a threat of war, a threat to national security, internal political instability or any other public emergency as a justification of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
The relevant extracts from the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials (adopted by the Eighth UN Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, Cuba, 27 August to 7 September 1990) read:
“13.  In the dispersal of assemblies that are unlawful but non-violent, law enforcement officials shall avoid the use of force or, where that is not practicable, shall restrict such force to the minimum extent necessary.”
The relevant extracts from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) Election Observation Mission Final Report on parliamentary elections of 6 November 2005 (1 February 2006) read:
“On 9, 13 and 19 November Azadliq organized and received permission to hold rallies at Galaba Square to protest election irregularities. No serious incidents were reported...
The Azadliq and other opposition parties organized another protest meeting on November 26 at Galaba Square. This meeting took place after the departure of the EOM (Election Observation Mission) from Azerbaijan. Police dispersed the participants, using considerable force, immediately after expiration of the allotted time for the meeting.”