The case originated in an application (no. 46192/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Pavlovich Malyshev (“the applicant”), on 9 September 2007.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr E.V. Markov, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been ill-treated by the officers of a local department of the Federal Drug Control Service and that the inquiry into his ill-treatment complaint had been ineffective.
On 18 February 2013 notice of the complaints concerning the applicant’s alleged ill-treatment in police custody, the authorities’ failure to carry out an effective investigation into his complaints, the lack of the effective remedy in respect of that complaint and an alleged interference with the applicant’s property rights was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in St Petersburg.
According to the official account of the events, on 10 January 2007 officers of the Cherepovets Unit of the Vologda Regional Department of the Federal Service of Drug Control (“the Drug Control Service”, “the FSKN”) held an operative-search activity “test purchase” in respect of the applicant on the basis of the operative information received from K., the applicant’s acquaintance, who had identified him as a person who had been selling drugs to her since November 2006.
At about 8 p.m. on that date the Drug control officers apprehended the applicant on the street and brought him to the local Drug Control office. The arrest record was not compiled.
According to the applicant, a FSKN officer G. searched him, seized a mobile phone, 100 US dollars (USD) and 7,100 Russian roubles (RUB) allegedly won by the applicant in a casino, planted sachets of methamphetamine on him and “replaced” a part of the banknotes (RUB 2,100) belonging to the applicant with those marked with special substance. G. allegedly hit the applicant to the head and body and threatened to rape him. Then at some point the officer again searched the applicant in the presence of lay witnesses and seized the drugs from him.
On the same date an investigator recorded the applicant’s explanations. The applicant submitted, in particular, that the police had seized RUB 7,100 from him. The record, signed by the applicant without any objections, did not mention the mobile phone or an amount in US dollars.
Between 8.20 p.m. and 9.20 p.m. the applicant was searched at the Drug Control office in the presence of the lay witnesses Pop. and Lap. Methamphetamine and MDMA, commonly known as “ecstasy”, and the sum of RUB 7,100 were seized from him. The applicant signed the record and had not objected to its contents.
On the same date G. proposed to the applicant to participate in another “test purchase”, that is to buy drugs from a certain private person. G. allegedly threatened to beat and rape him if the test purchase failed. According to subsequent refusals to initiate criminal proceedings, the applicant agreed that his USD 100 be used for the test purchase.
On 11 January 2007 the applicant met the dealer and gave him money but the latter allegedly fled the police. The applicant did not come back to the Drug Control office, allegedly out of fear. The official account of the events is that the applicant escaped during the covert operation.
On the same date the applicant met Ms B., his partner, and told her that he had been ill-treated by a Drug Control officer. Ms B. did not see any injuries on his body. The applicant told her that the policemen had hit him to the head, so that the injuries could not be seen on him.
The applicant did not undergo a medical examination after these events.
On 17 January 2007 the applicant called Ms Kud., his acquaintance, using the SIM card he had previously used in the mobile phone allegedly taken from him by G. (as confirmed by Mal.’s statement and a billing record). According to the applicant, he inserted the card into a different mobile phone to make a call.
At about 11 p.m. on 17 January 2007 the Drug Control officers apprehended the applicant and brought him onto the Drug Control premises. At 0.25 a.m. on 18 January 2007 the applicant’s arrest as a suspect was recorded. At 3.10 a.m. on the same date the applicant was transferred to the temporary detention centre of Cherepovets (“the IVS”). He was examined by the IVS officer on arrival. No injuries were found on him.
According to the IVS logbooks, at 9.40 a.m. on 18 January 2007 the applicant was transferred from the IVS to the Drug Control Service.
The applicant submits that officer G. threatened him there and urged him to confess in the presence of I. and Gan., private persons who had been transferred to the Drug Control office in connection with inquiries unrelated to the applicant’s case.
Between 10.30 and 11.50 a.m. the applicant was questioned as a suspect by investigator Sov. in the presence of a lawyer. According to the interrogation record, the applicant informed the investigator about G.’s threats and the alleged theft of his money and mobile phone on 10 January 2007. At noon on that date the investigator charged the applicant with attempted sale of narcotic drugs and ordered a forensic medical examination aimed at detecting “any evidence of the applicant’s consumption of narcotic drugs and any injuries”. The applicant and his lawyer studied relevant documents until 12.15 a.m.
According to the applicant, thereafter G. took him to a gym in the Drug Control building. G. had a photo camera with him. He ordered the applicant “to put a carton cockscomb on his head”, so that G. could take pictures of him. The applicant refused, and G. hit and kicked him in the face and body. He attempted to undress the applicant, threatened to rape him and to take pictures. G. continued to beat the applicant urging him to write a confession; however, the applicant did not produce a self-incriminating statement.
Then G. brought the applicant to a cell in the same building. I. allegedly saw G in the corridor hitting the applicant in the head.
After that G. took the applicant to his office and allegedly hit his back with a roll of wall-paper. He also continued to insult the applicant and told him, in particular, that the applicant “could complain to anyone, G. [would] never be punished”.
At 3 p.m. on 18 January 2007 the applicant was transferred back to the IVS. According to the applicant, he asked the IVS officers to call a doctor. They allegedly replied that the doctor would come and see him on 19 January 2007.
According to IVS officer V., interviewed by an investigator during the first round of the pre-investigation inquiry (see below), on 18 January 2007, the applicant had looked depressed but had not had visible injuries. Once the Drug Control officers who escorted him left the cell, the applicant told V. that he had been beaten by the policemen.
At some point on 19 January 2007 the applicant made a handwritten note in the IVS’s logbook of medical examinations: “Was not beaten in the IVS. Have no complaints”. On the same date an IVS officer M. saw a redness on the applicant’s cheek. She called the ambulance for him. At 4.39 p.m. an ambulance doctor examined the applicant.
According to the medical certificate of 19 January 2007 by the local emergency hospital, the applicant complained about the beatings by a Drug Control officer. The applicant had the following injuries: “a bruise of 4 cm in diameter in the right lower eyelid area; a minor oedema of the soft tissues in the haematoma area; a mucosal break of the lower lip in the incisors area on the right”. No injuries were detected on his body. The applicant was diagnosed with soft tissue injuries of the face.
On the same date the applicant was transferred to remand centre IZ35/3 of Cherepovets. According to an “act” compiled on 19 January 2007 by two remand prison officers on duty and a medical assistant (feldsher) of the remand centre, the applicant had a red-blue bruise on the right zygomatic region. On 20 January 2007 the applicant wrote “an explanation” to the remand centre officers to the effect that on 18 January 2007 he had been beaten by G. at the Drug Control Office premises.
On 2 February 2007 the applicant’s forensic medical examination was conducted pursuant to the investigator’s order (see paragraph 19 above). The expert found traces of drug injections on the applicant and found no other visible injuries on him.
On 16 January 2007 the applicant complained about the alleged beatings and the theft of his belongings on 10 January 2007 to the prosecutor’s office of Cherepovets of the Vologda Region (“the prosecutor’s office”). On 19 January 2007 the applicant lodged a complaint about the beatings of 18 January 2007. In both complaints the applicant requested that criminal proceedings be brought against G. on account of abuse of power and ill-treatment.
On 2 and 22 February 2007 an investigator of the town prosecutor’s office on two occasions held inquiries and refused to bring criminal proceedings against G. On 15 March 2007 the Cherepovets Town Court quashed those refusals upon the applicant’s complaint, having found that the investigator had failed to make legal assessment of the applicant’s allegations of theft and illtreatment.
In the meantime, the investigator questioned I. and Gan. Mr Gan. stated that he had heard G. calling the applicant “a cock”, seen him taking the applicant out from the office, and then heard the applicant screaming behind a wall. When G. had brought the applicant back, the latter had a red bruise on his cheek and an abrasion of the lips. Mr I. said that he had seen G. slapping the applicant in the face when brining the applicant to a cell.
On 4 April 2007 the prosecutor’s office issued a new refusal to bring criminal proceedings against the policeman, which was subsequently quashed on 1 June 2007 by the Deputy Prosecutor of Cherepovets.
On 10 June 2007 the prosecutor’s office held an inquiry in accordance with Article 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and refused to bring criminal proceedings against G., for the lack of corpus delicti in his actions.
As regards the allegations that the alleged beatings and the theft of the applicant’s belongings on 10 January 2007, the prosecutor found no evidence of the offence apart from the applicant’s own statements. In particular, the applicant’s injuries had never been recorded. Two lay witnesses who had been present at the applicant’s search had not seen G. beating the applicant, and had not noticed any injuries on him. Furthermore, his allegations contradicted to the submissions of G. who denied accusations of theft. The prosecutor concluded that the applicant complained about the theft in order to avoid criminal liability for drug trafficking.
As regards the alleged ill-treatment on 18 January 2007, the prosecutor referred to the applicant’s account of the events, as well as to the depositions of I. and Gan., who confirmed that on 18 January 2007 they had seen the applicant at the Drug Control office, and that his lip had been split and there had been a bruise on his face. The prosecutor cited a statement by Drug Control officer Yu. , identified by the applicant as an eye-witness of the beatings; Yu. had denied having seen any use of force against the applicant. The prosecutor further referred to the testimony by IVS officer V. who submitted that the applicant’s examination of 18 January 2007 had not revealed any injuries on his body; to the submissions of the IVS official M. who had called the ambulance for the applicant on 19 January 2007; and to the depositions of G. and Yu. who denied any use of force against the applicant. G. claimed that the applicant had told him that he would injure himself and then lodge a complaint against the policeman. The prosecutor rejected the statements by Gan. and I. as unreliable since they had been the applicant’s acquaintances. In particular, between 20 January and 28 April the applicant and I. were detained in the same cell and could have agreed on a version of the events favourable to the applicant. The prosecutor noted that on 18 January 2007 the applicant had not had visible injuries and therefore the traumas revealed on 19 January 2007 had been self-inflicted.
At some point the refusal was set aside by an unknown authority.
On 8 July 2007 the town prosecutor’s office issued another refusal to initiate criminal proceedings. This decision was upheld by the deputy prosecutor of  on 7 September 2007. On 12 February 2008 the Cherepovets Town Court granted the applicant’s appeal against the refusals and quashed them. The court observed, in particular, that the prosecutor’s office had failed to examine the episode of the applicant’s transfer from the IVS to the Drug Control Service between 9.40 a.m. and 3 p.m. on 18 January 2007; and that several persons, including lay witnesses, had not been interviewed and that the investigation authorities had failed to establish all relevant facts. The court further noted that the investigator had omitted to assess the depositions of IVS officer V. (see paragraph 24 above). The court also noted the investigator’s failure to interview Ms Mal. who had received on 17 January 2007 a phone call from the mobile phone allegedly stolen from the applicant.
In 2008-15 several further refusals were issued by the Cherepovets Investigative Department of the Investigative Committee of the Vologda Region (“the investigative department”), in charge of the investigation since 14 March 2008. All the refusals were set aside either by a higher investigative authority or a court (see paragraph 41 below for details).
On 5 May 2015 investigator K. of the investigative department again refused to open criminal proceedings against G. upon the applicant’s illtreatment complaint. He found that the applicant had inflicted injuries to himself to avoid criminal liability, and that the applicant’s account was not supported by any evidence, since his allegations and the testimonies of Gan. and I. had been refuted by statements of officers G. and V.
On 2 June 2016 the decision was upheld by the first-instance court.
On 12 September 2016 the Vologda Regional Court quashed the lower court’s decision and declared the refusal of 5 May 2015 unlawful and unfounded. The court observed that the inquiry had been pending for eight years. Twenty-two refusals to bring criminal proceedings had been issued, and twenty-one of them had been subsequently set aside as unlawful and unfounded. Refusals of 22 May, 7 August and 3 September 2008, 4 May 2009, 14 January 2011 had been issued without any additional measures being taken, and quashed for the failure to rectify the previously identified shortcomings. The refusals of 30 May, 3 July, 3 August, 11 September, 15 November and 29 December 2013 had been set aside for the failure to comply with the instructions contained in the decision of 30 April 2013. The conclusion on the injuries being self-inflicted of 5 May 2015 had not been supported by any proof, the applicant’s statements had not been recorded correctly in the decision and, furthermore, the first-instance court had failed to address those shortcomings.
It appears that at some point in 2016 a domestic court convicted twelve Drug Control officers of Cherepovets, including G. , Yu., Vor. and Sov., of several counts of unlawful drug sale, abuse of power, fraud, perjury and causing serious bodily harm, and sentenced them to various terms of imprisonment. There is nothing to suggest that those criminal proceedings concerned the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment and theft.
On 23 January 2017 the investigator of the prosecutor’s office again refused to open criminal proceedings. On 27 March 2017 the Cherepovets town court upheld the refusal. The applicant appealed, arguing, in particular, that the decision reproduced verbatim the previous refusal of 5 May 2015, already declared unlawful (see paragraphs 39 and 41 above). On 7 June 2017 the Vologda Regional Court quashed the lower court’s decision as taken in G.’s absence and remitted the case for a fresh examination by the first-instance court.
It appears that the inquiry into the applicant’s allegations of illtreatment was pending until at least late 2017.
On 19 January 2007 the Cherepovets Town Court of the Vologda Region ordered the applicant’s placement into custody pending trial. His pretrial detention was further twice extended by the same court.
On 28 April 2007 the town court convicted the applicant of illicit purchase and attempted sale of narcotic drugs on 10 January 2007 and sentenced him to five years and six months’ imprisonment and a fine in the amount of RUB 20,000.
During the trial the applicant argued that some of the banknotes and drugs seized from him on 10 January 2007 had been planted on him by G. He further submitted that on 10 and 17-18 January 2007 G. had beaten him up. The court heard  and Gan. who submitted that they had seen bruises on the applicant’s face on 18 January 2007. The court found that those witnesses’ depositions did not corroborate the applicant’s allegations of beatings on 10 January 2007. The court did not address the ill-treatment allegations in respect of the episode of 18 January 2007.
As regards the amount of RUB 7,100 allegedly seized from the applicant, the court established that RUB 2,100 of that amount had not belonged to the applicant as these were banknotes marked with the special substance given to him during the test purchase operation. The court found that the remaining RUB 5,000 belonged to the applicant and ordered that amount to be directed to the State Treasury for the repayment of the fine (see paragraph 46 above).
On 5 June 2007 the Vologda Regional Court quashed the conviction for illicit purchase of drugs and upheld the remainder of the judgment. The appeal court did not address the ill-treatment complaint raised by the applicant on appeal.
For the relevant provisions of domestic law on the prohibition of torture and other ill-treatment and the procedure for examining a criminal complaint, see Lyapin v. Russia, no. 46956/09, §§ 96-102, 24 July 2014, and Ryabtsev v. Russia, no. 13642/06, §§ 4852, 14 November 2013.