The case originated in an application (no. 17012/09) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Irakli Mindadze (“the applicant”), on 29 December 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr Jason Beselia, a lawyer practising in . The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Levan Meskhoradze of the Ministry of Justice.
On 14 March 2011 the Court decided to communicate the complaint under Article 3 of the Convention concerning the alleged lack of adequate medical care in prison to the Government (Rule 54 § 2 (b) of the Rules of Court). It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The Government and the applicant each submitted observations on the admissibility and merits of the communicated complaint (Rule 54 (a) of the Rules of Court). The Government submitted additional comments on the applicant’s submissions on 14 October 2011.
The applicant was born in 1955 and is currently serving a prison sentence in a medical establishment of the Ministry of Penitentiary, Probation and Legal Assistance (“the prison hospital”).
The applicant and an acquaintance (co-accused in subsequent criminal proceedings) were arrested in the latter’s flat on 31 March 2007 for unlawful purchase and possession of a particularly large quantity of drugs with the intention to sell, an offence under Article 260 § 3 (a) of the Criminal Code of Georgia. According to the relevant search record, the police discovered some 80 grams of heroin in the flat, and, in addition, according to the record of the body search of the applicant, 1.6150 grams of heroin were found in a pocket of his jacket.
Prior to the arrest of the applicant and his acquaintance, two other people had been arrested while leaving the same flat. They were both released the same evening, after making incriminating statements against the applicant and the co-accused. At a later stage of the proceedings, notably during the trial, they retracted their initial incriminating statements, claiming that they had been coerced by the police into making them (see paragraph 11 below).
The case file did not contain a copy of the record of the applicant’s body search. However, the applicant claimed that he had refused to sign it, since, according to him, heroin had been planted on his person by police officers during his transfer from the impugned flat to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The applicant maintained in this connection that he had never waived his right to be searched in the presence of independent witnesses, contrary to what was noted in the search record.
On 28 December 2007 the Tbilisi City Court convicted the applicant of unlawful purchase and possession of a particularly large quantity of heroin, which had been found in the flat and on his person, with the intention to sell and sentenced him to seventeen years in prison. The firstinstance court dismissed as unsubstantiated the applicant’s allegation that heroin had been planted on him by the police.
Following the applicant’s appeal, the prosecution dropped the charges concerning the heroin found in the flat. Subsequently, on 12 September 2008 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal convicted the applicant of unlawful purchase and possession of 1.6150 grams of heroin found on his person only and reduced his sentence to twelve years’ imprisonment.
The applicant’s conviction was primarily based on the record of his body search, the results of the chemical examination of the seized substance and the statements of the three police officers who had conducted the body search. In reaching their conclusion, the domestic courts also relied on the pre-trial incriminating statements of the two witnesses arrested during the police operation and released shortly afterwards. The court gave precedence to the statements they had made during the pre-trial investigation as it considered that the withdrawal of their initial statements had been unjustified, as they had not proved that they had been coerced into making them. The court specifically noted the fact that neither of the two witnesses had lodged any subsequent complaints regarding the alleged coercion exerted on them.
By a decision of 7 May 2009 the Supreme Court of Georgia dismissed that applicant’s appeal on points of law.
Copies of medical records submitted to the Court indicate that prior to his arrest, in 2006 the applicant was diagnosed as suffering from viral hepatitis C (HCV) and B, acute erosive peptic ulcer, second degree arterial hypertension, ischemic heart disease and angina pectoris. From 10 to 17 March 2006 the applicant underwent clinical treatment for gastroduodenal bleeding. At the same time he was involved in a drug rehabilitation program. In June 2006 the applicant was additionally diagnosed with dysbacteriosis.
On 17 August 2007 the head of the medical unit of Tbilisi no. 5 Prison, where the applicant was placed at the material time, in reply to the applicant’s lawyer’s request, issued a medical certificate according to which the applicant did not require treatment on an in-patient basis. It was noted in the certificate that the applicant had been examined on 14 August 2007 by a group of medical specialists who had diagnosed him with second degree arterial hypertension, chronic inactive HCV infection and a peptic ulcer.
On 18 July 2008 the applicant was transferred to Rustavi no. 6 Prison. On 15 October 2008, in view of a deterioration in the applicant’s medical condition, his lawyer requested the head of the prison department of the Ministry of Justice, the authority in charge of the prison system at the material time, to transfer the applicant to the prison hospital for medical examination and treatment. In support of the request, the applicant’s lawyer submitted a copy of the applicant’s medical records confirming his diagnosis. On 20 October 2008 the Ministry of Justice forwarded the request to the Governor of Rustavi no. 6 Prison and to the head of the medical group of the prison department requesting that action be taken accordingly. The applicant claimed that he had never received a reply to his request, which fact the Government disputed. Although they failed to submit a copy of the relevant letter in support of their contention, the Government provided the Court with an extract from the log book of Rustavi no. 6 Prison, according to which a letter of reply had been sent to the applicant on 5 November 2008. Further, according to the Government, the applicant subsequently underwent various medical examinations; notably, he had blood and urine tests, including a blood test for HCV, a fibrogastroduodenoscopy and an electrocardiography. He was also consulted by a pathologist, a therapist and a cardiologist and prescribed drug-based treatment for his various conditions.
On 16 June 2010 the applicant was transferred to Rustavi no. 16 Prison, where he stayed for almost one year. According to the case file, the chief doctor of the above facility issued an undated medical record, which confirmed the applicant’s diagnosis of chronic HCV, second degree arterial hypertension, peptic ulcer and angina pectoris. The chief doctor made no mention of the treatment, if any, administered to the applicant at the material time.
On 5 May 2011, following the communication of the case to the respondent Government, the applicant was placed in the prison hospital, where he underwent extensive clinical examinations and his final diagnosis was defined as follows: first degree arterial hypertension, chronic superficial gastroduodenitis, chronic HCV with moderate pathological activity, a cyst on the right kidney, spinal osteochondrosis, disc hernia, varicose veins in the lower limbs and chronic venous insufficiency.
The applicant started receiving an anti-viral treatment on an in-patient basis in the prison hospital. In September 2011 he was additionally diagnosed with sputum negative pulmonary tuberculosis. The decision was, therefore, taken to suspend his anti-viral treatment. On 12 September 2011 the applicant was included in the DOTS programme (Directly Observed Treatment, Short-course – the treatment strategy for the detection and cure of tuberculosis recommended by the World Health Organisation).
The relevant legal provisions concerning the protection of prisoners’ rights, as well as excerpts from the Public Defender’s report for the second half of 2007 bearing on medical problems in prison, including those created by viral Hepatitis C, were cited in the case of Poghosyan v. Georgia (no. 9870/07, §§ 20-22, 24 February 2009).
The relevant excerpts from the above-mentioned report read:
“Viral Hepatitis
The problem of viral hepatitis remains one of the most acute issues within the establishments of the Georgian prison system. About 40% of the inmates who died in 2009 were suffering from viral hepatitis. 15% of the deceased had cirrhosis of the liver and related complications such as bleeding from the upper part of the gastrointestinal tract, which in several instances was the direct cause of the inmates’ death. As regards the statistical data for 2010, 47.4% of the prisoners who died in the first half of 2010 were diagnosed as suffering from viral hepatitis; some of them had developed life-threatening complications. The monitoring carried out by the National Preventive Mechanism revealed that the chief doctors of the prison establishments recognised viral hepatitis as one of the most widespread diseases. However, no accurate record is maintained concerning instances of viral hepatitis infection; nor is any other type of statistical data gathered in the prisons of . The [prison] doctors have information only concerning cases where the hepatitis diagnosis has been confirmed by lab results. The monitoring revealed that a lot of prisoners who had clinically apparent signs of liver damage had not been examined for the presence of viral hepatitis at all.”
The European Prison Rules lay down the following guidelines as concerns healthcare services in prisons:
“Admission
1 At admission the following details shall be recorded immediately concerning each prisoner: ...
subject to the requirements of medical confidentiality, any information about the prisoner’s health that is relevant to the physical and mental well-being of the prisoner or others. ...
As soon as possible after admission:
information about the health of the prisoner on admission shall be supplemented by a medical examination in accordance with Rule 42; ...
Duties of the medical practitioner
1 The medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall see every prisoner as soon as possible after admission, and shall examine them unless this is obviously unnecessary. ...
3 When examining a prisoner the medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall pay particular attention to: ...
isolating prisoners suspected of infectious or contagious conditions for the period of infection and providing them with proper treatment.”
The following are the relevant extracts concerning health care services in prisons:
“33. When entering prison, all prisoners should without delay be seen by a member of the establishment’s health care service. In its reports to date the CPT has recommended that every newly arrived prisoner be properly interviewed and, if necessary, physically examined by a medical doctor as soon as possible after his admission. It should be added that in some countries, medical screening on arrival is carried out by a fully qualified nurse, who reports to a doctor. This latter approach could be considered as a more efficient use of available resources.
It is also desirable that a leaflet or booklet be handed to prisoners on their arrival, informing them of the existence and operation of the health care service and reminding them of basic measures of hygiene.
While in custody, prisoners should be able to have access to a doctor at any time, irrespective of their detention ... The health care service should be so organised as to enable requests to consult a doctor to be met without undue delay ...
A medical file should be compiled for each patient, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the patient’s evolution and of any special examinations he has undergone. In the event of a transfer, the file should be forwarded to the doctors in the receiving establishment. ...
A prison health care service should ensure that information about transmittable diseases (in particular hepatitis, AIDS, tuberculosis, dermatological infections) is regularly circulated, both to prisoners and to prison staff. Where appropriate, medical control of those with whom a particular prisoner has regular contact (fellow prisoners, prison staff, frequent visitors) should be carried out.”
The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
“76. Despite the goodwill and commitment of health-care staff at the penitentiary establishments visited, the provision of health care to prisoners remained problematic, due to the shortage of staff, facilities and resources. The delegation heard a number of complaints from prisoners at all the establishments visited concerning delays in access to a doctor, the inadequate quality of care (in particular, dental and psychiatric care) and difficulties with access to outside specialists and hospital facilities. ...
Prisoners in need of hospitalisation were transferred to the , upon recommendation by the prison doctor. Some complaints were heard at the establishments visited of long delays in securing such transfers, due to a limited capacity. Inmates who could not be admitted to the  depended financially on their families (including, apparently, to cover the cost of escort to the hospital). The CPT recommends that measures be taken to ensure that prisoners in need of hospital treatment are promptly transferred to appropriate medical facilities.
As a result of the insufficient number of doctors and nurses, the medical examination upon admission was superficial, if it took place at all. The only establishment at which prisoners were systematically screened upon arrival was Prison No. 5 in , where new arrivals were undressed and screened for injuries by a doctor or a nurse, and all cases of injuries and complaints of ill-treatment were immediately reported to the Prosecutor’s Office. However, in other aspects the initial medical examination was cursory and did not identify detained persons’ health-care needs. At the rest of the establishments visited, there was no routine medical examination on arrival. A prisoner could be seen by a doctor if he/she had a particular health complaint and specifically requested an examination. ...
No progress had been made since the previous visit in respect of medical documentation. Only a small number of prisoners (i.e. those who had a particular medical problem) had a medical file worthy of the name. In line with its previous recommendations, the CPT recommends that the Georgian authorities take steps to open a personal and confidential medical file for each prisoner, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the prisoner’s state of health and of his treatment, including any special examinations he has undergone. ...
... [R]ecommendations
- the Georgian authorities to take steps to ensure that all newly arrived prisoners are seen by a health-care staff member within 24 hours of their arrival. The medical examination on admission should be comprehensive, including appropriate screening for transmissible diseases (paragraph 79); ...
- the Georgian authorities to take steps to open a personal and confidential medical file for each prisoner, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the prisoner’s state of health and of his treatment, including any special examinations he has undergone (paragraph 80).”
The relevant excerpts from the above-mentioned report, bearing on the problem of medical care in Georgian prisons, read:
“iii. Medical records and confidentiality
The delegation noted as a positive development the recent introduction (at the end of 2009) of new personal medical files for prisoners. However, at the Ksani establishment, due to the large number of prisoners – and the limited number of nurses – the process of creating personal files was rather slow.
As regards the keeping of other medical records, it remained substandard and often lacking in detail, including in relation to traumatic injuries. ...
The CPT recommends that steps be taken to improve the medical record-keeping, in the light of the above remarks. ...”