The case originated in an application (no. 56856/00) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Nikolay Dobromirov Yordanov (“the applicant”), on 4 January 2000.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Stoyanov, a lawyer practising in Pazardzhik.
The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Karadjova, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 26 October 2004 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The Government did not submit observations on the admissibility and merits of the application.
On 1 April 2006 this case was assigned to the newly constituted Fifth Section (Rule 25 § 5 and Rule 52 § 1).
On 29 December 1999 the applicant's apartment was searched by the police with the apparent approval of the Prosecutor's Office. It was apparently conducted following the receipt of information received as a result of the arrest of several drug addicts earlier in the day. The applicant claimed, which the Government did not challenge, that the search was conducted in the absence of the applicant or an adult representative of the household and only in the presence of two witnesses, neither of them being the residence's manager or a representative of the municipality. Various items were seized, including an unspecified quantity of drugs and three stolen automobile registration documents.
Following the search of the applicant's apartment on 29 December 1999, the police arrested him and took him into custody for twenty-four hours.
On 30 December 1999 the applicant was charged with possession of drugs with intent to supply. He was remanded in custody upon a decision of an investigator which was apparently confirmed by the Prosecutor's Office later in the day. In ordering the remand in custody, the investigator found that the applicant might abscond or re-offend considering the fact that he had a previous conviction for drug related offences and had another three preliminary investigations opened against him.
The applicant appealed against his detention on the same day, 30 December 1999. He argued that that there was insufficient evidence against him and that there was no danger that he might abscond or re-offend. He claimed that he was a drug addict, that he required medical treatment for his addiction, that the drugs found in his apartment were for personal consumption, that he had a permanent address and that he had to care for his disabled mother. The appeal was sent by registered post both to the Pazardzhik Regional Court and the Pazardzhik Regional Investigation Service. It is unclear when they received it.
On 1 January 2000 amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure entered into force in respect of the legal regime of detention and its justification.
On 4 January 2000 the applicant's lawyer requested in writing from the Pazardzhik police copies of the orders for the search of his client's home and for his arrest. In a response of 24 February 2000 the police refused to provide him with copies of the documents arguing that the applicant had received copies of the same at the time of the search and arrest.
In connection with the processing of the applicant's appeal of 30 December 1999, the Pazardzhik Regional Investigation Service forwarded the applicant's case file to the Pazardzhik Regional Court on 5 January 2000.
On 7 January 2000 the Pazardzhik Regional Court examined the applicant's appeal of 30 December 1999 and dismissed it. It found that the applicant's claim that he required medical supervision and treatment was unsubstantiated. It further considered that based on the evidence before it there was sufficient evidence that he may have committed the offence with which he had been charged and, taking into account his previous conviction and the existence of another three preliminary investigations against him, that he might abscond or re-offend. The applicant appealed against the decision on an unspecified date.
On 13 January 2000 the Plovdiv Court of Appeals examined the applicant's appeal. In addition to the arguments presented before the Pazardzhik Regional Court the applicant also claimed that he had an ongoing business operating a shop. The court dismissed the applicant's appeal on grounds similar to those given by the Pazardzhik Regional Court. Namely, that based on the evidence before it there was sufficient evidence to ground a reasonable suspicion that the applicant might have committed the offence with which he had been charged and, taking into account his previous conviction and the existence of another three preliminary investigations against him, that he might abscond or re-offend.
The subsequent development of the criminal proceedings is unclear. No further information detailing their development has been provided by the parties following the applicant's letter of 5 April 2000. As of the date of the said letter, the applicant was still in remanded custody. However, it is unknown whether, and when, he was subsequently released or granted bail.
The applicant contended, which the Government did not challenge, that as from 29 December 1999 he was detained at the Pazardzhik Regional Investigation Service at least until 5 April 2000 (see paragraph 16 above).
In the applicant's submission the cells were small, overcrowded and below street level. There was no natural light or fresh air in the cells. Quite often there were rodents and cockroaches. A bucket was provided for the sanitary needs of the detained. There was no hot water, soap or other toiletries. The applicant was not permitted to go out of his cell for exercise. The food provided was of insufficient quantity and substandard. The applicant was not allowed to read newspapers or books. The applicant also referred to his drug addiction and the need for provision of medical treatment in a medical facility.
In support of his assertions pertaining to the conditions of detention at the above facility, the applicant presented declarations from another two detainees, Mr D.A. and Mr. R.D., corroborating his claims.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (the “CCP”) and the Bulgarian courts' practice at the relevant time are summarised in the Court's judgments in several similar cases (see, among others, Nikolova v. Bulgaria [GC], no. 31195/96, §§ 25-36, ECHR 1999-II; Ilijkov v. Bulgaria, no. 33977/96, §§ 55-59, 26 July 2001; and Yankov v. Bulgaria, no. 39084/97, §§ 79-88, ECHR 2003-XII (extracts)).
As of that date the legal regime of detention under the CCP was amended with the aim to ensure compliance with the Convention (TR 1-02 Supreme Court of Cassation).
The relevant part of the amended Article 152 provides:
“(1)  Detention pending trial shall be ordered [in cases concerning] offences punishable by imprisonment..., where the material in the case discloses a real danger that the accused person may abscond or commit an offence.
(2)  In the following circumstances it shall be considered that [such] a danger exists, unless established otherwise on the basis of the evidence in the case:
in cases of special recidivism or repetition;
where the charges concern a serious offence and the accused person has a previous conviction for a serious offence and a non-suspended sentence of not less than one year imprisonment;
where the charges concern an offence punishable by not less than ten years' imprisonment or a heavier punishment.
(3)  Detention shall be replaced by a more lenient measure of control where there is no longer a danger that the accused person may abscond or commit an offence.”
It appears that divergent interpretations of the above provisions were observed in the initial period of their application upon their entry into force on 1 January 2000.
In June 2002 the Supreme Court of Cassation clarified that the amended Article 152 excluded any possibility of a mandatory detention. In all cases the existence of a reasonable suspicion against the accused and of a real danger of him absconding or committing an offence had to be established by the authorities. The presumption under paragraph 2 of Article 152 was only a starting point of analysis and did not shift the burden of proof to the accused (TR 1-02 Supreme Court of Cassation).
At the relevant time, Article 191 of the CCP provided that in the course of an enquiry (i.e. when there was insufficient evidence to initiate formal criminal proceedings) a search of premises could be conducted only in the course of examining a crime scene and if its immediate execution was the only possibility to collect and secure evidence.
At the relevant time, Article 134 of the CCP provided that a search of premises might be carried out if there was probable cause to believe that objects or documents, which might be relevant to a case, would be found in them. Such a search could be ordered by the trial court (during the trial phase) or by the prosecutor (during the pre-trial phase) (Article 135).
A search of premises was to be conducted in the presence of witnesses and the person living there or an adult member of his family. In case the person living there or an adult member of his family could not be present, the search was to be conducted in the presence of the residence's manager or a representative of the municipality (Article 136).
There was no special procedure through which a search warrant issued by a prosecutor could be challenged. Thus, the only possible appeal was a hierarchical one to the higher prosecutor (Article 182), which did not have suspensive effect (Article 183).
The State Responsibility for Damage Act of 1988 (the “SRDA”) provides that the State is liable for damage caused to private persons by (a) the illegal orders, actions or omissions of government bodies and officials acting within the scope of, or in connection with, their administrative duties; and (b) the organs of the investigation, the prosecution and the courts for unlawful pretrial detention, if the detention order has been set aside for lack of lawful grounds (sections 1-2). In respect of the regime of detention and conditions of detention, the relevant domestic law and practice under sections 1 and 2 of the SRDA has been summarised in the cases of Iovchev v. Bulgaria (no. 41211/98, §§ 76-80, 2 February 2006) and Hamanov v. Bulgaria (no. 44062/98, §§ 56-60, 8 April 2004).
In respect of conditions of detention, despite some initial uncertainty as to the applicability of the SRDA in respect of complaints relating to conditions of detention, in a number of recent cases the domestic courts have ruled that the State's liability does arise under the SRDA and its section 1 in particular (реш. от 17.02.2003 г. по гр. д. № 1380/2002 г. на Пловдивският АС; реш. № 126 от 08.06.2005 г. по въззивно гр. д. № 205/2005 г. на Добричкият ОС; реш. № 380 от 19.07.2005 г. по гр. д. № 177/2005 г. на Габровският РС; реш. 04.05.2005 г. по гр. д. № 21393/2003 г. на Софийският РС; реш. № 444 от 08.07.2005 г. по гр. д. № 1031/2004 г. на Ловешкият РС; реш. № 4 от 18.02.2005 г. по гр. д. № 3267/2004 г. на Русенският РС).
In respect of unlawful searches of premises, the only reported case dates from 2002 where the Sofia City Court examined, on appeal, an action for damages stemming from an allegedly unlawful search and seizure conducted by the authorities in the home of the claimant. In that particular case, the court rescinded the judgment of the lower court and remitted the case solely because the latter court had failed to examine the action under Article 1 of the SRDA, but had rather examined it as a tort action. Accordingly, the Sofia City Court instructed the lower court to re-examine the said action solely under the SRDA (реш. от 29 юли 2002 г. по гр. д. № 169/2002 г., СГС, IVб отд.).
The CPT visited Bulgaria in 1995, 1999, 2002 and 2003. The Pazardzhik Regional Investigation Service was visited in 1995. There are also general observations about the problems in all Investigation Service detention facilities in the 1995, 1999 and 2002 reports.
The CPT found that most, albeit not all, of the Investigation Service detention facilities were overcrowded. With the exception of one detention facility where conditions were slightly better, the conditions were as follows: cells did not have access to natural light; the artificial lighting was too weak to read by and was left on permanently; ventilation was inadequate; the cleanliness of the bedding and the cells as a whole left much to be desired; detainees could access a sanitary facility twice a day (morning and evening) for a few minutes and could take a weekly shower; outside of the two daily visits to the toilets, detainees had to satisfy the needs of nature in buckets inside the cells; although according to the establishments' internal regulations detainees were entitled to a “daily walk” of up to thirty minutes, it was often reduced to five to ten minutes or not allowed at all; no other form of out-of-cell activity was provided to persons detained.
The CPT further noted that food was of poor quality and in insufficient quantity. In particular, the day's “hot meal” generally consisted of a watery soup (often lukewarm) and inadequate quantities of bread. At the other meals, detainees only received bread and a little cheese or halva. Meat and fruit were rarely included on the menu. Detainees had to eat from bowls without cutlery – not even a spoon was provided.
The CPT also noted that family visits and correspondence were only possible with express permission by a public prosecutor and that, as a result, detainees' contacts with the outside world were very limited. There was no radio or television.
The CPT concluded that the Bulgarian authorities had failed in their obligation to provide detention conditions which were consistent with the inherent dignity of the human person and that “almost without exception, the conditions in the Investigation Service detention facilities visited could fairly be described as inhuman and degrading”. In reaction, the Bulgarian authorities agreed that the CPT delegation's assessment had been “objective and correctly presented” but indicated that the options for improvement were limited by the country's difficult financial circumstances.
In 1995 the CPT recommended to the Bulgarian authorities, inter alia, that sufficient food and drink and safe eating utensils be provided, that mattresses and blankets be cleaned regularly, that detainees be provided with personal hygiene products (soap, toothpaste, etc.), that custodial staff be instructed that detainees should be allowed to leave their cells during the day for the purpose of using a toilet facility unless overriding security considerations required otherwise, that the regulation providing for thirty minutes' exercise per day be fully respected in practice, that cell lighting and ventilation be improved, that the regime of family visits be revised and that pre-trial detainees be more often transferred to prison even before the preliminary investigation was completed. The possibility of offering detainees at least one hour's outdoor exercise per day was to be examined as a matter of urgency.
The CPT established that the Pazardzhik Regional Investigation Service had fifteen cells, situated in the basement, and at the time of the visit accommodated thirty detainees, including two women in a separate cell.
Six cells measuring approximately twelve square metres were designed to accommodate two detainees; the other nine, intended for three occupants, measured some sixteen-and-a-half square metres. This occupancy rate was being complied with at the time of the visit and from the living space standpoint was deemed acceptable by the CPT. However, all the remaining shortcomings observed in the other Investigation Service detention facilities – dirty and tattered bedding, no access to natural light, absence of activities, limited access to sanitary facilities, etc. – also applied there. Even the thirty-minute exercise rule, provided for in the internal regulations and actually posted on cell doors, was not observed.
The CPT noted that new rules providing for better conditions had been enacted but had not yet resulted in significant improvements.
In most investigation detention facilities visited in 1999, with the exception of a newly opened detention facility in Sofia, conditions of detention were generally the same as those observed during the CPT's 1995 visit, as regards poor hygiene, overcrowding, problematic access to toilet/shower facilities and a total absence of outdoor exercise and outofcell activities. In some places, the situation had even deteriorated.
In the Plovdiv Regional Investigation detention facility, as well as in two other places, detainees “had to eat with their fingers, not having been provided with appropriate cutlery”.
During the 2002 visit some improvements were noted in the country's investigation detention facilities, severely criticised in previous reports. However, a great deal remained to be done: most detainees continued to spend months on end locked up in overcrowded cells twenty-four hours a day.