The case originated in an application (no. 47183/13) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Mr Nauris Rakuzovs (“the applicant”), on 1 August 2013.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms J. Averinska, a lawyer practising in Riga. The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Līce.
On 18 September 2015 the complaint concerning Article 3 of the Convention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1984. He is currently serving a prison sentence in Valmiera.
On several occasions between 2009 and 2011 the applicant was escorted to court hearings from various detention facilities where he was being held. During these transfers the applicant was subjected to strip-searches. According to the applicant, he was ordered to strip naked in the presence of other inmates and escorting officers, to assume embarrassing positions (squatting), and to submit to a visual inspection of his body.
The strip-searches of the applicant were carried out on 9 December 2009, 8 and 11 June 2010, 22 February and 8 June 2011.
The applicant lodged several applications with the administrative courts concerning the strip-searches. They were all joined in one set of administrative proceedings (no. A420533911).
On 20 June 2012 the Administrative District Court (Administratīvā rajona tiesa) dismissed the applicant’s complaints and terminated the proceedings. It held that the strip-searches had been objectively justified on security grounds and the manner in which they had been conducted had not gone beyond what had been required to ensure the efficacy of those searches. Therefore these searches had not “significantly interfere[d]” with the applicant’s rights and had not constituted an “action of a public authority” (see paragraphs 17 and 18 below). The applicant appealed.
On 13 September 2012 the Administrative Regional Court (Administratīvā apgabaltiesa) dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the ruling of the lower court.
On 5 November 2012 the Senate of the Supreme Court (Augstākās tiesas Senāts) quashed the ruling of the appeal court and remitted the case to the first-instance court. The Senate of the Supreme Court found that the strip-searches had had a legitimate goal, namely ensuring public safety, and had not been carried out in an abusive manner. However, the lower courts had not sufficiently addressed the applicant’s argument that he had been subjected to strip-searches in the presence of other persons.
On 27 February and 11 April 2013 hearings took place before the first-instance court. In order to clarify the facts eleven witnesses – seven escorting officers and four prisoners – were called.
On 13 May 2013 the Administrative District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaints and terminated the proceedings.
As concerns the strip-searches carried out on 9 December 2009, 8 and 11 June 2010, the court, on the basis of witness testimony, found that the applicant had been searched in the presence of one inmate and at least one additional escorting officer. However, taking into account that the applicant had not voiced any concerns in this regard during the first round of proceedings, the court concluded that “the strip-searches ... had not humiliated the applicant in the eyes of others or in his [own] eyes”. Accordingly, the court could not establish a “significant violation” of the human rights guaranteed under Article 95 of the Constitution and Article 3 of the Convention.
As concerns the strip-searches carried out on 22 February and 8 June 2011, the court found that the evidence did not support the applicant’s allegation that he had been searched in the presence of other persons. The court dismissed the applicant’s further allegations (the presence of female officers, being exposed to the court’s staff and passers-by, unsanitary touching of his food) as unsubstantiated.
On 9 July 2013 the Senate of the Supreme Court, by a final decision, dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the ruling of the lower court.
Article 95 of the Constitution (Satversme) prohibits torture, as well as any cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
The relevant parts of the Administrative Procedure Law (Administratīvā procesa likums), which took effect on 1 February 2004, have been summarised in the case of Melnītis v. Latvia (no. 30779/05, §§ 24-26, 28 February 2012).
To show the scope of review by the administrative courts in relation to strip-searches of prisoners, the Government referred to administrative proceedings no. A8125609. In those proceedings, on 31 May 2010, the Senate of the Supreme Court had held that the administrative courts had been competent to examine prisoners’ complaints concerning “actions of a public authority” (faktiskā rīcība) if those actions “significantly interfered” (būtiski ierobežo) with their human rights. In order to establish a violation of a prisoner’s right not to be subjected to degrading treatment, the administrative courts had to evaluate the measure in its entirety, in particular the nature and the context, as well as the effect of the treatment; whether the aim of the treatment had been to debase or humiliate the person concerned; and whether the person’s suffering had gone beyond the inevitable element of suffering connected with this form of legitimate treatment. The allegations made by the person concerned also had to be examined.