The case concerns the applicant’s pre-trial detention on charges of mass disorder and violence against a public official during the dispersal of a public assembly at Bolotnaya Square in Moscow on 6 May 2012, the alleged lack of medical assistance and restrictions on family life during his pre-trial detention.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in Moscow. He was granted legal aid and was represented by Mr V.V. Shukhardin, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
The Government were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The background facts relating to the planning, conduct and dispersal of the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square are set out in more detail in Frumkin v. Russia (no. 74568/12, §§ 7-65, 5 January 2016) and Yaroslav Belousov v. Russia (nos. 2653/13 and 60980/14, §§ 7-33, 4 October 2016).
The facts of the case, as submitted by the applicant, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is a disabled person suffering from schizophrenia acquired during military service. From 2001 he had been under outpatient supervision by a psychiatric medical institution. In 2008 he was assessed as having a second-degree disability and since then he has been receiving a disability pension.
On 6 May 2012 the applicant took part in the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square. On 8 June 2012 he was arrested on suspicion of having participated in mass disorder and of having used violence against the police during the demonstration of 6 May 2012. He was charged under Article 212 § 2 (participation in mass disorder) and Article 318 § 1 (violence against a public official) of the Criminal Code and detained in a temporary detention facility of the Moscow Department of the Interior.
On 9 June 2012 the Basmannyy District Court of Moscow ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention. It referred to the gravity of the charges, the circumstances of the criminal case and the applicant’s personality, and concluded that, faced with the risk of a prison term, he might obstruct the proper administration of justice or abscond. It noted that the applicant’s state of health did not preclude his being detained.
From 25 June to 31 October 2012 the applicant was detained in detention facility IZ-77/4 in Moscow. There was no medical ward and the applicant was detained together with other inmates.
On 15 June 2012 charges were brought against the applicant. He was accused of having participated in mass disorder and of having used violence against the police. In particular, between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m. on 6 May 2012 he allegedly arrived at the site of the demonstration and followed the unlawful calls of other persons inciting the protestors to break through the police cordons surrounding the restricted area designated for the event. In doing so, he joined in an assault on K., one of the policemen whose task was to contain the demonstration; unidentified persons removed K.’s helmet and truncheon, and forced him to the ground while hitting and kicking him. The applicant allegedly hit K. once and kicked him once in the torso.
On 25 June 2012 the applicant was examined by a doctor, who recommended a consultation with a psychiatrist.
On 5 July 2012 the Basmannyy District Court of Moscow examined a request from the investigator to extend the term of the applicant’s detention by four months. The request was supported, inter alia, by a certificate stating that the authorities had obtained information from undisclosed sources that the applicant had sufficient means to flee Moscow. The applicant requested that the court select an alternative preventive measure, having indicated, in particular, that he had no criminal record, he was a disabled person suffering from a mental disorder (schizophrenia) and was not fit for detention. He also alleged that he had been living with his family at his address, was supervised by a psychiatric medical institution and was receiving his disability pension at that address; he was unable to obstruct the investigation because the witnesses had already been questioned. He contested the information relied on by the investigator that he had sufficient means to flee as false and unlawfully obtained. The applicant asked for an alternative preventive measure, in particular for release on bail, or under a personal guarantee by two prominent human rights activists, or for house arrest. The court examined the file and extended the applicant’s detention. It held that the nature of the crime which had been committed gave sufficient grounds to presume that the applicant might reoffend, influence and threaten witnesses and other participants in the criminal proceedings, destroy evidence or otherwise obstruct the proper administration of justice. The extension was granted, as requested, until 6 November 2012.
The applicant’s three lawyers lodged three separate appeals on 6, 9 and 12 July 2012. The points of appeal filed on 9 July 2012 indicated that the lawyer would file additional submissions after studying the verbatim records of the hearing of 5 July 2012.
On 6 and 20 July 2012 the applicant was examined by a psychiatrist and diagnosed with “sluggish schizophrenia”. The report stated that his general condition was satisfactory, his orientation and response were adequate and that he showed no signs of aggression or anxiety; a complaint about poor sleep was noted, but the applicant refused to take sleep-inducing pills. On the latter date he was prescribed medication.
On 24 July 2012 a psychiatric forensic report was issued by a commission of experts. It stated that the applicant had been suffering from paranoid schizophrenia which rendered him incapable of understanding the nature and the adverse consequences of his acts. It further stated that the applicant was not capable of understanding the nature of the criminal proceedings against him, that he posed a risk to himself and others and needed to be placed in a psychiatric institution for inpatient treatment. As to the question whether the applicant was fit for pre-trial detention in a general detention facility, the experts stated that it was outside their competence.
On 10 and 30 August and 3 October 2012 the applicant was examined by a psychiatrist. The records stated that his condition was generally satisfactory, except for continued poor sleep. On the latter date he was observed as being emotionally subdued but irritable. He was prescribed two types of medication, the doses of which were adjusted each time in accordance with current condition.
On 16 August 2012 the Basmannyy District Court sent a letter to the applicant’s lawyer referring to the intention he had indicated in the points of appeal of 9 July 2012 to file additional submissions and inviting him to do so by 14 September 2012. On 12 September 2012 the lawyer in question submitted a copy of his complaint of 9 July 2012.
On 24 September 2012 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision to extend the applicant’s pre-trial detention ordered on 5 July 2012.
On 18 October 2012 the applicant’s case was referred to the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow for a ruling as to his compulsory placement in a psychiatric institution.
On 31 October 2012 the applicant was transferred to remand prison IZ-77/2 in Moscow, which had a medical ward with a psychiatric department.
On 1 November 2012 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow conducted a preliminary hearing of the applicant’s case. The applicant requested that an alternative preventive measure be selected. He pointed out that the prosecution had not asked for an extension. The court, however, rejected the request on essentially the same grounds as those in the previous detention decisions, and extended the applicant’s detention until 22 April 2013. A hearing of the applicant’s case was fixed for 9 November 2012.
On 9 November 2012 the applicant challenged his continued detention as unlawful. The court dismissed his complaint, reiterating the same reasons for his detention.
The applicant appealed against the decisions of 1 November 2012 and 9 November 2012. He urged the court to reconsider the measure of restraint and to release him under a personal guarantee by two prominent human rights activists who had reiterated their undertaking in writing. On 13 February 2013 the Moscow City Court dismissed the applicant’s appeals.
On 11 April 2013 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court extended the applicant’s detention on the same grounds as before, until 22 July 2013. The decision was upheld by the Moscow City Court on 8 July 2003.
On 10 July 2013, during proceedings in which the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court ordered a further extension of the applicant’s detention until 22 October 2013, he complained that he was not allowed family visits at the remand prison, in particular by his sister, who was his legal guardian. He indicated that he had not received family visits for eight months and asked the court to secure his right to family visits. The applicant’s sister also applied for permission to visit him, but the court ruled that it could not deal with the matter during the court hearings before the pronouncement of the judgment, and that it had no competence to decide on family visits outside the court hearings. The applicant appealed, complaining, in particular, of a lack of family visits and the court’s refusal to address this issue. On 4 September 2013 the Moscow City Court examined the applicant’s appeal and dismissed it, endorsing the reasons for his continued detention without taking cognisance of his complaint concerning the lack of family visits.
On 5 September 2013 the applicant’s mother died. On 6 September 2013 the applicant’s sister applied, on the applicant’s behalf, to the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court and to remand prison IZ-77/2 for permission for the applicant to attend his mother’s funeral. On 9 September 2013 the Ombudsman of the Russian Federation made the same application on the applicant’s behalf. The applicant did not receive any reply to those requests and was therefore unable to attend the funeral, which took place on 11 September 2013.
On 8 October 2013 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court examined the criminal charges against the applicant and found that he had committed the acts set out in the indictment. He was absolved from criminal liability on the grounds of mental incapacity and committed to internment in a psychiatric hospital for an undetermined duration.
On 11 October 2013, and 1 and 27 November 2013 the applicant received visits by his sister, each time for one and a half hours.
On 11 July 2014 the applicant was released from the psychiatric hospital and continued his treatment on outpatient basis.
The relevant provisions of domestic and international law on the general healthcare of detainees are set out in Ivko v. Russia (no. , §§ 55-62, 15 December 2015).
The relevant provisions of the Pre-trial Detention Act are set out in Resin v. Russia (no. 9348/14, § 14, 18 December 2018).