The case originated in an application (no. 62304/12) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Markas Kardišauskas (“the applicant”), on 20 September 2012.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms K. Čeredničenkaitė, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their former Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicant complained that the domestic authorities had failed to ensure his safety in prison, and that the investigation into the circumstances surrounding his injury in prison had been ineffective, in breach of Article 3 of the Convention.
On 5 July 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1979.
On 3 January 2003 the applicant started serving a sentence in the Pravieniškės Prison after his conviction for rape and theft.
In subsequent separate proceedings the applicant and his three accomplices were found guilty of murder and robbery committed as part of an organised group in 2000. A final decision in that case was adopted in 2013 by the Supreme Court. The applicant was sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment. That sentence was added to the applicant’s prior conviction, and a final sentence of thirteen years’ imprisonment was imposed.
On 25 May 2003 the applicant was found beaten up and unconscious in the Pravieniškės Prison after being attacked by other prisoners. A pre-trial investigation into the incident was opened the same day by the Pravieniškės Prison authorities, who informed the Kaišiadorys prosecutor about it. Immediately after the event an investigator of the prison inspected the area where it had taken place.
The same day the applicant was taken injured and unconscious to the Prison Department’s Hospital (Laisvės atėmimo vietų ligoninė) and then to the Emergency Hospital of Vilnius University (Vilniaus greitosios pagalbos universitetinė ligoninė), where he underwent an operation. Five days later he was transferred back to the Prison Department’s Hospital.
On 26 May 2003 the investigators ordered that the applicant be examined by a forensic medical expert. According to the medical record, the applicant had sustained beatings (muštinė žaizda) to the head and haematoma.
On 5 June 2003 the applicant’s mother wrote to the State authorities that she had learned about the incident only a week later, when she wanted to visit her son in the Pravieniškės Prison. She alleged that the prison was dangerous and demanded that those responsible for the assault on her son be found and punished.
By a letter of 13 June 2003 the Kaišiadorys prosecutor informed the applicant’s mother that a pre-trial investigation into the assault on her son had been opened on the day of the incident. She was also informed that a medical examination had been ordered to establish the severity of the injury.
On 1 July 2003 the Pravieniškės Prison investigator wrote to the Kaunas police that the applicant’s mother was avoiding coming to the prison and testifying and he therefore requested the police to question her as a witness; it was indispensable to ask her whether her son had ever told her about having disagreements with other prisoners or whether he had received threats. The police were also asked to employ operational measures to identify suspects and determine the circumstances surrounding the severe bodily injury (sunkus sveikatos sutrikdymas) of the applicant.
On 10 July 2003 the applicant was granted victim status by the investigators. It was explained to him that in that status he could submit requests or lodge complaints, under Article 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 43 below). On 10 July and 18 August 2003 the applicant was questioned about the incident. However, he stated that, given his state of health, he did not remember how he had been attacked and injured.
According to a medical certificate of 28 August 2003, a severe fracture of the skull had occurred as a result of what the doctors described as two blows to the applicant’s head. He had been unconscious for some time just after the assault, and then neurosurgery had been carried out. The doctors concluded that the applicant had sustained a serious head injury and would need a long period of rehabilitation. In August 2003 the applicant was declared Category II disabled, and in March 2004 he was declared Category III disabled (a less severe level of disability). As the applicant’s state of health improved, in February 2008 he was declared able to work at ninety percent.
On 28 August 2003 the applicant was discharged from the Prison Department’s Hospital and returned to the Pravieniškės Prison for outpatient health care. Afterwards, on different dates, the applicant spent time in Lukiškės Remand Prison, Pravieniškės Prison and the Prison Department’s Hospital.
On 10 September 2003 the applicant testified that on the day of the incident he was taking exercise when another prisoner approached him and asked him to go to the living quarters of the Pravieniškės Prison Wing no. 5. They went to a place where there were other prisoners, among whom the applicant noticed a person he had known earlier from the time outside the prison. That person was holding a knife, and hit (smogė) the applicant on the head. The applicant described him as a tall, well-built man of 40-45, who had previously been convicted of murder. The applicant was confident that he could recognise his attacker. On 25 September 2003 the applicant identified from photographs of forty three persons a suspect who appeared to be a certain E.J.
A report of 11 November 2003 from the Pravieniškės Prison showed that E.J. had a conviction for robbery under Article 272 of the Criminal Code, and had been sentenced to three years of imprisonment. According to that report, E.J. had left Pravieniškės Prison on 5 September 2002 for Lukiškės Remand Prison and had come back to the Pravieniškės Prison on 29 May 2003, which was four days after the incident. An extract from E.J.’s personal file indicates that E.J. arrived at Lukiškės Remand Prison on 5 September 2002 and left that prison on 29 May 2003.
On 19 December 2003 the Pravieniškės Prison authorities concluded, on the basis of the 11 November 2003 report, that on the day of the incident E.J. was not being held in the Pravieniškės Prison but was in Lukiškės Remand Prison in Vilnius.
According to the Pravieniškės Prison’s internal investigation report of 19 December 2003, the authorities questioned twenty eight witnesses, including prisoners, operational investigation measures were ordered, medical examinations were carried out and photographs of possible suspects were shown to the applicant and witnesses.
By a letter of 25 February 2004 to the Kaunas police, the Pravieniškės Prison authorities reiterated their request that suspects be identified. The letter also mentioned that, according to the medical report, the applicant had sustained two blows to the head with blunt objects (sužalojimai padaryti veikiant bukais daiktais – dviem smūgiais). The prison authorities also observed that the applicant’s testimony lacked consistency (apklausiamas keičia parodymus) and that he claimed not to remember the circumstances of the incident.
On 26 March 2004 the Kaunas police informed the Pravieniškės Prison investigators that no reliable information enabling identification of the perpetrators of the assault on the applicant had been established.
On 10 May and 13 July 2005 the Pravieniškės Prison authorities requested the Kaišiadorys prosecutor and the Kaunas and Plungė police authorities to order additional operational measures, inter alia, to question three witnesses – inmates of the Pravieniškės Prison at the time when the applicant was injured. The last letter ended with a request for the criminal police “to identify persons who had committed the impugned crime and to find the crime weapon” (nustatyti asmenis, padariusius minėtą nusikaltimą ir surasti nusikaltimo padarymo įrankius).
On 15 July 2005 the prosecutor ordered the Kaunas police to carry out the aforementioned actions. The prosecutor also informed the applicant’s mother that the criminal investigation file had been examined by a prosecutor. Twelve days later, the Plungė police authorities sent the report of questioning to the Pravieniškės Prison investigators.
Considering that the process of investigation was not producing any results, in February 2007 the applicant’s mother objected to the way the investigation in the case was being conducted and asked the prosecutors to find her son’s attackers.
By a letter of 27 April 2007 the prosecutor dismissed the complaint by the applicant’s mother that the criminal investigation was not effective. According to the prosecutor, even though a number of investigative actions had been carried out, it was not possible to identify the persons who had injured the applicant. It was explained to the applicant’s mother that, if she disagreed with the prosecutor’s conclusion, she could appeal to a court.
On 7 August 2008 the Kaišiadorys district prosecutor refused to comply with a request by the applicant’s mother to start an investigation into whether the Pravieniškės Prison authorities had failed to act and to protect her son’s safety and health in prison. In the decision, the prosecutor wrote:
“The [applicant’s mother] cites matters which are relevant to the criminal case concerning the injury to M. Kardišauskas. A pre-trial investigation into this incident is already pending. In the event that a failure of the officers to perform their official duties is established, the question of their criminal responsibility will be decided subsequently. The question of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage [caused to the applicant] will also be decided within the current pre-trial investigation, once a person or persons who have committed the crime, that is, injured M. Kardišauskas, are identified. If then, due to his state of health or for other reasons, M. Kardišauskas is unable to submit a civil claim on his own account, the prosecutors will have to submit such a claim, as prescribed by Article 117 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.”
The decision stated that it could be appealed against within fourteen days to the pre-trial investigating judge of the Kaišiadorys district court.
According to a report by the Pravieniškės Prison authorities of 28 December 2007, even though prisoners who had served in that prison as of 2003 had been questioned about the attack on the applicant, no relevant information had been obtained.
On 19 April 2010 the prosecutor informed the applicant’s mother that no suspect had been identified during the investigation.
The pre-trial investigation was still pending on 7 June 2012, as was later observed by the Supreme Administrative Court in the administrative case for damages (see paragraphs 33-40 below).
In reply to a request for information by the applicant’s mother, on 9 January 2013 the prosecutor wrote to her that the pre-trial investigation was still pending, no suspect had been identified and no procedural decision had been taken in the criminal case.
In their observations of 4 November 2013 on the admissibility and merits of the case, the Government stated that the criminal investigation remained open until new circumstances came to light. On 20 January 2014 the Court received observations from the applicant, in which he noted that the criminal investigation was still continuing.
In April 2010 the applicant was granted State-guaranteed legal aid and on 18 October 2010 he instituted proceedings against the State.
Firstly, the applicant claimed damage to his health resulting from the failure of the prison authorities to protect him from ill-treatment. To this claim the Pravieniškės Prison administration responded that the applicant had never indicated that he was in danger in prison.
Secondly, in the rectified complaint of 29 November 2010 the applicant criticized the authorities for not having established who his assailant was. On 3 February 2011, when addressing the Kaunas Regional Administrative Court in writing, the applicant further argued that the authorities had failed to act diligently and to take all necessary measures so that the crime was solved quickly.
During those proceedings the applicant contended that the introduction of his civil claim for damages in respect of the injury had been delayed for objective reasons, namely the state of his health, his continuing stay in prison, the failure of the investigating authorities to indicate suspects and to inform the applicant in a timely fashion of the possibility of submitting such a claim and of his right to legal aid.
On 23 March 2011 the Kaunas Regional Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s claim. The court established that the applicant had been injured on 25 May 2003, and the statutory time-limit to lodge a claim for damages caused by health impairment was three years. The applicant had lodged his claim only on 18 October 2010, that is, more than seven years after the injury had been sustained.
The applicant appealed. On 14 November 2011 the Supreme Administrative Court remitted the case to the first-instance court to verify whether part of the applicant’s claim that the pre-trial investigation had not been effective was also time-barred.
On 14 February 2012 Kaunas Regional Administrative Court refused to examine the applicant’s claim for damage caused to his health on the ground of prescription. The court established that as early as 2004 the applicant’s health had improved; he had been released from hospital and had returned to prison. The applicant had relatives to assist him in making use of his rights, and he could also have asked for free legal aid in a timely fashion. Lastly, it was only the applicant’s own unfounded belief that a court action for damages against the Pravieniškės Prison was not possible before the person who had attacked him was identified.
By a final decision of 7 June 2012 the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the claim due to the expiry of the three-year prescription period applicable to claims relating to damage to health. The court rejected the applicant’s arguments that he had been misled by the prosecutors investigating the incident, who had convinced him that he would be able to lodge a civil claim for damages only after the person responsible for his injury was identified. The applicant’s contention that his health had prevented him from submitting the claim in time was likewise dismissed. The Supreme Administrative Court also observed that the applicant could have appealed against the investigating officers’ or prosecutor’s actions, if he considered them improper. However, the applicant had not made use of any of his rights under Article 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The pre-trial investigation was not yet over.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code read as follows:
“8. An abridged three-year limit shall be applied with respect to claims for compensation for damage...”
“1.  Damage caused by unlawful acts of institutions of public authority must be compensated by the State from the resources of the State budget, irrespective of any fault on the part of a particular public servant or other employee of a public authority institution ...
For the purposes of this Article, the notion of ‘institution of public authority’ shall mean any public-law body (such as State or municipal institutions, officials, public servants or any other employee of these institutions), as well as private individuals performing the functions of a public authority.
For the purposes of this Article, the notion of ‘action’ shall mean any action (or failure to take action) by an institution of public authority or its employees that directly affects the rights, liberties and interests of individuals (legal acts or individual acts adopted by the institutions of State and municipal authorities, administrative acts, and physical acts, with the exception of court judgments, verdicts in criminal cases, decisions in civil and administrative cases, and orders).
Civil liability of the State or a municipality subject to this Article shall arise where employees of institutions of public authority fail to act in the manner prescribed by law for those institutions and their employees.”
“1.  Where the damage sustained by a natural person is bodily harm, i.e. he is mutilated or his health is impaired in any other way, the person liable for the damage caused shall be bound to compensate the aggrieved person for all his damage suffered, including non-pecuniary damage....”
The court practice concerning application of time-limits in respect of civil claims relating to damage to health provides that the right to bring an action arises on the day on which a person is injured (the Supreme Court ruling of 10 December 2010 in civil case no. 3K-3-516/2010).
The relevant provisions of the Code on Criminal Procedure with regard to conducting pre-trial investigations at the relevant time read as follows:
“When elements of a crime become apparent, the prosecutor and the pre-trial investigation authorities must take all the measures within their competence to investigate and disclose a criminal activity within the shortest time possible.”
“1.  A person who, as a result of the crime, sustained physical ... damage, shall be recognized as a victim... by a decision of the investigator, prosecutor or the court.
The person having status of the victim may testify in the case. The victim and his representative have a right to: provide evidence, submit requests, ..., have access to the case-file, take part in the proceedings, appeal against actions of the investigator, prosecutor, investigating judge or the court, appeal against the court ruling...”
“1.  Parties to the proceedings may lodge complaints against procedural actions and decisions of the pre-trial investigation officer to the supervising prosecutor. In the event of the complaint being dismissed by the prosecutor, his decision may be appealed against the pre-trial judge...”
“1.  The actions and decisions of the prosecutor in charge of the pre-trial investigation may be appealed against to a higher prosecutor. If a higher prosecutor dismisses the appeal, this decision may be appealed against to the pre-trial judge...”
“In the event of damage caused to the State or to a person, who because of his minor age, illness, dependence on the accused or other reasons is unable to defend his lawful interests before the court on his own, a prosecutor is under an obligation to lodge a civil claim in criminal proceedings if such claim has not yet been lodged.”
“1.  Pre-trial investigation shall be carried out by pre-trial investigation officers. Pre-trial investigation shall be organised and supervised by a prosecutor. The prosecutor may decide to carry out the entire pre-trial investigation, or part of it, himself...”
“1.  The Police are a pre-trial investigation authority...
Pre-trial investigation is also carried out by ... officers of the Prisons Department, directors of custody, detention or correctional facilities or officers authorised by them in respect of offences committed in those institutions ...”
“1.  A prosecutor has the right to carry out a full pre-trial investigation or separate phases of a pre-trial investigation.
When a pre-trial investigation or some of its actions are carried out by investigators, a prosecutor shall supervise the proceedings.
The prosecutor gives investigators orders, and overturns their unlawful or unfounded decisions.
Only the prosecutor delivers decisions on:
1)  joining and separating investigations;
2)  suspension of a pre-trial investigation;
3)  termination of an investigation;
4)  renewal of a previously terminated pre-trial investigation;
5)  completion of the investigation and submission of a bill of indictment.
Only the prosecutor may address the pre-trial judge on actions which fall within the latter’s competence. In [certain] cases, the prosecutor’s decisions on the termination and the renewal of a terminated pre-trial investigation shall be approved by the pre-trial investigation judge.”