The case originated in an application (no. 72413/10) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Iraqi national (“the applicant”) on 24 November 2010. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Jussil, a lawyer practising in . The Swedish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Ms C. Hellner and Ms H. Lindquist, of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that his deportation to  would involve a violation of Article 3 of the Convention.
On 14 December 2010 the President of the Section to which the case had been allocated decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Government that the applicant should not be deported to Iraq for the duration of the proceedings before the Court.
On 22 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1959 and originates from .
The applicant arrived in  on 2 January 2008 and applied for asylum two days later. In support of his application, he submitted in essence the following. He is Christian, and is married and has two children. His wife and children lived in . He claimed that he had been persecuted due to his Christian beliefs and the fact that he was well-off as part-owner of a sheet-metal workshop. In August 2006 he had been kidnapped at his work place. The kidnappers had told him to pay money to Al-Tawahid and AlJihad, groups fighting against the American troops. After paying 50,000 U.S. dollars he had been released. In December 2006 he had again been contacted by the groups mentioned, which demanded more money. They had threatened to kill his children and to blow up his workshop, if he failed to pay. He and his family had therefore left their house and stayed with various friends. Two months later, he had been told that his workshop had been plundered and blown up. In September 2007 the applicant and his family had left for  with the help of a smuggler. However, they had returned to Iraq shortly thereafter, since the smuggler could not arrange for their departure from . Again, they had stayed with friends. In December 2007 the applicant had departed for . The rest of the family had left for , where they remained in difficult circumstances. The applicant also claimed that his sister-in-law had been murdered outside her work place in late 2008, allegedly as retribution against the applicant and his family.
On 3 March 2009 the Migration Board (Migrationsverket) rejected the application. The Board noted that a long time had passed since the alleged incidents had taken place. It further pointed out that the applicant had stayed in  for almost a year after the kidnapping in 2006 without facing any further threats. Also, the family had returned to Iraq after they had left for . The Board further considered that there was nothing to indicate a connection between the applicant and the murder of his sister-in-law. In sum, there was no individual threat against the applicant.
The applicant appealed, adding that there was no internal relocation alternative for him in the Kurdistan Region, as there were entry restrictions and a requirement of a sponsor. Moreover, it was not a reasonable alternative due to the lack of, for instance, work, housing and food. Furthermore, he claimed that, after his departure from , the Mujahedin had found out that he had had a homosexual relationship and that, as a consequence, his partner had been stoned to death. The Mujahedin had also been looking for the applicant in 2009 due to this relationship. He had not revealed this information earlier as he had not been aware that homosexual relationships were accepted in . Despite this relationship, his intention was to continue living with his wife.
In reply, the Migration Board submitted that the applicant, as a Christian, had a need of protection in regard to , according to the latest country information. However, he was not facing any risks outside of  and the Kurdistan Region constituted a reasonable relocation alternative. As to the new personal information given by the applicant, the Board noted that it had not been submitted in the beginning of the proceedings, although the applicant must have understood the importance of stating all the important facts at once. Noting that there was no substantiation for the claim, the Board found that the story lacked credibility.
On 18 May 2010 the  (Migrationsdomstolen) upheld the decision of the Board. Like the Board, the court noted that a long time had passed since the occurrence of the alleged incidents. It further held that they were rather connected to the general security situation in  than to the applicant’s religious affiliation. In regard to the applicant’s statement that he had had a homosexual relationship, the court found that he had not given a reasonable explanation for his having made this claim so late in the proceedings. It noted, in this respect, that he had been informed, during the interviews at the Board, that civil servants of the Board and all other people present were bound by professional secrecy. Having regard to this and the applicant’s account of the events, the court found reason to strongly question the veracity of this statement. Referring to recent country information, the court went on to state that there was no reason to deviate from the Board’s assessment that, being a Christian from , the applicant was in need of protection. In regard to the possibility of internal relocation, it held, however, that recent country information showed that there were no restrictions against entering the Kurdistan Region and that there were no systematic discrimination of any religious groups in that area. Considering this and the fact that the applicant was an adult married man in good health, the court found that it was reasonable for him to relocate to the Kurdistan Region.
On 13 July 2010 the Migration Court of Appeal (Migrations-överdomstolen) refused the applicant leave to appeal.
The basic domestic provisions applicable in the present case are set out in M.Y.H. and Others v. Sweden (no. 50859/10, §§ 14-19, 27 June 2013 – in the following referred to as “M.Y.H. and Others”).
Extensive information about  can be found in M.Y.H. and Others, §§ 20-36.