The case originated in an application (no. 10511/10) against the Kingdom of the Netherlands lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Dutch national, Mr James Clifton Murray (“the applicant”), on 22 February 2010.
The applicant was represented by Ms C. Wendenburg, a lawyer practising in Maastricht. The Dutch Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Deputy Agent, Ms L. Egmond, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that Articles 3, 5, 6 and 13 of the Convention had been violated as a result of his sentence to life imprisonment and continuing detention.
On 15 April 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1953. The applicant is officially detained in the Aruba Correctional Institution (Korrektie Instituut Aruba, hereafter ‘the KIA’). As far as the Court is aware, however, the applicant is currently staying in a nursing home on Curaçao in view of health problems.
At the time relevant to the facts of the case the Kingdom of the Netherlands consisted of the Netherlands (the Realm in Europe), the Netherlands Antilles (consisting of Curaçao, Sint Maarten, Sint Eustatius, Bonaire and Saba) and Aruba, which became an independent “country” (land) within the Kingdom in 1986.
As of 10 October 2010, however, the Netherlands Antilles as such ceased to exist by virtue of the Kingdom Act of 7 September 2010 amending the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands in connection with changes to the constitutional status of the island territories of the Netherlands Antilles (Kingdom Act amending the Charter in connection with the dismantling of the Netherlands Antilles – Rijkswet van 7 september 2010 tot wijziging van het Statuut voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden in verband met de wijziging van de staatkundige hoedanigheid van de eilandgebieden van de Nederlandse Antillen (Rijkswet wijziging Statuut in verband met de opheffing van de Nederlandse Antillen)).
At present the Kingdom of the Netherlands consists of four countries, i.e. the Netherlands (the Realm in Europe), Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten. The remaining islands that made up the Netherlands Antilles have been incorporated into the Netherlands as special municipalities.
The countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands have their own legal systems, which may differ from each other.
The head of state of the Kingdom of the Netherlands (the King) is represented by the Governor. Until 10 October 2010 both the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba had a Governor, whose duties are twofold: he or she represents and guards the general interests of the Kingdom and is head of the Government. As from 10 October 2010 Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten have a Governor.
On 31 October 1979 the First Instance Court (Gerecht in Eerste Aanleg) of the Netherlands Antilles found the applicant guilty of the murder of a 6-year old girl on the island of Curaçao.
The judgment of the First Instance Court included a psychiatric report that had been written at the request of the public prosecutor (Officier van Justitie). In the report, the psychiatrist concluded:
“That the defendant suffers from a mental illness, in particular a very limited development of his mental faculties... Considering this, the defendant should be considered as having diminished criminal responsibility (verminderd toerekeningsvatbaar), but nevertheless should mainly be held criminally liable for his actions. It is noted in particular that the defendant cannot be considered as mentally insane before, during or after the commission of the crime... Even though the defendant is capable of committing a similar offence in the future, it is not necessary to commit him to a regular mental hospital (krankzinnigengesticht), instead he should be placed in a custodial clinic for psychopaths (psychopatenasiel) to undergo a rather lengthy treatment under very strict surveillance. In Curaçao there is only the choice between prison and the national (regular) mental hospital (Landspsychiatrisch Ziekenhuis). Taking into consideration that the risk of recidivism is for the time being very high also when a treatment would possibly start immediately and that, consequently, intensive surveillance is of primordial importance (which surveillance is impossible in the national mental hospital) and the fact that the defendant is not to be considered as criminally insane within the meaning of the law, admission to the national mental hospital is wholly contra-indicated. The sole option remaining is that he must undergo his punishment in prison (transfer to a custodial clinic in the Netherlands is impossible on account of the defendant’s limited intelligence and insufficient ability to express himself verbally). It is strongly advised that, where possible in the prison setting, an attempt should be made to attain a stronger personality structure in the defendant in order to avoid recidivism in the future.”
The First Instance Court considered that it did not appear from the report that the applicant’s condition would never improve. Accordingly, it sentenced him to 20 years’ imprisonment.
Both the applicant and the Public Prosecution Service (Openbaar Ministerie) submitted an appeal against the judgment of the First Instance Court.
On 11 March 1980 the Joint Court of Justice (Gemeenschappelijk Hof van Justitie) of the Netherlands Antilles quashed the judgment of the First Instance Court. It convicted the applicant of murder, finding it proven that he had deliberately and with premeditation taken the life of the 6-year old girl. It held that he had conceived the intention and taken the decision to kill her after calm consideration and quiet deliberation, and in order to execute that intention, had stabbed her repeatedly with a knife, as a result of which violent acts she had died. The applicant had killed the child, who was the niece of an ex-girlfriend, in revenge for the latter’s ending of the relationship. The Joint Court of Justice further accepted the findings of the psychiatric report and added:
“Considering that − however regrettable − there is no possibility in the Netherlands Antilles for the imposition of a TBS order (terbeschikkingstelling met bevel tot verpleging van overheidswege) for confinement in a custodial clinic which would be the most appropriate measure in this case; that placement in a custodial clinic in the Netherlands in similar cases has in the past proved impracticable – as is known to the court ex officio – and is in the present case moreover considered impossible by the psychiatrist due to the [applicant’s] limited intelligence and insufficient ability to express himself verbally; ...”
In the determination of the applicant’s sentence, the Joint Court of Justice concluded that, in view of the findings in the report of the psychiatrist, the risks of recidivism were so significant that the protection of public safety should prevail as being the most important interest to protect. For this reason the Joint Court of Justice held that public safety could only be adequately protected by preventing the applicant’s return to society. It therefore sentenced him to life imprisonment.
The applicant was subsequently placed in the state prison Koraal Specht on Curaçao (later: Bon Futuro Prison; now: Sentro di Detenshon i Korekshon Korsou) where there was no separate regime for detainees requiring mental treatment.
On 25 November 1980 the Supreme Court (Hoge Raad) dismissed the applicant’s appeal in cassation against the judgment of the Joint Court of Justice.
On 24 November 1981 the applicant filed a request for revision with the Joint Court of Justice which was refused on 6 April 1982.
The applicant has submitted at least thirteen requests for a pardon (gratieverzoek). On 26 April 1982 the applicant submitted his first such request with the Governor of the Netherlands Antilles. The request was refused on 9 August 1982 on the ground that there were no reasons to grant a pardon.
The applicant’s first thirteen years in prison were marked by incidents: fights, extortion, drug abuse, etc., some of which led to periods in isolation.
Around the year 2000 the applicant was transferred, upon his request, to the KIA on Aruba. At the same time the responsibility for the execution of the applicant’s sentence was transferred from the authorities of the Netherlands Antilles to those of Aruba. By agreement of 1 December 1999 the Minister of Justice of Curaçao however made the transfer conditional, by stipulating that any measure (e.g. pardon, reduction of sentence, temporary leave) that would involve the applicant leaving prison was dependent on the consent of the Curaçao Public Prosecution Service.
On 30 January 2002 a request for a pardon by the applicant was refused by the Governor of the Netherlands Antilles on the ground that there were no reasons justifying a pardon.
On 31 May 2004 the warden of the Aruba Correctional Institution forwarded a letter from the applicant to the Minister of Justice of Aruba requesting the Governor of Aruba to contact the Governor of the Netherlands Antilles concerning a possible pardon. The applicant’s request did, however, not have the desired effect.
Separately, the applicant addressed a number of requests for pardon to the Procurator General (Procureur-Generaal) of Aruba, who informed the applicant by letters of 9 June 2000, 26 October 2004, 14 March 2005 and 18 July 2007 respectively that only the authorities of the Netherlands Antilles were entitled to enact changes in the execution of his sentence.
On 1 March 2006 a request for a pardon by the applicant was refused by the Governor of the Netherlands Antilles on the ground that there were no reasons justifying a pardon.
In response to the applicant’s requests for a pardon, the Minister of Justice of Aruba, by letter of 16 January 2008, informed him that his requests did not present any facts or circumstances which, had they been available to the Joint Court of Justice when it passed its judgment, would have altered the outcome of the proceedings against him, nor were there facts that could lead to the conclusion that the continuing execution of his sentence had lost its purpose.
In anticipation of the periodic review of life sentences to be introduced in the Curaçao Criminal Code (Wetboek van Strafrecht), the Procurator General, in a letter of 9 September 2011, requested a psychiatric examination of the applicant.
On 7 October 2011 psychologist J.S.M. stated as follows:
“... the results of the test show that [the applicant] is suffering from symptoms of depression. He pents up his emotions and anger and hides them from those around him. ... [The applicant] has little trust in other people. In his opinion people use and abuse each other in order to achieve their goals. That is why he is very distrustful of the people he encounters and displays antisocial behavior. ... He is extremely sensitive to criticism and rejection.”
On 26 March 2012 the Aruban Foundation for Probation and the Protection of Juveniles (Stichting Reclassering en Jeugdbescherming) issued a report, in which it was noted that the applicant could live with his mother on Aruba and could work in an upholstery shop. The person who drew up the report found it difficult to estimate the risk of recidivism, but considered that with appropriate support following release his prospects of successfully integrating in society were good.
On request of the Joint Court of Justice three reports were issued.
On 25 May 2012 the KIA issued a report, which included the following:
“He is a calm, quiet man of 59 who has never been given a disciplinary punishment during his detention. ... He carries out his duties adequately and to the satisfaction of prison staff. In principle he works alone, but is occasionally willing to train other inmates in upholstery work. ... He is always polite and respectful towards prison staff; none of them have complaints about him. He rarely has any contact with the social worker and if he does, he always asks the same questions. It is as if he forgets matters which have already been discussed.”
In his report of 21 July 2012 psychiatrist M.V. concluded the following:
“The personality test showed that the subject has an antisocial personality disorder with mild psychopathic features. There are also signs of narcissistic features. The character structure is rigid, but is not strongly displayed, perhaps because of his age. The risk that he will reoffend or get into trouble in some other way upon return to society is considered to be present (moderate risk in comparison with the forensic population). ... In general the subject can be described as having an antisocial personality whose more unpleasant manifestations have been mitigated. ... It is reasonably certain that his personality will not change. Personality is formed up to age 35, after which only small changes take place. The examination shows that the subject’s personality profile is fairly rigid. He will therefore always be a fairly unpleasant person in his relations with others and will always have difficulty in establishing and maintaining social contacts. Given his personality, I estimate the chances of successful integration in society to be small.”
In his report of 17 August 2012, psychiatrist G.E.M. concluded the following:
“The subject is, however, suffering from a severe antisocial personality disorder, characterised by a highly undifferentiated, fairly primitive emotional awareness, an underdeveloped conscience, rudimentary social skills, a lack of empathy. ... Although the subject displayed problematic and aggressive behaviour during the first few years of his detention, even including an attempt at poisoning, he has practically been a model prisoner over the last few years. ... This change in behaviour is largely attributable to the structure provided by the prison setting and the fact that he is much older now (almost 60) and is likely to become more and more moderate as the years go by. ... [A]s to the risk of recidivism: I am in two minds. Whereas the subject is almost a model prisoner, his character traits have not in essence changed. He continues to be a person with a serious disability. It remains in doubt how he will react and to what extent he can survive once the structure offered by the prison is no longer in place.”
On 21 September 2012 the Joint Court of Justice, having submitted the applicant’s life imprisonment sentence to a periodic review pursuant to Article 1:30 of the Curaçao Criminal Code which had entered into force on 15 November 2011 (see paragraph 42 below), decided that the applicant’s custodial sentence still served a reasonable purpose after 33 years. It took into account the experts’ conclusions that the applicant was suffering from an antisocial personality disorder; the applicant’s attitude during the hearing, which showed that he was not capable of accounting for the seriousness and absurdity of the murder and how he could have committed it; and the position of the surviving relatives.
Due to extreme weather conditions in late 2010 and early 2011, rainwater had found its way into a number of cells in the KIA.
152 prisoners of the KIA (amongst whom the applicant) requested the First Instance Court of Aruba in summary proceedings (kort geding) to order the country of Aruba inter alia to take measures to prevent rainwater and glaring sunlight from entering their cells and to forbid the country to accommodate more than two prisoners in one cell of 3 x 3 m.
On 2 February 2011 the First Instance Court of Aruba partly allowed the requests and ordered the country of Aruba to take measures, before 1 April 2011, in order to keep the cells free from inflowing rainwater without reducing the ventilation. It equally forbade Aruba to place more than two prisoners in a cell of 3 x 3 m after one month of the judgment being issued.
On 19 April 2011 the Joint Court of Justice quashed the judgment of the First Instance Court and ordered Aruba to prevent rainwater from flowing into the cells within six months from the judgment being served.
Until 10 October 2010 the power to grant a pardon was regulated by article 16 § 1 of the Constitutional Rules of the Netherlands Antilles (Staatsregeling van de Nederlandse Antillen), which stipulated:
“The Governor may, having consulted the court which handed down the judgment, grant a pardon to any person convicted and sentenced by judgment of the courts.”
As of 10 October 2010 Article 93 of the Curaçao Constitution provides as follows:
“Pardons will be granted by country decree after the court which handed down the judgment has been consulted, taking into account provisions to be laid down by or pursuant to country ordinance.”
Such country decree is issued by the Governor.
As of 15 November 2011 periodic reviews of life imprisonment sentences are required on Curaçao. Article 1:30 of the Curaçao Criminal Code provides:
“1.  Any convicted person sentenced to life imprisonment will be released on parole after the deprivation of liberty has lasted at least twenty years if in the opinion of the [Joint] Court [of Justice] further unconditional execution no longer serves any reasonable purpose.
The [Joint] Court [of Justice] will in any event take into account the position of any victim or surviving close relatives and the risk of recidivism.
If the [Joint] Court [of Justice] decides not to release the person in question, it will review the situation again after five years and if necessary every five years thereafter.
...
No legal remedy lies against the decision of the Joint Court of Justice.”
The following extracts are taken from the Report to the authorities of the Kingdom of the Netherlands on the visits carried out to the Kingdom in Europe, Aruba, and the Netherlands Antilles by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“CPT”) (CPT/Inf (2008) 2). These visits were carried out on Aruba from 4 to 7 June 2007 and on the Netherlands Antilles from 7 to 13 June 2007.
“PART II:  VISIT TO ARUBA
... C.  Aruba Correctional Institute – KIA
Ill-treatment
The delegation received numerous allegations of inter-prisoner violence, during which prison officers were said to have remained passive when they should have intervened; in some of these cases, such an attitude allegedly exacerbated the situation. On other occasions involving incidents of inter-prisoner violence, there were allegedly no prison officers present or even close at hand.
Conditions of detention
material conditions
... Each cell measured less than 9m² - not counting the partly partitioned sanitary annexe consisting of a shower, toilet and washbasin - and was occupied by up to three persons. As in the rest of the prison, each cell was closed off (on the doorway side) by floor-to-ceiling bars, offering virtually no privacy. The cells were furnished with triple bunk beds and good-quality bedding and in-cell artificial lighting was good. The openings in the concrete structure provided sufficient natural light to the section, but insufficient ventilation (and no possibility to see outside the building).
regime
Two prisoners were serving life sentences at the time of the visit, and 26 inmates were serving long sentences of 10 to 22 years duration. Yet such prisoners, who formed over 12% of the sentenced prisoners, did not appear to benefit from a richer regime than the rather meagre one on offer to all prisoners; nor did they benefit from adequate psychological support.
...The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities develop a policy vis-à-vis life-sentenced and other long-term prisoners.
psychiatric and psychological care
In principle, a psychiatrist attended KIA once a month; however, the delegation noted that he had not visited for several months. The lack of provision of psychiatric care was essentially a budgetary issue.
... A psychiatric and forensic observation and assistance centre (FOBA) within the prison, with a capacity to hold 10 prisoners, had recently been established. However, due to a shortage of staff, both medical and custodial, the FOBA had not been brought into service. In theory, prisoners could receive acute psychiatric treatment at the PAAZ Unit at Oduber Hospital, but resort to hospitalisation was very infrequent.
...
PART 3  VISIT TO THE NETHERLANDS ANTILLES
...
Material conditions
Moreover, the phenomenon of inter-prisoner violence had increased. The number of lesions recorded annually during detention (i.e. not on admission) appeared to have doubled since 2002. Further, the delegation received allegations of inter-prisoner sexual violence, most incidents of which were not reported. ...
The CPT has grave concerns about the levels of violence at Bon Futuro Prison, an establishment which was clearly dangerous and unsafe for both prisoners and staff.
...
Health care services
...
psychiatric and psychological care at Bon Futuro Prison
A psychiatrist attended Bon Futuro Prison (apart from FOBA, see paragraph 59) on a half-time basis. However, prisoners did not benefit from psychological care (one psychologist attended only the FOBA unit). In the CPT’s view, an establishment of the size of Bon Futuro Prison should be able to rely on the services of at least one full-time psychologist. The CPT recommends that a full-time psychologist be recruited as soon as possible for Bon Futuro Prison.
The forensic psychiatric support unit (or FOBA) at Bon Futuro Prison was developed in order to cater for certain problematic prisoners in the absence of more appropriate hospital surroundings.”