The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 17 April 1996, within the threemonth period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 of the Convention (art. 32-1, art. 47). It originated in applications (nos. 19233/91 and 19234/91) against the  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by two Greek nationals, Mr Dimitrios Tsirlis and Mr Timotheos Kouloumpas, on 26 November 1991.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Articles 3, 5, 6, 9, 13 and 14 of the Convention (art. 3, art. 5, art. 6, art. 9, art. 13, art. 14).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicants stated that they wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent them (Rule 30).
On 27 April 1996, the President of the Court decided, under Rule 21 para. 7 and in the interests of the proper administration of justice, that a single Chamber should be constituted to consider this case and that of Georgiadis v.  (no. 56/1996/675/865). The Chamber to be constituted for that purpose included ex officio Mr N. Valticos, the elected judge of Greek nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 4 (b)). On the same date, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr F. Gölcüklü, Mr R. Pekkanen, Mr A.N. Loizou, Mr A.B. Baka, Mr D. Gotchev, Mr P. Kuris and Mr U. Lohmus (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 5) (art. 43).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 6), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Greek Government ("the Government"), the applicants’ lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the Government’s memorial on 25 October 1996 and the applicants’ claims for just satisfaction on 31 October 1996.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 21 January 1997. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
(a) for the Government
Mr P. Georgakopoulos, Senior Adviser,
Legal Council of State, 	Delegate of the Agent,
Mrs K. Grigoriou, Legal Assistant,
Legal Council of State, 	Counsel;
(b) for the Commission
Mr P. Lorenzen, 	Delegate;
(c) for the applicants
Mr P. Bitsaxis, of the Athens Bar, 	Counsel.
The Court heard addresses by Mr Lorenzen, Mr Bitsaxis and Mrs Grigoriou and also replies to its questions.
The applicants were born in 1964 and live in Thiva, Beotia.
On 4 November 1987 Mr Tsirlis was appointed religious minister by the Central Congregation of the Christian Jehovah’s Witnesses of .  He was given authority, inter alia, to perform wedding ceremonies between persons of that faith and to notify such weddings to the competent registry offices. By letter of 20 November 1987 the Prefecture of Eastern Attica notified the registry offices of Eastern Attica of his appointment.
On 13 February 1990 the applicant lodged an application with the Recruitment Office of Eastern Attica ("the Recruitment Office") to be exempted from military service in accordance with section 6 of Law no. 1763/1988 ("the 1988 Law"), which grants such a right to all ministers of "known religions". On 28 February 1990 the Recruitment Office rejected the application on the ground that Jehovah’s Witnesses were not a "known religion". The applicant immediately lodged an appeal with the Director for Recruitment at the General Headquarters for National Defence ("the Director for Recruitment").
While that appeal was pending, the applicant was ordered by the Recruitment Office to report for duty at a military training centre in Rethymnon on 6 March 1990.  The applicant presented himself at the Rethymnon centre, as ordered, but refused to join his unit, invoking his status as a minister of a "known religion". He also refused to wear a military uniform as ordered by a military officer.  He was arrested, charged with insubordination (see paragraph 45 below) and detained pending trial.
On 22 March 1990 the Director for Recruitment rejected the applicant’s appeal against the Recruitment Office’s decision, on the ground that Jehovah’s Witnesses were not a "known religion".
On 30 April 1990 the Canea Permanent Army Tribunal (Diarkes Stratodikio), composed of two military judges and three ordinary military officers, examined the criminal charges against the applicant. Mr Tsirlis claimed that he was innocent on the ground that he was a minister of a "known religion" exempted from military service. At the end of the hearing the President of the tribunal put the following question to its members:
"Is [the applicant], who is a Jehovah’s Witness, guilty of having refused to obey, while serving in the military, an order given by his commanding officer to perform a certain duty, namely collecting articles of clothing necessary for his training as an unarmed soldier, on the ground that the religious convictions of Jehovah’s Witnesses did not permit him to do so?"
The tribunal unanimously answered the question in the affirmative, found the applicant guilty of insubordination and sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment, from which it deducted the period he had spent in detention pending trial.
On 4 May 1990 the applicant appealed against that decision to the  (Anatheoritiko Dikastirio).
On 21 May 1990 the applicant brought proceedings in the  (Symvoulio tis Epikratias) to have the Director for Recruitment’s decision of 22 March 1990 quashed. He asked, among other things, to be treated like other religious ministers.
On 19 June 1990 the applicant’s appeal came up for hearing before the , a court composed of five military judges. The defence sought the applicant’s acquittal or, alternatively, an adjournment of the hearing pending the ’s decision on his administrative appeal. The defence also applied for the applicant’s provisional release. The military court decided to adjourn the hearing to a date to be fixed by the prosecutor (Epitropos), in order to enable the latter to produce a copy of the applicant’s original application for an exemption and of the Director for Recruitment’s final decision on it. It further ruled that the applicant should not be provisionally released.
On 12 September 1990 the applicant requested the  to order a stay of execution of the Director for Recruitment’s decision refusing to exempt him from military service.
On 29 November 1990 the applicant’s appeal came up again for hearing before the . In the meantime the Fourth Division of the  had delivered judgment no. 3601/90, in which the right of Jehovah’s Witnesses ministers of religion to be exempted from military service had been expressly upheld (see paragraph 44 below). The prosecutor requested an adjournment of the hearing with a view to obtaining the opinion of the Director for Recruitment on the following matter:
"Is the accused under an obligation to perform military service in the light of judgment no. 3601/90 of the Fourth Division of the , which quashed a decision of the Director for Recruitment at the General Headquarters for National Defence, who had rejected an application for exemption from military service lodged by another accused person who was a religious minister of the Central Congregation of the Christian Jehovah’s Witnesses ...?"
The prosecutor further submitted that the applicant should remain in custody. The defence agreed to the hearing being adjourned and considered that the question of the applicant’s provisional release "should be left to the court’s discretion". The court granted the prosecution’s application and ordered that the applicant should not be provisionally released.
On 16 April 1991 the applicant’s appeal came up for hearing for the third time before the . A hearing had been fixed on the same day in the action the applicant had brought in the  to have the Director for Recruitment’s decision of 22 March 1990 quashed.
The prosecutor at the  proposed adjourning the hearing of the applicant’s criminal appeal pending the ’s decision. He also submitted that the applicant should remain in custody. The defence considered that the first matter should be left to the court’s discretion but made an application for the applicant’s provisional release.
The court decided to adjourn the hearing in order to obtain the opinion of the Director for Recruitment on the following question: "Was the accused exempted from the obligation to report for duty in the light of his purported status of religious minister?" It further ordered that the applicant should remain in custody.
On 24 April 1991 the  quashed the Director for Recruitment’s decision of 22 March 1990 on the ground that Jehovah’s Witnesses were a "known religion" and the administrative authorities had not challenged the evidence produced by the applicant that he was a minister of that religion.
On 8 May 1991 a three-member committee of the  decided that in the circumstances there was no need to rule on the applicant’s petition for a stay of execution of the Director for Recruitment’s decision.
On 30 May 1991 the  considered the applicant’s appeal against the Canea Permanent Army Tribunal’s judgment of 30 April 1990. The issue before the court, as formulated by its President, was the following:
"Is [the applicant], a member of the religious sect of Jehovah’s Witnesses, guilty of having refused to obey, while serving in the military, an order given by his commanding officer to perform a certain duty, namely collecting articles of clothing necessary for his training as an unarmed soldier, on the ground that the religious convictions of Jehovah’s Witnesses did not permit him to do so?"
Having heard the evidence and the parties’ submissions on the question of the applicant’s guilt, the court withdrew for deliberations. After the deliberations the President announced the verdict. The applicant was acquitted, by three votes to two, on the ground that "there was no act" of insubordination. The dissenting judges considered that "the accused [was] not a religious minister". The following order was attached to the court’s verdict and read out together with it: "The State is under no obligation to compensate the applicant for his detention between 6 March 1990 and 30 May 1991, because his detention was due to his own gross negligence."
The applicant was immediately released and was provisionally discharged from the armed forces on the basis that he was a minister of religion.
On 4 November 1987 Mr Kouloumpas was appointed religious minister by the Central Congregation of the Christian Jehovah’s Witnesses of . He was given authority, inter alia, to perform wedding ceremonies between persons of that faith and to notify such weddings to the competent registry offices. By letter of 20 November 1987 the Prefecture of Eastern Attica notified the registry offices of Eastern Attica of his appointment.
On 29 November 1989 the applicant lodged an application with the Patras Recruitment Office ("the Recruitment Office") to be exempted from military service in accordance with section 6 of the 1988 Law. On 1 March 1990 the Recruitment Office rejected the application on the ground that Jehovah’s Witnesses were not a "known religion". The applicant immediately lodged an appeal with the Director for Recruitment.
While that appeal was pending, the applicant was ordered by the Recruitment Office to report for duty at a military training centre in  on 6 March 1990. The applicant presented himself at the  centre, as ordered, but refused to join his unit, invoking his status as a minister of a "known religion". He also refused to wear a military uniform as ordered by a military officer. He was arrested, charged with insubordination (see paragraph 45 below) and detained pending trial.
On 6 April 1990 the Director for Recruitment rejected the applicant’s appeal against the Recruitment Office’s decision, on the ground that Jehovah’s Witnesses were not a "known religion".
On 21 May 1990 the applicant brought proceedings in the  to have the Director for Recruitment’s decision of 6 April 1990 quashed. He asked, among other things, to be treated like other religious ministers.
On 30 May 1990 the Athens Permanent Army Tribunal, composed of one military judge and four ordinary military officers, examined the criminal charges against the applicant. Mr Kouloumpas claimed that he was innocent on the ground that he was a minister of a "known religion" exempted from military service. At the end of the hearing the President of the tribunal put the following question to its members:
"Is [the applicant], who is a Jehovah’s Witness, guilty of having refused to obey, while serving in the military, an order given by his commanding officer to perform a certain duty, namely collecting articles of clothing necessary for his training as an unarmed soldier, on the ground that the religious convictions of Jehovah’s Witnesses did not permit him to do so?"
The tribunal unanimously answered the question in the affirmative, found the applicant guilty of insubordination and sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment, from which it deducted the period he had spent in detention pending trial.
On 1 June 1990 the applicant appealed against that decision to the .
On 12 July 1990 the applicant’s appeal came up for hearing before the . The defence sought the applicant’s acquittal or, alternatively, an adjournment of the hearing pending the ’s decision on his administrative appeal. The court decided to adjourn the hearing to a date to be fixed by the prosecutor, in order to enable the latter to produce copies of certain documents from the Ministry of Education and the Holy Synod of the Orthodox Church of Greece which had been relied on by the military authorities to refuse the applicant’s application for exemption. The court further accepted the submission of both the prosecution and the defence that the applicant should not be provisionally released.
On 12 September 1990 the applicant requested the  to order a stay of execution of the Director for Recruitment’s decision refusing to exempt him from military service.
On 27 November 1990 the applicant’s appeal came up again for hearing before the . In the meantime the Fourth Division of the  had delivered judgment no. 3601/90, in which the right of Jehovah’s Witnesses ministers of religion to be exempted from military service had been expressly upheld (see paragraph 44 below). The prosecutor requested an adjournment of the hearing with a view to obtaining the opinion of the Director for Recruitment on the following matter:
"Is the accused under an obligation to perform military service in the light of judgment no. 3601/90 of the Fourth Division of the , which quashed a decision of the Director for Recruitment at the General Headquarters for National Defence, who had rejected an application for exemption from military service lodged by another accused person who was a religious minister of the Central Congregation of the Christian Jehovah’s Witnesses ...?"
The prosecutor further submitted that the applicant should remain in custody. The defence requested the applicant’s provisional release. The court granted the prosecution’s application and ordered that the applicant should not be provisionally released.
On 7 March 1991 the applicant’s appeal came up for hearing for the third time before the . The prosecutor sought an adjournment of the hearing on the ground that the Director for Recruitment should give his opinion on the following matter: "Is the accused already exempted from the obligation to perform military service in view of the proceedings he has brought in the ?" He also submitted that the applicant should remain in custody. Despite the applicant’s opposition, the court granted both applications.
On 24 April 1991 the  quashed the Director for Recruitment’s decision refusing the applicant’s application for exemption on the ground that Jehovah’s Witnesses were a "known religion" and the administrative authorities had not challenged the evidence produced by the applicant that he was a minister of that religion.
On 8 May 1991 a three-member committee of the  decided that in the circumstances there was no need to rule on the applicant’s petition for a stay of execution of the Director for Recruitment’s decision.
On 29 May 1991 the  considered the applicant’s appeal against the Athens Permanent Army Tribunal’s judgment of 30 May 1990. The issue before the court, as formulated by its President, was the following:
"Is [the applicant], a member of the religious sect of Jehovah’s Witnesses, guilty of having refused to obey, while serving in the military, an order given by his commanding officer to perform a certain duty, that is to collects articles of clothing necessary for his training as an unarmed soldier, on the ground that the religious convictions of Jehovah’s Witnesses did not permit him to do so?"
Having heard the evidence and the parties’ submissions on the question of the applicant’s guilt, the court withdrew for deliberations. After the deliberations the President announced the verdict. The applicant was acquitted, by three votes to two, on the ground that "there was no act" of insubordination. The dissenting judges considered that "the accused [was] not a religious minister". The following order was attached to the tribunal’s verdict and read out together with it: "The State is under no obligation to compensate the applicant for his detention between 6 March 1990 and 29 May 1991, because his detention was due to his own gross negligence."
The applicant was immediately released and was provisionally discharged from the armed forces on the basis that he was a minister of religion.
Section 6 of Law no. 1763/1988 ("the 1988 Law") exempts all ministers of "known religions" from military service. In application of this provision, priests of the Greek Orthodox Church obtain exemption without any difficulty.
The Supreme Administrative Court has repeatedly held that Jehovah’s Witnesses are a "known religion" (judgments nos. 2105 and 2106/1975, 4635/1977, 2484/1980, 4620/1985 and 790 and 3533/1986). In its judgment no. 3601/1990 the  expressly upheld the right of Jehovah’s Witnesses ministers of religion to be exempted from military service.
Article 70 of the Military Criminal Code provides as follows:
"A member of the armed forces who refuses ... to obey an order by his superior to perform one of his duties is punished..."
On 16 March 1992 the Athens Permanent Army Tribunal held that a Jehovah’s Witnesses minister of religion who had refused to collect military clothing when first called upon to join the army was not guilty of insubordination. The tribunal considered that there had been no act of insubordination, because the accused had no obligation to perform military service as he was a minister of a "known religion".
Article 434 provides that where a procedural matter is not regulated in the Military Criminal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure applies.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure read as follows:
Article 533 para. 2    
"Persons who have been detained on remand and subsequently acquitted ... shall be entitled to request compensation ... if it has been established in the proceedings that they did not commit the criminal offence for which they were detained ..."    
Article 535 para. 1    
"The State shall have no obligation to compensate a person who ... has been detained on remand if, whether intentionally or by gross negligence, he was responsible for his own detention."  
Article 536    
"1. Upon an oral application by a person who has been acquitted, the court which heard the case shall rule on the State’s obligation to pay compensation in a separate decision delivered at the same time as the verdict. However, the court may also make such a ruling proprio motu ...
The ruling on the State’s obligation to pay compensation cannot be challenged separately; it shall, however, be quashed if the decision on the principal issue of the criminal trial is reversed."
Article 537    
"1. A person who has suffered loss may seek compensation at a later stage from the same court.
In those circumstances the application must be submitted to the prosecutor [Epitropos] at that court no later than forty-eight hours after the delivery of the judgment in open court."
Article 539 para. 1
"Where it has been decided that the State must pay compensation, the person entitled thereto may bring his claim in the civil courts, which shall not call in question the existence of the State’s obligation."    
Article 540 para. 1
"Persons who have been unfairly ... detained on remand must be compensated for any pecuniary loss they have suffered as a result of their ... detention. They must also be compensated for non-pecuniary loss ..."
Mr Tsirlis and Mr Kouloumpas applied to the Commission on 26 November 1991. Relying on Articles 3, 5 paras. 1 and 5, 6 para. 1, 9, 13 and 14 of the Convention (art. 3, art. 5-1, art. 5-5, art. 6-1, art. 9, art. 13, art. 14), they complained that their detention was unlawful and amounted to discrimination on account of their religious beliefs, that they had been subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment, and that they did not have a fair hearing in the matter of compensation for their unlawful detention. They further complained under Article 7 (art. 7) that their conviction had been arbitrary.
On 4 September 1995 the Commission declared the applications (nos. 19233/91 and 19234/91) admissible with the exception of the complaints concerning the lawfulness of the applicants’ pre-trial detention and the complaint under Article 7 (art. 7). In its report of 7 March 1996 (Article 31) (art. 31), the Commission expressed the opinion that:
(a) there had been a violation of Article 5 para. 1 (art. 5-1) (unanimously);
(b) there had been a violation of Article 5 para. 5 (art. 5-5) (unanimously);
(c) there had been a violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) (unanimously);
(d) it was not necessary to examine whether there had been a violation of Article 13 (art. 13) (unanimously);
(e) there had been a violation of Article 14 read in conjunction with Article 9 (art. 14+9) (twenty-six votes to two);
(f) it was not necessary to examine whether there had been a violation of Article 9 (art. 9) (twenty-four votes to four);
(g) there had been no violation of Article 3 (art. 3) (unanimously).
The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the three separate opinions contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
At the hearing, the applicants requested the Court to find that, in their cases, Articles 3, 5 paras. 1 and 5, 6 para. 1, 9, 13 and 14 (art. 3, art. 51, art. 5-5, art. 6-1, art. 9, art. 13, art. 14) had been violated.
The Government, for their part, asked the Court to reject every allegation of a violation of the Convention.