The case originated in an application (no. 48866/10) against the Kingdom of Sweden lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Iraqi national (“the applicant”) on 23 August 2010. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Soussi, a lawyer practising in Stockholm. The Swedish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms G. Isaksson, of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his deportation to  would involve violations of Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention.
On 25 August 2010 the President of the then Third Section decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Government that the applicants should not be deported to  until 22 September 2010. On 21 September, 2 and 23 November and 7 December 2010 this indication was prolonged, eventually until further notice.
On 22 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant, who was born in 1979, is a Sunni Muslim from . He is married and has a son.
The applicant arrived in Sweden on 11 November 2007 and applied for a residence permit the following day and for asylum on 20 May 2008. The Migration Board (Migrationsverket) held an interview with him in the presence of his legal counsel and an interpreter.
The applicant stated in essence the following in support of his application. He and his family lived in Karrada, a Shi’a-dominated district of Baghdad. In June 2003 he began working for a security company. After a year and a half he switched to another company in the same business and in January 2007 he began working for the biggest security company in the country which had connections to the US military. In May 2007 his clan disowned him due to this affiliation. In his work he had access to the “Green Zone”, the international area of Baghdad. He also had the right to bear arms and to search suspected criminals. In October 2007 members of the Badr militia visited his house and told his wife that he should appear at their office for questioning. Some days later the al-Mahdi militia, which cooperated with the Badr militia in his neighbourhood, made the same demand. On 20 October 2007 he received a threatening letter pasted to his car, urging him to stop working for the US troops or else he would be killed. He asked his employer for help, but did not get any. On 1 November 2007 his house was hit by shell fire and was completely destroyed. No other house in the street was hit. He suspected that the two militias were behind the attack. The police arrived, but did not take any action. He and his family went to live with his parents-in-law in another part of Karrada. Three days later he left for Sweden, leaving his wife and son behind in Baghdad. In October 2008 they were assaulted at the home of his parents-in-law by men who were asking about his whereabouts. In late 2008 a friend visited his destroyed house in Baghdad and found another threatening letter addressed to the applicant which was forwarded via the applicant’s wife to Sweden. The applicant claimed that he would risk persecution and inhuman treatment from the militias and his clan if he were to return to Iraq. He was also worried that he could be badly treated by the US military which may believe that he had disclosed information about them and because he brought with him his service identification cards when he left Iraq.
On 3 March 2009 the Migration Board rejected the application and ordered the applicant’s deportation to Iraq. The Board held that he had not proved his identity, but that he had made it plausible that he was from . It further considered that the situation in  as such did not constitute grounds for asylum. Noting that the applicant had not had any difficulties for religious or political reasons and that he had been able to live in a Shi’a-dominated area without anything having happened to him until October 2007, the Board concluded that the threats against him were local and related to the militias in question. It could not be considered as persecution, however, and there was no indication that he risked persecution upon return. Nor did the Board find that he risked other forms of ill-treatment. In so finding, it noted that he had not been subjected to such treatment previously. Since the applicant had been working for security companies and thereby cooperated with the American troops since 2003, the Board found his claim that he had received threats only in October 2007, four years later, to be peculiar. As to the alleged threats by the militias, the applicant had not been able to state who the people visiting his house were or what had been the purpose of their visits. His accounts in these respects were, according to the Board, mere speculation. Moreover, if the threats concerned his work for the American troops, the applicant had since ended that job and the threats could therefore no longer be considered valid. Also the applicant’s accounts of the destruction of his house and the attack on his wife and son lacked details as to who the perpetrators were and why the actions had been undertaken. Consequently, no connection had been shown between the militia visits and the alleged subsequent events and the latter events did not indicate that the militia groups were still looking for him. In this context, the Board also noted that a remarkably long period of time had passed between the applicant’s leaving Iraq and the alleged attack on his family members. It was further deemed peculiar that someone should have left a threatening letter at his demolished house long after his escape from the country. Furthermore, the applicant had not been able to explain why his clan would pose a threat to him. Finally, the Board noted that the incidents to which the applicant claimed to have been exposed were locally restricted to the Shi’a-dominated Karrara district; as a Sunni Muslim he should be able to move to a Sunni part of Baghdad.
The applicant appealed, adding that, if he were to be removed to Iraq, he would be split up from his family, who had moved to Syria. Furthermore, he claimed that he had not ended his employment at the security company and that, thus, the connection to the American troops remained.
On 2 March 2010 the Migration Court (Migrationsdomstolen) held an oral hearing in the case. The applicant was represented by his counsel and assisted by an interpreter. He later requested a further hearing, at which he wished that his former boss at one of the security companies in Iraq be heard by telephone. On 24 March 2010 the court rejected this request, finding it unnecessary, and instead gave the applicant the opportunity to finalise his submissions in writing.
On 16 April 2010, after having rejected the applicant’s renewed request for a further hearing, the Migration Court upheld the decision of the Board, generally agreeing with its conclusions. The court considered that, even though the applicant and his family had been assaulted in Iraq, there was no evidence of a remaining threat against him upon return. In so finding, the court noted that it had not been shown that there was a connection between the various incidents and that the applicant did not know who were the perpetrators or why they had carried out the acts. Furthermore, almost a year had passed between the destruction of the house and the assault on his family. His wife and child had stayed in Baghdad during this period and, if any group had had an interest in him to the alleged extent, they would in all likelihood have searched for him more actively. The court further took into account that more than two years had passed since the applicant had stopped working for the security companies and, consequently, that it was not likely that he would be exposed to further threats due to his former work if he were to return to Iraq. Also, many of the incidents dated back a number of years and had to be seen as consequences of the difficult general security situation in Iraq in 2007.
On 4 June 2010 the Migration Court of Appeal (Migrations-överdomstolen) refused the applicant leave to appeal.
In September and October 2010, at the Court’s request, the applicant presented additional information, including copies of identification cards, certificates and letters of recommendation to show that he had been working for the security companies in question. He also submitted photos to prove that he had been training with the US military and photos of his wife and child to show that they had been injured in the alleged assault in October 2008. Additionally, he submitted several documents in Arabic and translations into Swedish. The documents, a report to the police by the applicant’s brother, instructions of an investigating judge, witness statements by the brother and neighbours and a police account of measures taken – all dated in October 2008 –, provide the following account of events. On 10 October 2008 at 10 p.m., a black car stopped outside the applicant’s house and four men got out of the car and went into the house. They rummaged through the house looking for the applicant and destroying property in the process. However, the brother told the police that the applicant was at work in the “Green Zone” at the time and therefore was not at home. The four men left a threatening note for the applicant. The alleged note was submitted to the Court with a translation.
The basic provisions applicable in the present case, concerning the right of aliens to enter and to remain in , are laid down in the Aliens Act (Utlänningslagen, 2005:716).
An alien who is considered to be a refugee or otherwise in need of protection is, with certain exceptions, entitled to a residence permit in  (Chapter 5, section 1 of the Act). The term “refugee” refers to an alien who is outside the country of his or her nationality owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted on grounds of race, nationality, religious or political beliefs, or on grounds of gender, sexual orientation or other membership of a particular social group and who is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country (Chapter 4, section 1). This applies irrespective of whether the persecution is at the hands of the authorities of the country or if those authorities cannot be expected to offer protection against persecution by private individuals. By “an alien otherwise in need of protection” is meant, inter alia, a person who has left the country of his or her nationality because of a well-founded fear of being sentenced to death or receiving corporal punishment, or of being subjected to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Chapter 4, section 2).
Moreover, if a residence permit cannot be granted on the above grounds, such a permit may be issued to an alien if, after an overall assessment of his or her situation, there are such particularly distressing circumstances (synnerligen ömmande omständigheter) to allow him or her to remain in Sweden (Chapter 5, section 6). Special consideration should be given, inter alia, to the alien’s health status. According to the preparatory works (Government Bill 2004/05:170, pp. 190-191), life-threatening physical or mental illness for which no treatment can be given in the alien’s home country could constitute a reason for the grant of a residence permit.
As regards the enforcement of a deportation or expulsion order, account has to be taken of the risk of capital punishment or torture and other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. According to a special provision on impediments to enforcement, an alien must not be sent to a country where there are reasonable grounds for believing that he or she would be in danger of suffering capital or corporal punishment or of being subjected to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Chapter 12, section 1). In addition, an alien must not, in principle, be sent to a country where he or she risks persecution (Chapter 12, section 2).
Matters concerning the right of aliens to enter and remain in  are dealt with by three instances: the Migration Board, the  and the Migration Court of Appeal.
On 31 May 2012 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) issued the latest Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Iraq (hereafter “the UNHCR Guidelines”). They contain the following account (at p. 8):
“[A]rmed groups opposed to the Iraqi Government remain active and capable of disrupting the security environment with regular mass casualty attacks, often directed at Shi’ite civilians, reportedly aiming to reinvigorate sectarian violence. Armed groups are also thought to be responsible for targeted attacks on government and security officials, politicians, tribal and religious leaders, and members of religious and ethnic minorities, among others. Occasionally, local cells manage to coordinate attacks across the country. The number of civilian casualties, though less than at the peak of violence in 2006 and 2007, remains nonetheless significant with around 4,000 civilians killed in both 2010 and 2011, respectively. At least 464 civilians were killed in January 2012, in what appeared to be a surge in mass casualty attacks. Shi’ite civilians have been the most affected. After a short lull in violence, several major attacks across central Iraq were again reported in late February, March and April 2012.
These casualty figures are indicative of the significant risks still faced by Iraqi civilians. The number of civilian deaths from suicide attacks and car bombs decreased in 2011 compared to previous years, to an average of 6.6 per day. While these attacks still account for the highest number of civilian deaths each month, the number of civilians killed from gunfire/executions rose to an average of 4.6 per day in 2011. This suggests that an increasing number of Iraqis, especially government and security officials, are being individually targeted. Violence is mostly concentrated in the predominantly Sunni or mixed central governorates of Al-Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Ninewa, Kirkuk, and Salah Al-Din, but occasionally moves into the mainly Shi’ite governorates further south. Armed Sunni groups such as Al-Qa’eda in Iraq and Ansar Al-Islam are thought to be responsible for most of the violence. Shi’ite armed groups have to a large extent been integrated into the ISF [Iraqi security forces] and the political process, though they reportedly maintain their independent military capabilities and at times threaten to use it to further their political agendas. Armed groups target civilians on the basis of their (imputed) political views, religion, ethnicity, social status or a combination of reasons. As a result of the weak law enforcement and justice system, persons at risk of persecution are reportedly unable to find protection or judicial redress. Observers mention undue political influence, the lack of trained legal professionals and corruption as further obstacles to the administration of justice, including in the Kurdistan Region. Legal professionals continue to work in a very difficult security environment, and remain a target of armed groups. Crime is widespread and some armed groups reportedly engage in extortion, kidnappings and armed robberies to fund their other, politically – or religiously, or ideologically – motivated activities, conflating acts of persecution and criminality. Consequently, the line between persecution and criminality appears to be increasingly blurred.”
The UNHCR Guidelines also describe the armed Shi’ite groups (at pp. 11-12):
“After 2003, a range of armed Shi’ite groups reportedly started to compete for power and religious influence in Iraq, at times resulting in violent intra-Shi’ite clashes. This was the case, in particular, between the Badr Corps, the armed wing of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq / Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq, and the Jaysh Al-Mahdi, the armed wing of the Sadrist Movement led by cleric Muqtada Al-Sadr. Jaysh Al-Mahdi became the main Shi’ite opposition to the foreign coalition forces in Iraq after the fall of the former regime in 2003. It staged two uprisings against US forces in April and August 2004 and launched numerous attacks against mainly US military targets. Attacks on US forces peaked in mid-2007, when Jaysh Al-Mahdi was responsible for the majority of all US casualties. Both the Badr Corps and the Sadrists have integrated into the political process and the Sadrists have become a major political force and main backer of Prime Minister Al-Maliki. However, none of these groups have given up military capacity and, in the case of Jaysh Al-Mahdi / Promised Day Brigades, sporadic attacks on US targets continued into 2011. Some members of the Badr Corps, and to a lesser extent the Jaysh Al-Mahdi, have been integrated into the ISF. Armed Shi’ite groups are accused of having a major role in the sectarian cleansing that followed the February 2006 Al-Askari shrine bombing. Armed Shi’ite groups were significantly affected by the ISF-led offensives in southern Iraq and Sadr City/Baghdad in 2007–2008.
Muqtada Al-Sadr faced apparent difficulties in retaining control over Jaysh Al-Mahdi, and the group splintered into various factions with differing agendas (so-called “Special Groups”), some of them engaging in mainly criminal activities. In recent years, three main armed Shi’ite groups have been active: Jaysh Al-Mahdi / Promised Day Brigades; Asa’ib Ahl Al-Haq, which was created by former Sadrist Qays Al-Khazali; and Kata’ib Hezbollah. In 2011, these groups claimed responsibility for lethal attacks against the USF-I [United States Forces in Iraq] aimed at expediting the withdrawal of foreign forces from Iraq. Their presence is mainly reported in Baghdad, Basrah, Missan, Thi-Qar, Kerbala, Babel, Najef, Wassit and Diwaniyah. Armed Shi’ite groups have also been reported to engage in criminal activities such as kidnappings, extortion and oil smuggling.
Armed Shi’ite groups boasted that the US troop withdrawal from Iraq in mid-December 2011 was a “historic victory”. It remains to be seen how their agendas will evolve in the aftermath of this withdrawal. Reportedly, there continue to be regular rocket attacks against the US consulate in Basrah, which houses almost 1,000 US diplomatic and security personnel. At the same time, Asa’ib Ahl Al-Haq announced its decision to lay down its arms and engage in the political system as an opposition party. This decision heightened existing tensions with the Sadrists. Muqtada Al-Sadr has repeatedly warned that the Promised Day Brigades stand ready to attack any “oversize” US diplomatic presence in Iraq. There are no indications that Kata’ib Hezbollah seeks to integrate into the political system.
While armed Shi’ite groups have in the past publicly focussed on attacking the MNF-I [Multi-National Forces in Iraq] / USF-I, there are reports that they also single out Iraqis of various profiles for kidnapping and assassination, including former Ba’athists, security and government officials, political/religious rivals, and persons considered as “collaborators” with the foreign forces, especially the US. Further, Shi’ite groups have also enforced strict Islamic rules of behaviour and dress, and are considered to be responsible, inter alia, for attacks on women not wearing the veil, persons engaged in selling liquor, and LGBTI persons.”
In its Report on Human Rights in Iraq: July – December 2012, published in June 2013, the Human Rights Office of the United Nations Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) gave, inter alia, the following summary (at p. vii):
“Violence and armed violence continued to take their toll on civilians in Iraq. According to the Government of Iraq, 1,704 civilians were killed and 6,651 were injured in the second half of 2012, resulting in a total of 3,102 killed and 12,146 injured for 2012. According to UNAMI, 1,892 civilians were killed and 6,719 were injured in the last six months of 2012, resulting in a total of at least 3,238 civilians who were killed and 10,379 who were injured for the year. These figures indicate that the trend of recent years of a reduction in the numbers of civilian casualties has reversed and that the impact of violence on civilians looks set to increase in the near to medium future. Terrorists and armed groups continued to favour asymmetric tactics that deliberately target civilians or were carried out heedless of the impact on civilians.
Political instability and regional developments continued to impact negatively on the security situation in Iraq, with its concomitant toll on civilians. Although the Government takes the impact of violence on civilians extremely seriously and has taken measures to enhance security, more needs to be done to ensure the proper coordination of financial, medical and other forms of support for the victims of violence.”
The UK Border Agency Iraq Operational Guidance Note of December 2012 describes the general security situation thus (at pp. 21-22):
“3.6.2  The security situation in Iraq continues to affect the civilian population, who face ongoing acts of violence perpetrated by armed opposition groups and criminal gangs. In particular, armed groups continue to employ tactics that deliberately target crowded public areas and kill and maim civilians indiscriminately. While some attacks appear to be sectarian in nature, frequently targeting religious gatherings or residential areas, others seem random, aimed at creating fear and terror in the population at large and casting doubt over the ability of the Government and Iraqi security forces to stem the violence. Assassinations also persist across the country, targeting, inter alia, Government employees, tribal and community leaders, members of the judiciary and associated persons.
6.3  Apparently making use of the political wrangling which has followed the elections for Iraq’s Council of Representatives (CoR) held on 7 March 2010, armed Sunni groups (such as Al-Qaeda in Iraq) have stepped up attacks since December 2011. These attacks have been carried out primarily against Shi’ite civilians in what appears to be an effort to stir sectarian tensions and undermine confidence in the ISF and, ultimately, the Iraqi Government. The political stalemate also comes at an uncertain period in the wider region: the repercussions of ongoing unrest and tensions in Syria and Iran, with which Iraq shares porous borders and political and economic ties, are not yet known. Iraq’s political difficulties have also reportedly increased tensions with neighbouring Turkey.”
In a country guidance determination, HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC), delivered on 13 November 2012, the UK Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) reached, inter alia, the following conclusions (at p. 2):
“ii. As regards the current situation, the evidence does not establish that the degree of indiscriminate violence characterising the current armed conflict taking place in the five central governorates in Iraq, namely Baghdad, Diyala, Tameen (Kirkuk), Ninewah, Salah Al-Din, is at such a high level that substantial grounds have been shown for believing that any civilian returned there would solely on account of his presence there face a real risk of being subject to that threat.
Nor does the evidence establish that there is a real risk of serious harm under Article 15(c) [of the Refugee Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC] for civilians who are Sunni or Shi’a or Kurds or have former Ba’ath Party connections: these characteristics do not in themselves amount to “enhanced risk categories” under Article 15(c)’s “sliding scale” ..."
The UNHCR Guidelines contain the following account in regard to individuals affiliated with the USF-I, foreign governments, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) or international companies (at pp. 16-17):
“Civilians (formerly) employed or otherwise affiliated with the former MNF-I/USF-I or foreign governments, NGOs or international companies, as well as their families, are at risk of being targeted by non-state actors for their (imputed) political opinion. Since 2003, both Sunni and Shi’ite armed groups are known to have threatened, kidnapped and killed interpreters, embassy workers, drivers, subcontractors and others affiliated with the MNF-I/USF-I, foreign governments, international companies or organizations, reportedly to deter others from working for them.
Ahead of the full USF-I withdrawal from Iraq, achieved by mid December 2011, advocates and Iraqis (formerly) employed with the US military raised concerns about being left without protection. There are fears that employee records maintained by the USF-I may have leaked to armed groups. Perpetrators of violence against Iraqis affiliated with the MNF-I/USF-I are both Sunni and Shi’ite armed groups. It is reported that there were no contingency plans to provide emergency protection to former Iraqi employees after the USF-I withdrawal.
Individuals who have worked for the MNF-I/USF-I may be unable to find new employment if their former employer becomes known. Many former USF-I employees allegedly hesitate to reveal their prior work experience to a potential new employer for fear of retribution.”
The UK Border Agency Iraq Operational Guidance Note states as follows (at pp. 23-25):
“3.6.11  Almost all attacks are currently attributable to Sunni extremists and target current Iraqi Security Forces, Government of Iraq (GoI) employees, or very occasionally Shia gathering areas. Most incidents are targeted attacks against specific individuals, with only a small number of indiscriminate attacks. ...
...
6.14  Shia militias have predominantly been seen to operate in most areas of eastern Baghdad, generally emanating from the Sadr City area. They do also have a presence in the more ethnically mixed areas of central and western Baghdad. Shia militia tend to have a far higher capability to carry out lethal acts, though their intent is presently very low. Their agenda is far more linked to the political situation and as their leadership attempt to move into power-brokering they have far less of an inclination to use violence openly. Previously most of their attacks specifically targeted US Forces, though these started to tail off mid 2011 with the understanding that US Forces would withdraw entirely by the end of the year. In 2012 thus far it would be difficult to attribute more than a handful of incidents to Shia militia, and most of these would be down to in-fighting between different factions, or criminal disputes.”