The case originated in an application (no. 44290/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Ms Evgeniya Ivanova Sabeva (“the applicant”), on 24 September 2007.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Stefanova and Mr M. Ekimdzhiev, lawyers practising in . The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms S. Atanasova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that her confinement in a psychiatric hospital was unlawful, that she had no opportunity to seek judicial review of that confinement, that she did not have an enforceable right to compensation in respect of these matters, and that the conditions of her detention were inhuman and degrading.
On 20 January 2009 the Court decided to give priority to the application under Rule 41 of its Rules. On the same date it decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3 of the Convention).
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in .
On 27 December 2005 the Stara Zagora District Court granted the applicant's petition for divorce from her husband, with whom she had two daughters.
On 14 July 2006 the applicant's former husband asked the Stara Zagora District Prosecutor's Office to apply for a court order for the applicant to be subjected to compulsory treatment. He asserted that her mental health had deteriorated sharply and that she was not taking care of their children. That Office carried out a inquiry, in the course of which it took statements from the applicant, her former husband, and their two daughters. The applicant said that, if necessary, she would voluntarily submit to a psychiatric examination. Her former husband alleged that she had been delusional and paranoiac for many years, and had been harassing both him and their two children. The two daughters, at that time aged eighteen and eleven, made similar statements. The social services drew up a report which said that the applicant had expressed her fears of persecution by the former communist secret services, which in their view showed that she had psychiatric problems and needed treatment.
On 8 September 2006 the Stara Zagora District Prosecutor's Office applied to the Stara Zagora District Court for an order for the applicant's compulsory treatment. It described the allegations of her former husband, and asserted that her mental condition had deteriorated and that there was a risk that she would cause harm to herself, her relatives or third parties, or would seriously endanger her health.
The court appointed counsel for the applicant and examined the case at a hearing held on 3 October 2006. It heard the applicant, who denied that she was suffering from any mental disorder, and a psychiatric expert, who was of the opinion that she did have such a disorder, but that the question as to whether it required compulsory treatment could be answered only after a more detailed examination. The court accordingly ordered a psychiatric expert report, asking the expert to determine, inter alia, whether the applicant was suffering from a mental disorder, whether she presented a risk for others or herself, and whether she could be effectively treated as an outpatient.
The report, drawn up by Dr I.D., head of the inpatient department of the Stara Zagora Regional Psychiatric Clinic, on the basis of the materials in the case file and an examination of the applicant, concluded that she had a “persistent mental disorder” and a “paranoid syndrome with persecution delusions”. It further stated that the risk of her committing a violent act or an offence was low, but could not be fully ruled out. It expressed the view that she was unlikely to be able to cope with everyday tasks and especially those relating to parenting. It finally stated that lack of treatment could have a negative impact on her health, and recommended that she be treated in a closed psychiatric establishment for at least two months. If she showed a more critical attitude towards her disorder she could also be treated as an outpatient.
At a hearing held on 16 October 2006 the court heard Dr I.D., who maintained his conclusions and expressed the opinion that unless committed to a psychiatric hospital the applicant would not submit to treatment. The applicant replied that she was perfectly healthy and did not need treatment. The court admitted Dr I.D.'s report in evidence and heard the parties' arguments. In her closing statement the applicant mentioned that in 2006 her former husband had been convicted on the basis of information she had supplied to the prosecution authorities. In view of this new information, and noting that Dr I.D.'s report relied heavily on information furnished by the applicant's former husband, the court decided to order a second report, to be drawn up by three different experts.
The report was prepared by three psychiatrists of the Stara Zagora Regional Psychiatric Clinic, on the basis of the materials in the case file and an examination of the applicant. It made, almost verbatim, the same findings as the initial report, but in its conclusion also stated that the applicant presented a risk to her relatives, society and her own health.
At a hearing held on 1 November 2006 the court heard a witness called by the applicant and the three experts, who maintained their findings and said that the applicant could not be treated as an outpatient. In reply to a question by counsel for the applicant, one of the experts specified that Dr I.D. was not their direct superior. The court admitted the report in evidence and heard the parties' closing arguments.
In a judgment of 1 November 2006 the Stara Zagora District Court ordered that the applicant be subjected to compulsory treatment in a closed psychiatric hospital in Radnevo for a period of two months. It found that she was suffering from the disorder described in the two expert reports, both of which it fully credited, observing that they had been to a decisive extent based on an examination of the applicant by the experts. It further found that she posed a risk to herself and others and that, failing treatment, which could only be administered in a closed psychiatric establishment, her condition would worsen. It noted that the experts were unanimous that the applicant could not be effectively treated as an outpatient.
The applicant appealed, arguing that the expert reports were flawed because they had chiefly been based on the assertions of her former husband and their daughter, who was living with him and was under his influence. She requested a fresh psychiatric report, to be drawn up by other experts.
On 24 November 2006 the Stara Zagora Regional Court rejected the applicant's request, saying that it was unclear on what grounds she was seeking a fresh expert report.
At a hearing held on 17 January 2007 the applicant expressed her misgivings about the second expert report, saying that the three psychiatrists were probably influenced by the conclusions of Dr I.D.
On 31 January 2007 the  upheld the order for the applicant's detention, fully agreeing with the lower court's reasoning. It found that the expert reports were objective and clear, and had been predominantly based on the examinations of the applicant and not on other materials.
On 6 February 2007 the applicant was informed that the order for her confinement had become final. As she feared that she might be forcibly detained, she went to the psychiatric hospital in Radnevo in order to learn when she needed to voluntarily attend and what items she needed to take with her. The doctor on duty insisted that the applicant stay at the hospital. Despite her protestations and her explanations that she needed to go back to her house to arrange for someone to take care of her dog during her absence, she was taken into custody.
The applicant alleged that, while in the hospital in Radnevo, she was kept in a ward reserved for the most difficult patients and deprived of any contacts with the outside world. She could leave the ward only during the three daily meals. In her submission, the physical and hygienic conditions in the ward were appalling, with faeces and urine on the floor, stained bedsheets, rendering peeling off the walls, windows which could not be closed properly but at the same time did not let in enough light because of the bars, and no locks on the internal doors. She had to block the door of her room with furniture to avoid being assaulted by aggressive patients. Her room was not lit at night, because there were light bulbs only in the corridors. Despite the cold temperatures outside, the heating was turned on only during the doctors' rounds. The food consisted of soup and bread, which were allegedly being thrown on the floor with the patients fighting for them. The applicant's requests to be transferred to another ward were allegedly turned down. However, towards the end of her stay she was allowed to take walks in the hospital's yard. She was treated with pills, which she took because she feared penalties, which were allegedly customary in the ward.
According to information submitted by the Government, on admission to the hospital on 6 February 2007 the applicant was put in a closed ward. On 8 February 2007 her detention regime was changed to “normal”, and on 15 March 2007 she was placed under an “opendoor” regime. After 8 February 2007 she was involved in a physical rehabilitation programme, after 14 February 2007 in work therapy outside her ward, and after 22 February 2007 in art therapy at an art workshop.
The Government did not submit information about the conditions of the applicant's detention. They produced a letter from the Ministry of Health which said that the physical conditions in the ward where the applicant had been kept had been in line with the applicable hygienic and safety requirements, and that she had been treated with haloperidol and chlorprothixene.
The applicant submitted that during her stay in the hospital she had repeatedly enquired whether it would be possible for her to be discharged before the expiry of the twomonth period ordered by the court, and had received the reply that it would not be.
Less than a month after her admission the applicant was visited by a friend and learned that this friend, who had a key to her flat, had gone there and was taking care of her dog.
The applicant was discharged from the hospital on 30 March 2007.
The compulsory confinement and treatment of those suffering from mental disorders are governed by sections 155-65 of the 2005 Health Act.
Section 155, read in conjunction with section 146(1)(1) and (1)(2), makes such confinement subject to two preconditions. First, the persons concerned must suffer from (i) serious malfunction of the psychological functions (psychosis or a serious personality disorder), (ii) enduring psychological damage due to a mental illness, (iii) moderate, serious or profound mental retardation, or (iv) vascular or senile dementia. Second, their condition must create a risk that they might commit a criminal offence which would put their relatives, third parties, society at large, or their own health in danger. Caselaw provided by the Government (реш. от 29 март 2006 г. по н. ч. д. № 3235/2006 г., СРС, НК, 103 състав; реш. от 26 април 2006 г. по н. ч. д. № 3863/2006 г., СРС, НК, 7 състав; реш. № 187 от 20 юли 2007 г. по в. ч. н. д. № 317/2007 г., ОСВелико Търново) shows that in applying section 155 the Bulgarian courts take into account both the risk to others and to the persons concerned themselves.
The assessment of whether or not an individual has a mental disorder cannot be based on family, professional or other conflicts, or on information about such disorders in the past (section 147(2)).
The procedure for deciding whether or not to order compulsory confinement is set out in detail in sections 15663. Matters not specifically covered by these provisions are regulated by the 2005 Code of Criminal Procedure – section 165(1). It takes place before the district court with territorial jurisdiction. The proceedings start at the request of the public prosecutor or, in certain cases, the head of a psychiatric establishment. The request has to be sent to the individual concerned, who can comment on it in writing and adduce evidence. The court then has to hold a public hearing in the presence of the individual; the participation of a psychiatrist and counsel is mandatory. The court must hear the individual and the psychiatrist. If it then proposes to order confinement, it must order a psychiatric expert report. A special regulation (Наредба № 16 от 13 май 2005 г. за съдебно-психиатричните експертизи за задължително настаняване и лечение на лица с психични разстройства) sets out in detail the manner in which the report must be drawn up. The individual concerned must then be given an opportunity to comment on the report. The district court's order for his or her confinement can be appealed before the regional court.
Compulsory confinement is discontinued either after the expiry of its allowed term, or earlier, by decision of the competent district court (section 164(1)), at the request of the individual concerned, the public prosecutor, or the head of the establishment in which the detainee is being treated (section 164(3)). The court must in addition review the matter of its own motion every three months, and decide, on the basis of a psychiatric report drawn up by the hospital where the individual concerned is being treated, whether or not to extend the confinement (section 164(2)). This procedure must be attended by all the safeguards available in the initial confinement procedure (ibid.).
During its visit to Bulgaria between 10 and 21 September 2006, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) inspected two psychiatric hospitals, in Karlukovo and Byala, and one psychiatric dispensary with inpatient wards, in . In its ensuing report (CPT/Inf (2008) 11) it noted, inter alia, that, with the exception of one ward, the material conditions in both hospitals were respectively “in an advanced state of dilapidation” and “in a poor state of repair” (paragraphs 131 and 134). The blankets and the bed linen in Karlukovo were fraying, and in Byala, while “[a]ll patients had been provided with new bed linen shortly before the visit [but] there was no spare bed linen in stock” (paragraphs 131 and 135). Also, the funding allocated for food was quite limited, amounting to 1.98 Bulgarian levs (BGN) and BGN 1.39 per patient per day, which did not allow patients to be properly fed (paragraphs 132 and 136). It also observed that in both Karlukovo and Byala acute and chronic patients were not duly separated (paragraph 142). Concern was also expressed about the low number of staff present in the wards, especially at night, which increased the risk of interpatient violence (paragraphs 129 and 145).
In a report drawn up in December 2005 (“Inpatient Psychiatric Care and Human Rights in Bulgaria in 2005”) the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee described its findings relating to, among other things, various aspects of the conditions in a nineteen psychiatric hospitals, including that in Radnevo, which it visited between May and August 2005.
The report contains the following findings in respect of the hospital in Radnevo. There was a serious problem with heating and hot water supply (p. 61 of the Bulgarian version of the report and p. 20 of the English version). In 2004 some of the toilets had been renovated (p. 59 of the Bulgarian version of the report). The hospital had a library which was open for one or two hours a day, and a small foodstuffs shop for the patients (p. 62 of the Bulgarian version of the report and p. 21 of the English version). It also had a sports room, an occupational therapy farm and a workshop (p. 63 of the Bulgarian version of the report and p. 21 of the English version), and ran a program for accompanying therapy and social rehabilitation (p. 82 of the Bulgarian version of the report). The hospital did not have a dedicated space for drying patients' clothes, with the result that patients had to use their beds or the window bars as washing lines, with water flowing directly on the floor (p. 109 of the Bulgarian version of the report). No data was available on the funding allocated for food in 200405, but in 1998 and 2001 it had been BGN 1.08 (p. 97 of the Bulgarian version of the report). However, the hospital was also using production from its own farm (p. 97 of the Bulgarian version of the report). During the visit, some patients had expressed the view that, although food was insufficient, they were not entitled to complain because they would not have had even that amount of food at their homes (p. 98 of the Bulgarian version of the report).
In its description of the conditions of one of the wards of the hospital in Karlukovo, the report mentioned, at p. 58 of the Bulgarian version and by reference to an earlier CPT report (CPT/Inf (2004) 21), that there was crumbling plaster, peeling paint, and a pervasive smell of urine in several patients' rooms despite the fact that windows and doors were left wide open.