The case originated in three applications (nos. 6909/08, 12792/08 and 28960/08) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Iranian nationals, Mr Mohammad Jaber Alipour and Mrs Raha Hosseinzadgan (“the applicants”), on 8 February, 14 March and 12 May 2008 respectively. Applications nos. 6909/08 and 12792/08 were brought by the first and second applicants respectively. Application no. 28960/08 was brought by both applicants.
The applicants were represented by Mr L. Kanat, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 8 February 2008 the President of the Chamber to which the applications had been allocated decided, in the interests of the parties and the proper conduct of the proceedings before the Court, to indicate to the Government of Turkey, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that Mr Mohammad Jaber Alipour should not be deported to Iran before 28 February 2008. On 22 February 2008 the President of the Chamber decided to extend until further notice the interim measure indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court in respect of the first applicant. On 14 March 2008 the President of the Chamber decided to indicate to the Government of Turkey, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that Mrs Raha Hosseinzadgan should not be deported to  until further notice.
On 30 April, 18 April and 16 September 2008, respectively, the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the applications to the Government. It was also decided that the admissibility and merits of the application would be examined together (Article 29 § 3) and that the case would be given priority (Rule 41).
The applicants and the Government each filed written observations on the admissibility and merits of the applications.
The applicants were born in 1973 and 1978 respectively. They currently live in .
In 1999 and 2000 the first applicant, Mohammad Jaber Alipour, a veterinary surgeon, opened a veterinary clinic in . Following the denunciation by the State authorities in  on religious grounds of the feeding of cats and dogs (since keeping pets was seen as propagating Western culture), the authorities began to put pressure on the applicant to close down his clinic. As the applicant failed to do so, the clinic was closed down by the authorities. Despite this, the applicant continued to be harassed by State officials.
On 28 November 2000 the applicant arrived in . He claimed that he had had to flee Iran as he had been harassed and persecuted by the State authorities for having opened a veterinary clinic in the city of .
In 2004 the applicant's request for asylum was rejected by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and subsequently by the Ministry of the Interior. The applicant's objection to the Ministry's decision was also dismissed. While the applicant claimed that he had not been notified of the outcome of his objection, the Government submitted that in March 2005 the applicant had gone to the Afyon police headquarters but refused to be served with the decision dismissing his objection.
On 6 November 2007 the applicant filed a petition with the Ministry of the Interior requesting a residence permit on the ground that he wished to marry an Iranian refugee in Afyon.
On 29 November 2007 the director of the department responsible for aliens, borders and asylum attached to the General Police Headquarters requested the Afyon police to apprehend and deport the applicant as soon as possible. The director's letter gave the applicant's home address and his mobile telephone number.
On an unspecified date the UNHCR reopened the applicant's file.
On 10 January 2008 the applicant was arrested by police officers in Afyon, his city of residence. He claimed that the officers had told him that he was being arrested with a view to his deportation to . Although he explained to the police that his file was under examination by the UNHCR, he was taken to Ağrı, where he escaped from the police. The deportation order was not served on him. The applicant further claimed that, when they had arrested him, the police had confiscated his passport, with the result that he could not appoint a lawyer to represent him.
On 12 January 2008 a police director from the Afyon police headquarters sent a letter to the General Police Headquarters and all provincial police headquarters. He explained in his letter that the applicant had gone missing while being deported. Noting that the applicant might go to the UNHCR's  office for his interview, which was to be held on 28 January 2008, he asked the police directors to take all necessary steps to apprehend him.
On 17 January 2008 the UNHCR's  office interviewed the applicant.
On 6 February 2008 the first applicant was granted refugee status under the UNHCR's Mandate.
On 22 February 2008 the President of the Second Section decided to extend until further notice the interim measure indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. She also decided to request the applicant to inform the Court whether he would be applying to the relevant domestic authorities for his identity documents, so that his representative could take the necessary legal steps regarding the deportation order issued in his respect and request his transfer to a third country following the UNHCR decision of 6 February 2008 recognising him as a refugee.
On 8 April 2008 the respondent Government informed the Court that on 11 March 2008 the applicant had gone to the Afyon police headquarters. The applicant had then been placed in the Kırklareli Aliens' Admission and Accommodation Centre.
On 26 June 2008 the applicant issued his representative with a notarised power of attorney to represent him in . Subsequently, on 13 July 2008, the applicant's representative lodged a petition with the administrative authorities, seeking the annulment of the decision to hold the applicant in the Kırklareli Foreigners' Admission and Accommodation Centre. He subsequently brought a case before the  requesting the first applicant's release from the facility .
On 20 March 2009 the  dismissed the request for suspension of the administrative decision to hold the first applicant in the Kırklareli Foreigners' Admission and Accommodation Centre. The proceedings are currently pending before the same court.
On 24 April 2009, on a request from the UNHCR, the Government of Sweden accepted the first applicant within the refugee quota for . A plane ticket to  was booked for the applicant for 27 May 2009. The applicant's transfer had to be postponed since the national authorities did not authorise the applicant's release and departure to .
On 24 and 29 March 2010 the Government and the applicant's representative informed the Court respectively that the applicant had left Turkey on 4 March 2010 and arrived in  where he was granted refugee status.
Conditions of detention and medical assistance
The applicant submitted that he did not have access to a doctor in the Kırklareli Foreigners' Admission and Accommodation Centre. The buildings were old and had not been renovated. The rooms were crowded. The bedding was also old and dirty. The toilets were very dirty and were rarely cleaned. The authorities did not provide proper cleaning materials to the detainees for them to do the cleaning either. The cleaning products given to the detainees had passed their expiry dates eight to nine years earlier, thus exposing detainees to the risk of several diseases, in particular cancer, if they used them. As a result of the poor detention conditions, the applicant suffered from skin diseases and infections. The applicant submitted digital photographs of various locations in the detention centre such as the bedrooms, kitchen and toilets, in support of his allegations. In one room there were two bunk beds on which there were pillows and blankets. There was no bed linen on the beds. In another room there were two beds with bed linen, pillows and blankets. The photographs of the kitchen sinks and cookers showed that the latter were unusable. Another photograph showed that there were four sinks in the bathroom. Inside, the toilets were partially covered with a dark substance. Photographs of the cleaning products that had labels in the Cyrillic alphabet showed that their dates had expired nine to ten years ago.
On 13 July 2008, when the applicant's representative lodged a petition with General Police Headquarters requesting that the applicant be released (see paragraph 19 above), he also asked that the applicant be provided with medical assistance. In his petition, the applicant's representative further noted that the conditions of detention in the Kırklareli Foreigners' Admission and Accommodation Centre were inhuman and constituted a breach of Article 3 of the Convention.
On 27 August 2008 the applicant, together with four other persons including the second applicant, started a hunger strike to protest about his placement and the physical conditions in the Centre.
Furthermore, although the applicant was suffering from a hernia and required an operation, the authorities did not take any steps to provide him with medical treatment. He received no reply to his requests to be operated on for his condition.
The Government submitted that all the bedrooms in the Kırklareli Foreigners' Admission and Accommodation Centre, which was not a detention centre, were equipped with cleaning and personal hygiene items, namely soap, towels and other similar items; the bedding was changed every week. Hygiene standards were maintained in the kitchen and the cafeteria and the food provided in the facility was the same as that provided to students in police academies. They noted that the applicant and the other foreign nationals were not allowed to cook in the Centre. The Government contended that hot water was provided at least two days a week and that the sanitary facilities were checked frequently.
The Government further maintained that the applicant had been provided with medical assistance on nineteen occasions between 21 April and 11 November 2008 while he was being held in the Kırklareli Centre and had undergone an operation. According to the documents submitted by the Government, the applicant had undergone orthopaedic surgery on 10 October 2008 in relation to an old thighbone fracture in the  at his request. He was hospitalised between 9 and 17 October 2008 and a femoral implant which had been inserted following the accident was taken out. The applicant was examined by a general practitioner in relation to his muscle pains and pain related to a thighbone fracture which he suffered due to an old traffic accident that he had had in 1998. He was also examined by an ophthalmologist, a neurologist and a dentist and prescribed medication or treatment.
In 2002, while living in , the applicant had a relationship with a man, as a result of which she was tortured by her father.  In 2004 she met another man who was an asylum seeker in . As she was being forced to marry her cousin, she left Iran with this man and arrived in  on 28 August 2004. In September 2004 they married in . In December 2007 the applicant obtained a divorce as her husband, a drug addict, had forced her into prostitution.
On unspecified dates the applicant applied to the Ministry of the Interior and the UNHCR requesting temporary asylum and refugee status respectively.
On 8 January 2008 the UNHCR's  office recognised the applicant as a refugee.
On 14 March 2008 the applicant was notified that her request for temporary asylum had been rejected by the Ministry of the Interior. On the same day she was arrested by police officers from the Burdur police headquarters.
On an unspecified date, following the President's decision to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, the applicant was placed in the Kırklareli Foreigners' Admission and Accommodation Centre.
On 13 July 2008 the applicant's representative lodged a petition with the General Police Headquarters, requesting that the applicant be released. In his petition, the applicant's representative further noted that the conditions of detention in the Kırklareli Foreigners' Admission and Accommodation Centre were inhuman.
On 27 August 2008 the applicant, together with four other persons including the first applicant, started a hunger strike to protest about her placement and the physical conditions in the Centre.
In the meantime, on 8 July 2008, the applicant issued her representative with a notarised power of attorney to represent her in . Subsequently, the representative brought a case before the  requesting the applicant's release from the facility where she was being held, noting that the applicant was due to have an interview with the Canadian Consulate with a view to obtaining refugee status in . The lawyer also asked the court to order a stay of execution of the applicant's detention.
On 6 March 2009 the  suspended the administrative decision to hold the second applicant in the Kırklareli Foreigners' Admission and Accommodation Centre and ordered her release with a view to facilitating her interview at the Canadian Consulate. The court also ordered that the applicant be granted a residence permit until her transfer to . The applicant was subsequently transferred to .
On an unspecified date the Government of Sweden accepted the second applicant within the refugee quota for . A plane ticket to  was booked for the applicant for 10 August 2009.
On 24 July 2009 the Ministry of the Interior authorised the applicant's departure from Turkey to .
On an unspecified date the applicant left Turkey and went to .
A description of the relevant domestic law and practice can be found in Abdolkhani and Karimnia v. Turkey (no. 30471/08, §§ 29-45, 22 September 2009).
The CPT Standards (the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment) concerning the conditions of detention of foreign nationals (see the CPT standards, document no. CPT/Inf/E (2002) 1- Rev. 2006, page 41) provide, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“...In the view of the CPT ... where it is deemed necessary to deprive persons of their liberty for an extended period under aliens' legislation, they should be accommodated in centres specifically designed for that purpose...
Obviously, such centres should provide accommodation which is adequatelyfurnished, clean and in a good state of repair, and which offers sufficient living space for the numbers involved. Further, care should be taken in the design and layout of the premises to avoid as far as possible any impression of a carceral environment. As regards regime activities, they should include outdoor exercise, access to a day room and to radio/television and newspapers/magazines, as well as other appropriate means of recreation (e.g. board games, table tennis). The longer the period for which persons are detained, the more developed should be the activities which are offered to them...”
In June 2008 Human Rights Watch visited three Admission and Accommodation Centres in , including the Centre in Kırklareli. The relevant extracts from the report entitled “Stuck in a Revolving Door” published by Human Rights Watch on 6 November 2008 read as follows:
“...The Kırklareli Gaziosmanpaşa Refugee Camp (hereafter Kırklareli) has had a long history as an actual refugee camp.  In 1989 it was a safe haven for ethnic Turks fleeing Bulgaria; in 1992, a shelter for refugees from ; and in 1999, a place of refuge for Kosovar Albanians.  It can no longer be described, truthfully, as a refugee camp, however.  It is rather a detention centre for migrants, some of whom may indeed be refugees, but not refugees being protected from persecution, but rather refugees that  is seeking to remove.
At the time of Human Rights Watch's visit, Kırklareli held 174 detainees, including four women and the four-year-old child of one of the women.
Although the men are locked away in a long barracks building, they were freely wandering around the outdoor grounds of the fenced-in facility during the Human Rights Watch visit.  They appeared to be allowed to go outside the barracks during the afternoons.  The facility is surrounded by a chain-link fence topped with barbed wire.  Signs of its history as a former refugee camp are abundant in the form of old unused shelters with faded UNHCR logos and an overgrown soccer field that have not been used in many years, despite a rather comical attempt by the Kırklareli administrator to give Human Rights a guided tour intended to show that old classrooms and recreational facilities are still being used by the detainees.
The women and child were housed in a separate building that the women told Human Rights Watch they had recently been asked to clean prior to a visit by another delegation.  The administrator showed Human Rights Watch a large-screen television set in one of the women's private rooms, but failed to note that the TV was not plugged in and didn't work at all.  Although the men are allowed to leave their barracks during most afternoons, the guards tell the women that they are not allowed to leave their building.  "The door is kept open to allow the child to come and go, but we are not allowed to walk out the door," said a 25-year-old Iranian woman.
Both men and women at Kırklareli complained about the poor quality and small quantity of food.  A man claiming to be Burmese said, "The food is not good.  It is not fit for humans, and it is not enough.  Nothing happens if we complain.  The guards say, 'If you don't like the food, go to the market and buy your own.'"
The main complaint, however, is that the detainees are not informed how long they will remain in detention.  Human Rights Watch spoke privately with a man who appeared to be an informal leader of the "Burmese" at Kırklareli.  He said that the Burmese numbered 160 of the 174 detainees in the camp and that most, including him, had already been held there for nine months and had no idea how much longer they would stay there.  "Just tell us what to do," he said.  "Give us a sentence.  If they let us leave, we will work and feed our families. Let us leave or kill us.”
Even though the conditions at Kırklareli did not appear to be nearly as bad as at , tensions between detainees and guards were very high.  The camp administrator told Human Rights Watch, "Despite the good conditions here, there is an enmity towards us."
On the night of the day after the Human Rights Watch visit there was a riot at Kırklareli.  The causes of the riot and the response of the security forces were under investigation when Human Rights Watch left the country.  In the course of putting down the disturbance, Turkish security forces shot and killed one of the detainees, a young man of unknown nationality who Human Rights Watch had talked to at length...”
On 11 June 2008 at around midnight a riot broke out in the Kırklareli Foreigners' Admission and Accommodation Centre. During the riot an asylum seeker died and another asylum seeker and two police officers were wounded. Subsequent to the riot, the Organisation for Human Rights and Solidarity for Oppressed People (Mazlum-Der), a human rights organisation based in , made a visit to the Centre in order to assess the situation there. Within the context of this visit, Mazlum-Der interviewed persons held in the Centre, the Kırklareli Governor, the director of the Kırklareli Centre and one of the officers who had been injured. The Governor stated, inter alia, that the authorities were doing their best to meet the needs of the persons held in the Centre. The director also stated that a high standard of living was maintained in the Centre.
After the start of the hunger strike by five persons held in the Kırklareli Foreigners' Admission and Accommodation Centre, including the applicants, Mazlum-Der made a second visit to the Centre on 3 September 2008 in order to interview the persons concerned and to observe the living conditions in the Centre. According to the report published by Mazlum-Der, they were not allowed to visit the inside of the Centre where foreign nationals were held. They were, however, able to interview the applicant and the other four persons, who maintained that there had been problems regarding the quality of food provided by the authorities in the Centre and also regarding hygiene, access to medical care and common living space.