The case originated in an application (no. 49867/08) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Uzbek national, Mr Mohammad Kuranbay Babajanov (“the applicant”), on 17 October 2008.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Yılmaz, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 17 October 2008, when the application was lodged, the applicant’s representative requested that the Court adopt an interim measure, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, to stop the applicant’s threatened deportation to Iran or Uzbekistan.
On the same day the President of the Chamber to which the case was allocated rejected the applicant’s request under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, as there was no evidence of an imminent danger of deportation.
On 6 April 2010 the applicant’s representative repeated the request under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
On 7 April 2010 the request under Rule 39 was rejected once again, in the absence of any relevant new information regarding the applicant’s situation.
On 7 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. On 12 March and 13 June 2012 the Government and the applicant submitted their observations respectively.
On 7 April 2015 the Chamber decided, under Rule 54 § 2 (c) of the Rules of Court, to invite the parties to submit further written observations on the admissibility and merits of the application. In particular, the parties were requested to respond to the question as to whether the applicant could claim to be a victim of a violation of the Convention, within the meaning of Article 34 of the convention, in relation to his complaints concerning his alleged threatened deportation to Iran or Uzbekistan. The Government were further requested to submit copies of administrative courts’ decisions in cases concerning removal of asylum seekers rendered subsequent to the entry into force of the Foreigners and International Protection Act (Law no. 6458).
On 30 April 2015 and 10 June 2015 the applicant and the Government submitted their further observations and supporting documents respectively. On 16 July 2015 the Government replied to the submissions of the applicant.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in Turkey.
In 1999 the applicant fled from Uzbekistan to Tajikistan because of pressure from the police, who suspected him of anti-constitutional activities in connection with his alleged Islamic religious beliefs and practices. He feared, in particular, that if he stayed in Uzbekistan, he would face persecution from the State authorities, and would eventually be imprisoned and tortured like some of his fellow Muslim friends. In support of his allegation of the risk of ill-treatment in Uzbekistan, the applicant submitted a copy of a list of persons who had been charged with offences against the State. The list had been prepared by the Human Rights Centre “Memorial”, a non-governmental organisation based in Moscow, and included the applicant’s name. According to this document, the applicant was charged under Article 159 § 4 of the Uzbekistan Criminal Code (attempting to violently overthrow the State’s constitutional order). At the top of the document, it was explained that the list had been compiled on the basis of the “Bulletin on the Search for Criminals” prepared by the criminal investigation and counter-terrorism department of the Ministry of the Interior of Uzbekistan and published in Tashkent in May 2003.
From Tajikistan, the applicant went on to Afghanistan and Pakistan. In 2005 he arrived in Iran, where he settled in Zahedan. The applicant applied to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (“the UNHCR”) in Zahedan for recognition as a refugee. He lived in Zahedan for two years without experiencing any major problems. In 2007, however, together with some other Uzbek asylum seekers who had left their country for the same reasons, the applicant decided to flee from Iran following deportation threats. He claimed that the threats had been a response to certain disagreements with the Iranian authorities over their living conditions.
On 18 November 2007 the applicant entered Turkey illegally through Van and went to Ankara to apply for refugee status at the UNHCR. Following a preliminary interview, the applicant was referred to the UNHCR office in Van. The Van office issued him with an asylum seeker certificate. Subsequently, he registered with the Van police headquarters and started the domestic temporary asylum procedure. Thereafter he was given a temporary residence permit until 24 September 2008 and was ordered to report to the police three times a week for signature. It appears that the other Uzbek asylum seekers who had fled Iran together with the applicant were granted similar certificates and permits after following the same procedural steps.
On an unspecified date the Van police sent a notice to a number of Uzbek families requiring them to appear at the police station on 12 September 2008. The notice stated that their attendance was required for the distribution of food rations and school stationery.
Although the applicant did not receive such a notice, at 2 p.m. on 12 September 2008 he went to the police station for signature, as part of his weekly routine. Once at the police station, some twenty-nine asylum seekers, including the applicant, were placed in detention. Their personal items, including identity documents, money and telephones, were confiscated. They were driven to the border at around 9 p.m. the same evening and forcibly deported to Iran. The applicant was allegedly illtreated and threatened by the police during deportation.
After crossing the border to Iran on foot, the Uzbek asylum seekers, including the applicant, were captured and held hostage by people smugglers, who demanded 5,000 United States dollars to spare their lives and to release them. The asylum seekers contacted some other Uzbeks who had managed to escape deportation from Turkey and obtained the ransom fee. The smugglers made them walk for three days to Yüksekova, a town close to the Iranian border of Turkey, where they were released.
After re-entering Turkey illegally, the applicant went back to Van together with the other Uzbek asylum seekers. They requested legal advice from the Van Bar Association, which, along with two Turkish non-governmental organisations, published a report on 28 September 2008 regarding the Uzbek asylum seekers’ collective expulsion. It was argued in the report, inter alia, that the expulsion of the Uzbeks by the Turkish State authorities, despite their valid residence permits, had had no legal basis. It was also alleged that the expulsion had been motivated by political considerations to improve relations with Uzbekistan, which had been strained following the acceptance by Turkey of members of Uzbek opposition groups, such as the applicant, as asylum seekers in recent years.
On 11 October 2008 a number of Uzbek asylum seekers, who had previously been deported to Iran on 12 September 2008, were collected from their homes by police officers from the Van police headquarters. The same evening, they were deported to Iran once again. The applicant, however, escaped this deportation by pure chance, as the police did not have his correct home address.
The deportation of the applicant and the other Uzbek nationals was brought to the attention of the national and international public through press releases from various NGOs and the UNHCR. In particular, seven human rights and refugee rights organisations, including Amnesty International, issued a press release in which they condemned the forced illegal deportation of the applicant and the other Uzbek nationals to Iran. Likewise, a Turkish parliamentarian issued a press release within the Parliament and criticised the removal as well as the existing refugee protection system in Turkey.
On an unspecified date the applicant’s representative sent letters to, inter alia, the Human Rights Commission of the Parliament of Turkey, the Human Rights Commission of the Van Governor’s office and the Ministry of the Interior.
On 26 November 2008 the head of the Human Rights Commission of the Parliament of Turkey replied to the applicant’s representative that the Ministry of the Interior had informed the Parliament, in a letter dated 11 November 2008, that the applicant had been deported to Iran, a safe third country, in compliance with the legislation in force.
In his reply dated 22 April 2009, in his capacity as head of the Human Rights Commission of the Van Governor’s office, the Deputy Governor of Van informed the applicant’s representative that the applicant and the other deportees had been removed to Iran in compliance with the legislation in force and that Iran was a safe third country where the applicant had lived before he had arrived in Turkey in 2007.
On 16 March 2010 the UNHCR Ankara Office sent a letter to the applicant’s representative, informing him that the UNHCR had learned that the applicant, along with a number of other Uzbek nationals, had been illegally deported to Iran and that the applicant’s asylum claim was under review. The UNHCR also informed the applicant’s representative that on 26 September 2008 they had sent a letter to the Turkish authorities requesting the latter to take the necessary measures to grant the applicant and other Uzbek nationals who had been deported on 12 September 2008 residence permits with a view to legalizing their status in Turkey pending the completion of the procedures with regard to their cases.
Since 2008, the applicant has been living in Turkey in hiding and his application for refugee status under the mandate of the UNHCR is still under consideration. On 4 December 2013 and 28 March 2014 he was interviewed by officers from the UNHCR’s Ankara office regarding his application for refugee status. He has not received any information from the Turkish authorities as to his request for asylum. The applicant cannot approach the Turkish authorities to apply for asylum or to obtain a temporary residence permit for fear of being deported to Iran, like the other Uzbek asylum seekers who were deported once again to Iran in October 2008. Moreover, he cannot appoint a lawyer to undertake the necessary legal and procedural actions on his behalf before the domestic authorities as he does not possess the necessary identity documents required to issue a power of attorney before a notary public.
When the applicant applied for asylum in Turkey in December 2007, he informed the authorities that he had been granted refugee status in Iran by the UNHCR. His application was registered and he was asked not to leave the city of Van.
On 14 February 2008 the applicant left Van and returned there on 26 August 2008. He subsequently repeated his asylum request.
On an unspecified date the applicant’s asylum request was assessed in the light of Article 33 of the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, the European Convention on Human Rights, the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the national legislation. He was subsequently deported to Iran, a safe third country, where he was recognised as a refugee by the UNHCR. According to a document signed by two police officers and one military officer, submitted by the Government, twenty-nine Uzbek and Afghan nationals, including the applicant, were deported on 12 September 2008.
According to the Government, the applicant was not deprived of his liberty. Moreover, his identity documents were not confiscated.
A description of the relevant domestic law and practice at the material time can be found in the case of Ghorbanov and Others).
On 11 April 2014 the Foreigners and International Protection Act (Law no. 6458) entered into force. Sections 52-60 of the Act concern the procedure for the removal of foreign nationals from Turkey, the judicial review of removal orders and detention pending removal. In particular, Sections 52 and 53 stipulate the procedure for issuing removal orders, their notification to the parties concerned and the procedure for appeal. Sections 54 and 55 of Law no. 6458 list the persons with regard to whom removal decisions shall be issued and those who are exempted from removal, respectively. Sections 57, 58 and 59 contain the rules concerning the administrative detention of foreign nationals pending removal and the standards of removal centres. Finally, Section 60 concerns the implementation of the removal orders.
Sections 61 to 90 of the same Act concern the principles and rules governing applications for international protection. In particular, Articles 6164 concern the types of international protection available and exclusion from international protection. Articles 65-79 contain the rules regarding, inter alia, the application for international protection, registration of applicants, administrative detention of persons seeking asylum, the latter’s residence and reporting obligations, interviews, accelerated procedure and the situation of unaccompanied minors. Article 80 of the Act stipulates the rules for administrative review of decisions on international protection requests and the judicial remedies. Articles 83 and 84 concern the issuing of “international protection identity documents” and travel documents for persons seeking asylum. Articles 85 and 86 stipulate the circumstances in which international protection status is terminated and cancelled, respectively. Finally, Sections 88-90 concern the rights and obligations of persons demanding and granted international protection.
In his report published on 1 October 2009, following his visit to Turkey on 28 June to 3 July 2009 (CommDH(2009)31), Mr Thomas Hammarberg, then Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe, stated the following:
The Commissioner notes with concern that NGOs as well as UNHCR continue to report incidents of deportation and refoulement of UNHCR recognized refugees and registered asylum seekers. He is aware that the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) also expressed concern over these reports and called upon Turkey to refrain from deporting refugees or persons registered with UNHCR as asylum seekers...
Reports indicated that in 2008 there was an increase in forcible returns of refugees and asylum seekers to countries where they were at risk of serious human rights violations including irregular deportations resulting in the death or injury of asylum seekers, one example being a group of Uzbek refugees twice forcibly returned to Iran, first in September and then in October 2008. During the first forcible return, members of the group were said to have been beaten and threatened with rape unless they crossed back into Iran...
UNHCR also informed the Commissioner that refugees and asylum seekers properly registered in the national procedure for temporary asylum are protected from refoulement, and the Government generally tolerates the presence of those registered only with UNHCR. However, UNHCR has observed with concern that the instances of refoulement of persons of concern to the Office are becoming more frequent. In 2008, 13 refugees recognized under UNHCR’s Mandate and 9 asylum seekers were refouled (mainly to Iran and Iraq), and 50 refugees and 5 asylum seekers have been deported to third countries (mainly to Iran, Iraq and Syria).
The Turkish authorities informed the Commissioner that asylum seekers, who are not granted refugee status but are assessed to have a risk of persecution in their countries of origin, are allowed to temporarily stay on grounds of subsidiary protection and protection with humanitarian considerations. The Commissioner appreciates the expressed commitment of the Turkish authorities to compliance with the principle of non-refoulement as laid out in Article 33 of the 1951 UN Refugee Convention which places a prohibition on sending asylum seekers back to countries where their life or freedom would be threatened. He calls upon the Turkish authorities to ensure effective implementation of this principle by border patrols and speedy, efficient investigation into cases of alleged violations. Furthermore, he urges prompt ratification of Protocol No. 4 to the European Convention on Human Rights that was signed by Turkey in 1992 and, inter alia, proscribes the collective expulsion of aliens...”
In its 2008 Report on Human Rights Practices in Turkey, the United States Department of State noted the following:
“...On September 12, 22 Uzbekistan citizens, who had earlier been recognized as refugees by the UNHCR in Iran but later came to Van seeking resettlement to a third country, were deported to Iran. The refugees were rounded up without notice and taken to an unmarked, mountainous portion of the border and forced to walk into Iran. The group included women and children, who were also forced to walk across the mountains under dangerous conditions. Later, the same group paid Iranian smugglers $5,000 to bring them back across the unmarked border to reach Van on September 23. The UNHCR formally approached authorities requesting that the refugees be granted temporary asylum in the country, as they presented credible documentation showing they had reason to fear refoulement to Uzbekistan if they returned to Iran. On October 13, all 22 of the refugees, along with another family of three Uzbekistan citizens who had filed a stop-deportation petition with the ECHR in September, were re-deported to Iran...”
On 17 and 30 September 2008 Amnesty International issued two statements expressing concerns regarding the forcible return of the applicant and other Uzbek nationals to Iran. In its statement dated 17 September 2008, Amnesty International noted, inter alia, the following:
“On 12 September, a group of 24 Uzbekistani nationals, who have been living for around a year in the eastern Turkish town of Van, were expelled to Iran. The group are now held by an unidentified Iranian group. Amnesty International fears for their safety while they are being held by the unidentified group and also that they could be subjected to forcible return to Uzbekistan by the Iranian authorities if and when they are released by the group that is currently holding them.
If returned to Uzbekistan the adults of the group would be at risk of incommunicado detention, torture or other ill-treatment. The group have been recognized as refugees by the UNHCR.
...
The families are originally from Uzbekistan, though they left for Tajikistan in the late 1990s to escape persecution and arrest for worshipping at a mosque outside state control and under an imam accused by the Uzbekistani authorities of anti-state activities. They left Tajikistan for Afghanistan in 1999 but left because of war there in 2001. They eventually made their way to Iran, where they were recognized as refugees by the UNHCR. The group fled to Turkey from Iran in 2007 after they had been threatened with forcible return to Uzbekistan. 22 of them were subsequently recognized again as refugees by the UNHCR in Turkey. The status of two is yet to be determined. The families were linked to the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU), an armed opposition group in whose camps they stayed, both in Tajikistan and Afghanistan, possibly under duress.”
In its report “Stranded: Refugees in Turkey Denied Protection” released in 2009, Amnesty International expressed its concerns regarding the deportation of the applicant and the other Uzbek nationals to Iran on 12 September 2008:
“...The forcible return on two occasions of a group of UNHCR recognized Uzbekistani refugees in September and October of 2008 illustrates the Turkish authorities’ increased flouting of both international non-refoulement obligations and the procedures of national law in the case of forcible returns. On 12 September, 24 Uzbekistani refugees, 15 of them children, were forced into Iranian territory by Turkish law enforcement officials. It was alleged that officials had persuaded the group to come to the Van Directorate of Security in order that stationery would be provided for the children’s education. Commenting to the press on these allegations, a senior official within the Van Directorate of Security was quoted as saying that the group was not complying with reporting requirements and that although the police methods may differ from others, the method of getting the refugees to the station did not matter. During this deportation, members of the group were allegedly beaten by security officials and women and girls were threatened with rape unless they left Turkey. The refugees were subsequently held hostage by an unnamed group in Iran which threatened to kill them. They were released after a week following the payment of a ransom of US$ 5,000. They then returned irregularly to Turkey...”