The case originated in an application (no. 79828/12) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Kiril Dimitrov Andreev (“the applicant”), on 5 December 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Arnaudov, a lawyer practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms D. Dramova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his forty-three-hour detention between 7 and 9 June 2012 had been unlawful, and that he had not had any means of contesting it.
On 26 May 2014 the aforementioned complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in Pleven.
On 25 April 2012 he was arrested in Sofia and subsequently charged with the unlawful possession of firearms and ammunition. He remained in detention on remand throughout the pre-trial proceedings. Eventually he entered into a plea agreement with the prosecution, acknowledging that he had committed the offence he had been charged with and accepting a suspended sentence of two years’ imprisonment.
The plea agreement was approved at a court hearing before the Sofia District Court on 7 June 2012. The court’s decision was final. At the end of the hearing, at 5.16 p.m., the court ordered the discontinuation of the applicant’s pre-trial detention.
After the hearing the applicant was brought to the Sofia Investigative Service, where his pre-trial detention was formally discontinued at about 7 p.m. However, he was not released but was instead taken to a police station, where he remained throughout the night and the next day. On the morning of 9 June 2012 he was transferred to the city of Pleven where, by an order issued at 12.10 p.m., he was once again formally placed in police custody. That measure was taken in the context of another set of criminal proceedings against the applicant which had been instigated in April 2012. On 10 June 2012 the investigator in charge of that case brought charges against the applicant in connection with another count of unlawful possession of firearms.
In the proceedings before the Court, the Government submitted an order dated 8 June 2012, issued by the investigator in charge of the case in Pleven and requiring that the applicant be taken by the police to appear before her in order to have charges brought against him. The order referred, in particular, to Article 71 §§ 1, 2 and 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 12 below) and, by way of justifying the need to bring the applicant by force, stated that there was a risk of his absconding. The Government explained that by the time that order had been received by the police in Sofia, it had become impossible to organise the applicant’s transfer to Pleven the same day. That is why the applicant had been kept in the police station overnight and was only transported to Pleven the next day, 9 June 2012.
Article 383 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that a plea agreement which has been approved by the court has the same legal effect as a conviction and sentence which have become final.
Under Article 309 § 2 of the Code, whenever an accused has been acquitted by means of a judgment, or has been convicted but has received a suspended sentence or a sentence not involving imprisonment, he must be released “in the courtroom”.
Article 71 of the Code authorises investigative bodies and courts to order that an accused be brought before them using force where his or her presence is mandatory or the respective body considers it necessary. However, this is permissible only where the accused has been summoned and has failed to appear without a valid reason. An exception to that rule is permitted when the accused has previously absconded or has no permanent address (Article 71 §§ 1 and 2). The order authorising the bringing of a person before an investigative body using force is to be served on the individual concerned (Article 71 § 8, previously 71 § 7). Save in exceptional circumstances, that person’s transfer is to be carried out during the day (Article 71 § 3).
A witness may also be brought before an investigative body or court using force if, having been duly summoned, he or she has failed to appear without a valid reason (Article 120 § 3 of the Code).
Section 1 of the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act (“the SMRDA”) provides that the State is liable for damage suffered by private persons as a result of unlawful decisions, actions or omissions by civil servants committed in the course of or in connection with the performance of their duties.
.  Before December 2012, section 2 of SMRDA – in so far as it concerned detention ordered by the investigative authorities, the prosecution authorities or the courts – provided that the State would be liable for damage in cases of
The relevant practice of the domestic courts in the application of this provision has been summarised in the Court’s judgments in the cases of Kandzhov v. Bulgaria (no. 68294/01, §§ 35-39, 6 November 2008) and Bochev v. Bulgaria (no. 73481/01, §§ 37-39, 13 November 2008).
After amendments published on 11 December 2012, effective as of 15 December 2012, the relevant parts of section 2 of the SMRDA read:
“The State shall be liable for damage caused to individuals by the investigative bodies, the prosecution authorities or the courts in the event of:
pre-trial detention [...] or house arrest, when such detention or house arrest has been set aside, [...] as well as any other deprivation of liberty in breach of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms [...];
breach of the rights guaranteed by Article 5 §§ 2-4 of the Convention [...].”
The context of the adoption of the December 2012 amendments has been described in the Court’s judgment in the case of Toni Kostadinov v. Bulgaria (no. 37124/10, § 49, 27 January 2015).