The case concerns the alleged lack of reasoning of the judicial decisions ordering the applicants’ arrest and continued detention, and the allegedly unreasonable duration of their pre-trial detention.
The applicants’ personal details are set out in the appended table.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On various dates the applicants were arrested in the context of criminal investigations against them. Shortly afterwards the courts ordered their pre-trial detention. The relevant judicial decisions stated that the applicants were accused of serious crimes and could abscond and hinder the investigation or continue with their criminal activities. The courts did not provide specific details explaining why the above-mentioned reasons persisted.
In addition to the above-mentioned reasons, in application no. 63542/13 the domestic court noted, without providing specific details, that the crime imputed to the applicant had been committed while he had been on probation for a similar crime.
In the course of the proceedings, the courts extended the applicants’ detention a number of times, referring to the reasons indicated in the initial decisions to detain them. The courts furthermore noted that there were no reasons for the applicants to be released, since no new circumstances warranting release had been identified or the circumstances that had led to the decision to place the applicants in pre-trial detention persisted, without providing specific details.
On 8 November 2012 the trial court convicted the first applicant and sentenced him to fourteen years and eight months’ imprisonment. On 10 February 2015 that sentence was quashed on points of law and the case was remitted for retrial. On 20 July 2016 the trial court again convicted the first applicant and sentenced him to the same term of imprisonment as before.
On 11 February 2014 the trial court convicted the second applicant and sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment with probation.
On 26 May 2014 the trial court convicted the third applicant and sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment.
On 21 December 2015, in the course of the proceedings, the fourth applicant was released on bail.
On 15 December 2017 the trial court convicted the fifth applicant and sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment.