The case originated in an application (no. 27193/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Mikhail Vyacheslavovich Ignatov (“the applicant”), on 29 May 2002.
The applicant was represented by Ms K. Kostromina, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, the Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 25 May 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government's objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in . At the time of his arrest he was a high-ranking police officer, working in the Central Police Division for the Fight against Organised Crime.
On 4 May 2001 the applicant was summonsed to the  prosecutor's office for questioning. Following that interview he was arrested on suspicion of incitement to bribery and fraud and placed in the temporary confinement ward of the  police department.
Three days later a deputy  prosecutor authorised the applicant's detention on remand. The detention order indicated that the applicant had been remanded on suspicion of having promised Mr A. that he would discontinue criminal proceedings against N. and to obtain his release from custody in exchange for a bribe. It was alleged that the applicant could re-offend, abscond or obstruct justice.
On 11 May 2001 the applicant was transferred to detention facility no. 77/1 in . According to the applicant, police officers visited him on several occasions and pressed him to confess. After he refused to admit his guilt, he was placed in a punishment cell for six days.
On 19 June 2001 the acting prosecutor of  issued a new order, extending the applicant's detention until 3 September 2001.  The detention was subsequently extended on 27 August 2001 until 25 October 2001. The prosecutor provided similar reasons for both extensions: the applicant was charged with serious criminal offences and, if released, he could abscond and pervert the course of justice.
In August 2001 the applicant was charged with abuse of position committed with the use of force and weapons. In October 2001 he was additionally charged with unlawful possession of weapons and aggravated bribery.
On 16 October 2001 a deputy Prosecutor General of the  extended the applicant's detention until 25 December 2001. The grounds for the extension were similar to those in the detention orders of 19 June and 27 August 2001.
On 8 October 2001 the applicant petitioned the Preobrazhenskiy District Court of Moscow for release. He argued that he had positive references, had received awards, had permanent residence in , was employed and had to take care of his mother, who was seriously ill. He did not intend to abscond or pervert the course of justice and his continued detention was therefore unnecessary.
On 20 November 2001 the Preobrazhenskiy District Court dismissed the applicant's request for release. The District Court held that, in view of the applicant's personality and the seriousness of the criminal offences with which he had been charged, his arrest and detention had been lawful.
The decision of 20 November 2001 was upheld on appeal by the Moscow City Court on 18 December 2001. The City Court endorsed the District Court's reasoning.
On 17 December 2001 the Prosecutor General authorised the applicant's detention until 4 April 2002, giving the same reasons as in the previous detention order of 16 October 2001.
A week later the applicant complained to the Preobrazhenskiy District Court that the extension had been unlawful. He petitioned for release.
On 31 January 2002 the Preobrazhenskiy District Court held that the extension order of 17 December 2001 had been lawful, taking into account “the seriousness of the offences with which the applicant was charged, his personality and the particular circumstances of the case”. There were no procedural violations and therefore no grounds for the applicant's release.
On 20 March 2002 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 31 January 2002.
On 20 March 2002, having regard to the gravity of the charges against the applicant and the necessity to carry out certain investigatory activities, the Prosecutor General of the  extended the applicant's detention until 4 June 2002.
The applicant appealed against the extension order to the District Court.
On 10 April 2002 the Preobrazhenskiy District Court held, that having regard to the applicant's personality and the seriousness of the charges against him, the extension order had been lawful.
The applicant appealed against that decision on the following day.
On 28 May 2002 the Moscow City Court quashed the decision of 10 April 2002 because the applicant had not been served with the Prosecutor General's decision of 20 March 2002. The City Court remitted the matter for a fresh examination.
On 6 June 2002 the applicant complained to the Preobrazhenskiy District Court that his request for release had not been considered. On 17 June 2002 he submitted the same complaint to the Moscow City Court.
On 1 July 2002 the Preobrazhenskiy District Court discontinued the proceedings concerning the detention matter on the ground that the new Code of Criminal Procedure had entered into force.  On 4 July 2002 the District Court notified the applicant of its decision of 1 July 2002.
On 22 May 2002 the applicant was informed that on 29 April 2002 the Prosecutor General had extended his detention until 4 August 2002. On the same day he lodged an appeal with the Preobrazhenskiy District Court. The applicant claims that he was twice brought to the District Court but the hearings were adjourned.
According to the Government, the Preobrazhenskiy District Court listed two hearings which were adjourned because the applicant's lawyer defaulted. They further submitted that no decision on the merits of the applicant's complaint had been taken, but that on 1 July 2002 the District Court had discontinued the proceedings concerning the detention matter because the new Code of Criminal Procedure had entered into force.
On 28 June 2002 the case was referred to the Moscow City Court for trial.
On 12 July 2002 the Moscow City Court held a preliminary hearing and declared that the applicant's detention “should remain unchanged”.
On 2 August 2002 the Moscow City Court returned the case to the prosecutor for correction of procedural defects in the bill of indictment. The City Court held that the applicant's detention “should remain unchanged”.
The Moscow prosecutor and the representatives of the victims appealed against that decision to the Supreme Court of the .  At the same time the applicant's lawyer asked the Supreme Court to uphold the decision of 2 August 2002 in the part concerning the correction of procedural defects but to have the applicant released.
On 9 October 2002 the Supreme Court quashed the decision of 2 August 2002, remitted the case to the Moscow City Court for trial and ordered that the applicant's detention “should remain unchanged”. The Supreme Court indicated that there were no grounds for release.
On 28 November 2002 the Moscow City Court listed a preliminary hearing for 19 December 2002. The City Court, without indicating any reason or setting a time-limit, held that the applicant should remain in detention.
That decision was quashed on appeal by the Supreme Court on 18 March 2003 due to certain procedural violations. The Supreme Court held that the applicant should remain in detention. No reasons were given.
On 27 December 2002 the Moscow City Court extended the applicant's detention until 28 March 2003. The court held that he had been charged with extremely serious criminal offences and his detention should therefore be extended.
The applicant appealed on the following day. On 18 March 2003 the Supreme Court upheld the Moscow City Court's decision. It held that, given that the applicant had been charged with serious offences and that the authorised period of his detention had expired, the Moscow City Court had made the correct decision.
On 17 March 2003 the Moscow City Court held that the applicant's detention should be extended until 28 June 2003 because the applicant had been charged with serious offences.
Two days later the applicant appealed against that decision.
On 14 August 2003 the Supreme Court upheld the decision, finding that the applicant had been charged with serious criminal offences and that there were insufficient grounds for his release.
On 13 May 2003 the Moscow City Court held a preliminary trial hearing. At that hearing the applicant asked for release. The Moscow City Court listed the first trial hearing for 17 June 2003 and dismissed the request for release. The City Court noted that the applicant had been charged with serious offences and “the circumstances of the case suggested that he could pervert the course of justice”.
On 23 May 2003 the applicant appealed against that decision.
On 13 August 2003 the Supreme Court upheld that decision, noting the seriousness of the charges against the applicant as the reason for the dismissing the request for release.
On 24 June 2003 the Moscow City Court held that, in view of the complexity of the case and the seriousness of the charges, the applicant's detention on remand should be extended until 28 September 2003.
On 4 July 2003 the applicant appealed.
On 4 September 2003 the Supreme Court upheld the Moscow City Court's decision, finding that the applicant had been charged with serious offences and that his arguments were not sufficient to secure his release.
On the days of the hearings the applicant was usually woken up at 4.00 a.m. and taken to the courthouse, where he was kept for the entire day and then returned to the detention facility late at night. According to the applicant, he was not given any food or drink on such days.
On 18 August 2003 the Moscow City Court found the applicant guilty of aggravated abuse of position, acquitted him of the other charges and sentenced him to three years' imprisonment. The applicant was prohibited from holding positions in State law enforcement bodies for three years.
On 25 November 2003 the Supreme Court of the  upheld the judgment of 18 August 2003.
On 30 December 2003 the Preobrazhenskiy District Court of Moscow ordered the applicant's release on licence.
Until 1 July 2002 criminal-law matters were governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (Law of 27 October 1960, “the old CCrP”). From 1 July 2002 the old CCrP was replaced by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001, “the new CCrP”).
“Preventive measures” or “measures of restraint” include an undertaking not to leave a town or region, a personal guarantee, bail and detention on remand (Article 89 of the old CCrP, Article 98 of the new CCrP).
The Russian Constitution of 12 December 1993 establishes that a judicial decision is required before a defendant can be detained or his or her detention extended (Article 22).
Under the old CCrP, a decision ordering detention on remand could be taken by a prosecutor or a court (Articles 11, 89 and 96).
The new CCrP requires a judicial decision by a district or town court on a reasoned request by a prosecutor supported by appropriate evidence (Article 108 §§ 1, 3-6).
When deciding whether to remand an accused in custody, the competent authority is required to consider whether there are “sufficient grounds to believe” that he or she would abscond during the investigation or trial or obstruct the establishment of the truth or re-offend (Article 89 of the old CCrP). It must also take into account the gravity of the charge, information on the accused's character, his or her profession, age, state of health, family status and other circumstances (Article 91 of the old CCrP, Article 99 of the new CCrP).
Before 14 March 2001, detention on remand was authorised if the accused was charged with a criminal offence carrying a sentence of at least one year's imprisonment or if there were “exceptional circumstances” in the case (Article 96). On 14 March 2001 the old CCrP was amended to permit defendants to be remanded in custody if the charge carried a sentence of at least two years' imprisonment, if they had previously defaulted, had no permanent residence in Russia or if their identity could not be ascertained. The amendments of 14 March 2001 also repealed the provision that permitted defendants to be remanded in custody on the sole ground of the dangerous nature of the criminal offence they had allegedly committed. The new CCrP reproduced the amended provisions (Articles 97 § 1 and 108 § 1) and added that a defendant should not be remanded in custody if a less severe preventive measure was available.
The Codes make a distinction between two types of detention on remand: the first being “during the investigation”, that is while a competent agency – the police or a prosecutor's office – is investigating the case, and the second being “before the court” (or “during the trial proceedings”), at the judicial stage. Although there is no difference in practice between them (the detainee is held in the same detention facility), the calculation of the time-limits is different.
After arrest the suspect is placed in custody “during the investigation”. The maximum permitted period of detention “during the investigation” is two months but this can be extended for up to eighteen months in “exceptional circumstances”. (Under the old CCrP) extensions were authorised by prosecutors of ascending hierarchical levels but they must now be authorised by judicial decisions, taken by courts of ascending levels (under the new CCrP). No extension of detention “during the investigation” beyond eighteen months is possible (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 4 of the new CCrP).
The period of detention “during the investigation” is calculated to the day when the prosecutor sends the case to the trial court (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 9 of the new CCrP).
Access to the file materials is to be granted no later than one month before the expiry of the authorised detention period (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 5 of the new CCrP). If the defendant needs more time to study the case-file, a judge, on a request by a prosecutor, may grant an extension of detention until such time as the file has been read in full and the case sent for trial (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 8 (1) of the new CCrP). Under the old CCrP, such an extension could not be granted for longer than six months.
Under the old CCrP, the trial court had the right to remit the case for “additional investigation” if it established that procedural defects existed that could not be remedied at the trial. In such cases the defendant's detention was again classified as “during the investigation” and the relevant time-limit continued to apply. If, however, the case was remitted for additional investigation but the investigators had already used up all the time authorised for detention “during the investigation”, a supervising prosecutor could nevertheless extend the detention period for one additional month starting from the date he received the case. Subsequent extensions could only be granted if the detention “during the investigation” had not exceeded eighteen months (Article 97).
From the date the prosecutor refers the case to the trial court, the defendant's detention is classified as “before the court” (or “during the judicial proceedings”).
Before 14 March 2001 the old CCrP set no time-limit for detention “during the judicial proceedings”. On 14 March 2001 a new Article 239-1 was inserted which established that the period of detention “during the judicial proceedings” could not generally exceed six months from the date the court received the file. However, if there was evidence to show that the defendant's release might impede a thorough, complete and objective examination of the case, a court could – of its own motion or on a request by a prosecutor – extend the detention by no longer than three months. These provisions did not apply to defendants charged with particularly serious criminal offences.
The new CCrP establishes that the term of detention “during the judicial proceedings” is calculated from the date the court received the file up to the date the judgment is given. The period of detention “during the judicial proceedings” may not normally exceed six months, but if the case concerns serious or particularly serious criminal offences, the trial court may approve one or more extensions of no longer than three months each (Article 255 §§ 2 and 3).
Under the old CCrP, the detainee or his or her counsel or representative could challenge the detention order issued by a prosecutor, and any subsequent extension order, before a court. The judge was required to review the lawfulness of and justification for a detention or extension order no later than three days after receipt of the relevant papers. The review was to be conducted in camera in the presence of a prosecutor and the detainee's counsel or representative. The detainee was to be summoned and a review in his absence was only permissible in exceptional circumstances if the detainee waived his right to be present of his own free will. The judge could either dismiss the challenge or revoke the pre-trial detention and order the detainee's release (Article 220-1). An appeal to a higher court lay against the judge's decision. It had to be examined within the same time-limit as appeals against a judgment on the merits (see paragraph 96 below) (Article 331 in fine).
Under the new CCrP, an appeal may be lodged with a higher court within three days against a judicial decision ordering or extending detention on remand. The appeal court must rule on the appeal within three days of its receipt (Article 108 § 10).
Upon receipt of the case file, the judge must determine, in particular, whether the defendant should be held in custody or released pending the trial hearings (Articles 222 § 5 and 230 of the old CCrP, Articles 228 (3) and 231 § 2 (6) of the new CCrP) and rule on any application by the defendant for release (Article 223 of the old CCrP).
At any time during the judicial proceedings the court may order, vary or revoke any preventive measure, including detention on remand (Article 260 of the old CCrP, Article 255 § 1 of the new CCrP). Any such decision must be given in the deliberation room and signed by all the judges on the bench (Article 261 of the old CCrP, Article 256 of the new CCrP).
An appeal against such a decision lies to the higher court. It must be lodged within ten days and examined within the same time-limit as an appeal against the judgment on the merits (Article 331 of the old CCrP, Article 255 § 4 of the new CCrP – see paragraph 96 below).