The case concerns the alleged inadequacy of the conditions of the applicant’s pre-trial detention in breach of Article 3 and the alleged unlawfulness and allegedly unreasonable duration of his detention on remand in breach of Article 5 §§ 1 and 3 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Kropyvnytskyi (Kirovograd at the material time). The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr M.O. Tarakhkalo, a lawyer practising in Kyiv.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 4 July 2009 the Kirovograd Regional Police Department opened a criminal case against the applicant and another person on suspicion of fraud involving particularly large sums of money. On the same day the applicant was arrested.
On 7 July 2009 the Leninskyy District Court of Kirovograd (“the Leninskyy Court”) extended the applicant’s detention in police custody to ten days with a view to forming an assessment of his personality. The court noted that the applicant had fully admitted his own guilt.
Subsequently, the applicant was charged with fraud involving particularly large sums of money, pretending to engage in business activities, founding a criminal organisation, money laundering, bribery and forging documents. The number of persons accused during the criminal investigation in question grew to twenty-two.
On 14 July 2009 the Leninskyy Court remanded the applicant in pretrial detention as a preventive measure (for two months, until 4 September 2009). It noted that he had continued to assert his own guilt at the hearing on that occasion. The judge stated that the seriousness of the charges against the applicant outweighed the fact that he had no criminal record, enjoyed positive character references and was married. The court stated in its ruling, without providing any further details, that the applicant might try to abscond or hinder the investigation if allowed to remain at liberty.
In the course of the investigation, the domestic courts extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention a number of times (until 4 November 2011). The grounds for those extensions were, in addition to those mentioned in the court’s initial detention order (see paragraph 7 above), the seriousness of the charges, the fact that the investigators still had a lot of work ahead of them and the absence of any reasons for the applicant to be released, since either no new circumstances warranting release had been identified or the circumstances that had led to the decision to place the applicant in pre-trial detention persisted.
On 28 October 2011 the pre-trial investigation was completed and the case, together with the relevant bill of indictment, was sent to the Kirovskyy District Court of Kirovograd (“the Kirovskyy Court”) for trial.
On 13 December 2011 that court remitted the case for additional pre-trial investigation on the ground that the right of the applicant (and some of the other accused) to a defence had not been respected, since they had not been able to study the case file in the presence of their lawyers. The court decided to maintain their detention as a preventive measure. On 22 March 2012 that decision was upheld on appeal.
In the course of the pre-trial investigation, on 1 June 2012 the Kirovograd Regional Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 5 August 2012.
On 3 August 2012 the investigation was completed and the case, together with the relevant bill of indictment, was sent for trial to the Kirovskyy Court, which held a preliminary hearing on 3 September 2012. It decided to transfer the case to the Leninskyy Court. By the same ruling, it maintained the preventive measure in respect of the applicant. In the meantime the criminal case was transferred to another court for trial, namely the Kirovograd District Court of Kirovograd (“the Kirovograd Court”).
On 10 October 2014 the Kirovograd Court granted a request for release by the applicant, citing the length of his pre-trial detention (over five years), his disability, the absence of any criminal record and the fact that he had a minor child and elderly parents to care for. On the same day the applicant was released.
During the entire period of his detention from 15 July 2009 to 10 October 2014, the applicant was held in the Kirovograd pre-trial detention centre (“the SIZO”). He described the conditions of his detention as follows.
The applicant was detained in four different cells – each measuring about 8 sq. m and shared by between four and six people. On two occasions, in May 2012 and October 2014 – each time for about two weeks – he was held in a cell measuring about 20 sq. m and shared by between ten and twelve inmates.
There was no hot water supply in the SIZO, and cold water was supplied only for short periods. The cell lacked any natural lighting, as its only window was covered by three rows of metal bars.
The applicant had a daily outdoor walk for thirty minutes. He had access to a shower once a week.
The Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Punishment or Treatment (CPT) from 9 to 21 September 2009 (CPT/Inf (2011) 29) reads as follows:
“74.At the time of the 2009 visit, the total number of prisoners in Ukraine stood at 145,000 (including 36,000 on remand), compared to some 178,000 at the time of the 2005 visit. Thus, the positive trend towards a reduction of the prison population already noted in the report on the 2005 visit continues. That said, overcrowding persists in remand establishments, the ones in Kyiv, Kherson, Crimea, Odessa and Kirovograd being cited as the most problematic. ...”