The case originated in an application (no. 72051/17) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Katerina Olegovna Korneyeva (“the applicant”), on 21 September 2017.
The applicant was represented by Mr Aleksandr Dmitriyevich Peredruk, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg, Russia. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that her administrative escorting and arrest had been unlawful, that she had not been given a fair hearing by an impartial tribunal and that there had been a violation of the ne bis in idem principle.
On 23 February 2018 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Article 5 § 1 and Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 of the Convention and Article 4 § 1 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1996 and lives in St Petersburg, Russia.
On 12 June 2017 a protest rally (involving some 1,000 people) was held at the Marsovo Pole in St Petersburg. The applicant was present at the venue with a friend but, according to her, did not take part in the rally (see paragraph 12 below).
According to the applicant, she was deprived of her liberty at 2.10 p.m., when the police and the National Guard surrounded the people gathered at the Marsovo Pole by way of a “kettling technique”. The applicant was “trapped” within the circle and could not leave.
The applicant was then apprehended and placed in a bus. At 2.50 p.m. she was escorted to the police station by police officer K., who then compiled an escort record. It indicated that the applicant had been escorted to the police station “in order to compile an offence record”. The escort record also stated as follows:
“[The applicant] was voluntarily present among some 1,000 people, with the aim of publicly expressing her opinion and influencing others in relation to acute political issues of public interest concerning ‘total intolerance toward corruption’ ... She was a participant in a public event which had not been approved by the authorities ... Together with other participants standing less than ten metres from her, she uttered the slogans ‘Putin is a thief’ or ‘We are fed up with Putin’, thereby taking part in a nonnotified rally ... Officer S. repeatedly informed the participants, including the applicant, via loudspeaker that [they] were violating section 6(3) of the Public Events Act and ordered them to stop the rally and disperse ... Being afforded no less than five minutes, [the applicant] did not comply with those lawful orders ...”
Officer K. also compiled a report (рапорт) to his superior officer. This report was worded in a way that was similar to the wording used by Officer K. Nearly identical reports were submitted by Officers A. and S. All three officers were interviewed by another official; the written record of their interviews was worded in terms that were similar or identical to those in the above-mentioned reports.
A record of offences under Articles 19.3 § 1 (failure to comply with a lawful order of an official in connection with the exercise of his duties) and 20.2 § 5 (violation by a participant of the procedure for a public event) of the Federal Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) was compiled and the applicant had access to it at 9.55 p.m. Before or after that, a record of administrative arrest was compiled in relation to the offence under Article 19.3 of the CAO, indicating that the arrest had been necessary in order to ensure “the correct and expedient examination of the case”.
The applicant spent the night in the police station. It appears that at around 6 p.m. the next day she was taken to the Vasileostrovskiy District Court of St Petersburg. However, a judge adjourned the case. According to a note in the arrest record, the applicant was released at 7.54 p.m. on 13 June 2017.
On 16 June 2017 judge K. of the Vasileostrovskiy District Court of St Petersburg examined, in turn, two cases against the applicant. The applicant and her lawyer were present at the trial hearings and made oral submissions to the courts. The applicant pleaded not guilty. According to her, on 12 June 2017 (which was Russia Day, an official holiday) she had been having a walk with a friend at the Marsovo Pole; she had not been in possession of any banners, flags or the like, and had not uttered any slogans; she had seen some people with flags, at a distance from her; she had not heard any order to disperse.
The trial court dismissed an application lodged by the defence to have a public prosecutor summoned to the hearing in order to support the charge against the applicant.
By two separate judgments of 16 June 2017 judge K. found the applicant guilty of the offences under Articles 19.3 § 1, and fined her 500 Russian roubles (RUB), and 20.2 § 5 of the CAO and fined her RUB 10,000 (EUR 7 and 140 at the time when the fines were due (29 June 2017)).
The applicant appealed to the St Petersburg City Court. She argued, inter alia, that the alleged disobedience to the order to stop her participation in the rally might be an aggravating circumstance to weigh within the offence under Article 20.2 of the CAO. However, it could not amount to a separate offence, without violating the principle of ne bis in idem. In her appeal relating to Article 20.2 of the CAO, the applicant argued that the overall set of facts held against her in both cases was identical; the offence record for both offences was worded in identical terms, too.
The applicant also argued that the trial proceedings had been unfair in that her conviction had been based on the pre-trial statements given by the police officers, whereas the defence had been afforded no opportunity to examine them; the trial court had adduced no reasons confirming that the reliance on the written testimony without providing the defence with a possibility of contesting it in open court had been a measure of last resort.
Both cases were assigned to Judge L. of the City Court. On 29 June 2017 that judge examined the cases in turn. It is, however, unclear in which order the two cases were examined. The appeal court upheld the judgments of 16 June 2017.
The appeal decision in the case relating to Article 20.2 of the CAO dismissed the ne bis in idem argument, indicating that that Article concerned liability for violating regulations on public events, whereas Article 19.3 of the CAO concerned liability for disobedience to lawful orders from a public official. As to the arguments relating to the refusal to summon the police officers, the appeal court held as follows:
“The trial court took cognisance of the evidence adduced by the defence, namely a photograph and a video recording. Having assessed them, the court rightly concluded that they did not rebut the other evidence and did not plead in favour of the defendant’s innocence because they disclosed that the defendant had been present in the group of other people and had been apprehended by the police ...
The defence argued that the trial court had relied on the documentary evidence while refusing to summon and examine the police officers ... Those arguments do not disclose a violation of the defendant’s right to a fair judgment. It was within the trial judge’s competence to determine the scope of evidence that was needed for determining the charge. The trial judge examined all the available evidence; there were no reasons for seeking additional evidence, the available evidence being sufficient for establishing all the relevant circumstances of the case.”
The appeal decision relating to Article 19.3 of the CAO reads as follows:
“There are no grounds to consider that the defendant was tried twice, under Article 20.2 and Article 19.3 of the CAO, for the same actions. Article 20.2 provides for liability in relation to breaching the regulations relating to public events, whereas Article 19.3 of the CAO concerns liability for disobedience to lawful orders from a public official ...
As to the arguments relating to the non-compliance with the European Convention on human rights and fundamental freedoms in relation to recourse to the arrest procedure, it is noted that Article 27.1 of the CAO provides for certain measures that could be applied to put an end to an offence, identifying a perpetrator, compiling an offence record, ensuring timely and correct examination of a case, or ensuring execution of a decision taken in that case. Administrative arrest is listed as one such measure ... It follows from the meaning of Article 27.3 § 1 of the CAO that it is possible to use administrative arrest, inter alia, for the purpose of ensuring the correct and expedient examination of a case. Thus, the defendant’s administrative arrest was in compliance with the CAO and international law ...”
Section 6(3) of the Public Events Act provides that during the public event its participants must comply with lawful orders of the organisers of the public event, representatives of the competent regional or municipal authorities, and lawenforcement officials; maintain public order and follow the schedule of the public event.
Section 6(4) of the Act provides that during the public event the participants are not allowed to hide their faces by way of using masks or other means for impeding their identification; to possess firearms or other objects that may be used as weapons; to be intoxicated.
Pursuant to Article 4.1 § 5 of the CAO, no one must be found administratively liable twice for the “same administrative offence”. Under Article 24.5 § 1 proceedings under the CAO should not be initiated or, if initiated, should be discontinued where there is no corpus delicti (subparagraph 2) or where there is a decision to impose a sentence or to discontinue the proceedings on account of the very same fact of unlawful actions by the same person, in so far as the offence is proscribed by the very same Article(s) of the CAO (subparagraph 7).
Where there are several records of administrative offences in respect of the same person, each record is submitted to a court to be examined separately. A court issues a separate judgment in respect of each related offence (Article 4.4 § 1 of the CAO and Ruling No. 5 of 24 March 2005 by the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia (paragraph 4(8)). Where one (in)action on the part of the defendant concerns several offences under different Articles of the CAO and which fall within the jurisdiction of the same court, an administrative sentence is imposed with reference to the strictest statutory penalty. Where there are grounds for imposing a sentence in accordance with the rule set out in Article 4.4 § 2, the cases should be joined and examined in one set of proceedings resulting in a single judgment (paragraph 4(9) of the Ruling).
Article 19.3 § 1 of the CAO provides that the following conduct is punishable with a fine of from RUB 500 to 1,000 or administrative detention for up to fifteen days: (i) non-compliance with a lawful order or request made by a police officer, a military officer, a detention facility officer or a National Guard officer, in connection with the exercise of his or her duties relating to securing public order and public safety; (ii) resistance to those officers in the exercise of their official duties.
Article 20.2 § 5 of the CAO provides that the following conduct is punishable with a fine of from RUB 10,000 to RUB 20,000 or up to forty hours of community work: violation by a participant in a public event of the established procedure for running (порядок проведения) a public event. As specified in paragraph 33 of Ruling No. 28 of 26 June 2018 by the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia, the above-mentioned violation requires the court to establish that the demonstrator did not comply with (or violated) one of the obligations (or prohibitions) incumbent on demonstrators under section 6(3) and (4) of the Public Events Act (see paragraphs 20 and 21 above). For instance, one such obligation requires compliance with all legal orders made by the police, military officers or National Guard officers. The Plenary Supreme Court indicated that a demonstrator’s noncompliance with such orders or resistance to those officers in the exercise of their official duties in the course of a public event falls within the ambit of an offence under Article 20.2 § 5 of the CAO. “In this specific context” this provision is lex specialis vis-à-vis Article 19.3 § 1 of the CAO.
Applying the above interpretation in a review decision issued under Article 30.12 of the CAO on 29 June 2018 in case no. 78-AD18-5, a judge of the Supreme Court of Russia stated:
“[The defendant] was prosecuted on the grounds that as a participant in a nonnotified public event, she had not complied with lawful orders of a police officer requiring her to cease her participation in that public event ... In the present case [Article 20.2 § 5 of the CAO] is lex specialis vis-à-vis Article 19.3 § 1 of the CAO ... Thus, the [defendant’s] conduct does not constitute corpus delicti under that provision ... At the same time, it is not possible in the present case to reclassify the defendant’s actions for the following reasons ... Reclassification from one Article of the CAO to another is possible when the type of object protected by those provisions (единый родовой объект посягательства) is the same and where a new sentence would not worsen the position of the defendant ... Articles 19.3 and 20.2 are contained in different Chapters of the CAO ... and protect different types of objects ... Article 20.2 § 5 provides for a stricter sentence than Article 19.3 § 1 ... Pursuant to Article 4.1 § 5 of the CAO, no one should be found liable more than once for the same administrative offence ...”
The Constitutional Court of Russia has ruled that administrative arrest must be effected in compliance with the goals listed in subparagraph (c) of Article 5 § 1, that is it must be effected for the purpose of bringing an individual before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or if it is reasonably considered necessary to prevent him or her from committing an offence or fleeing after having done so (Ruling No. 9-P of 16 June 2009). For an arrest to be lawful, an assessment must be made of the essential features affecting “lawfulness”, which includes assessment of whether the measure was justified (обоснованной) in view of the goals pursued and whether it was necessary and reasonable (разумной) in the specific circumstances of the situation in which it was carried out. Administrative arrest is lawful if it can be justified on account of the nature of the offence and is necessary for ensuring the execution of a judgment in an administrativeoffence case (Decision No. 1049-O of 2 July 2013 by the Constitutional Court). The assessment of the reasons and grounds listed in the record of administrative arrest (in so far as it was relevant in the context of a claim for compensation relating to such arrest) includes an assessment of whether arrest was the only possible measure in respect of the defendant (ibid).
For other relevant provisions of domestic law and judicial practice, see Tsvetkova and Others v. Russia, nos. 54381/08 and 5 others, §§ 66-75, 10 April 2018.