The case originated in an application (no. 57847/00) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Ivan Radkov Navushtanov who was born in 1978 and lives in Velingrad (“the applicant”), on 30 December 1999.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Stoyanov and Mrs V. Kelcheva, lawyers practising in Pazardzhik.
The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Karadjova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that there were numerous violations of his rights under Article 5 of the Convention in respect to his detention from 5 October 1999 to 21 April 2000. In addition, he claimed that he had been subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment as a result of having been detained in allegedly inadequate conditions of detention at the Velingrad Investigation detention facility and the Pazardzhik Prison.
On 5 April 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
On 5 October 1999 the Prosecutor's Office, acting on the victim's complaints and after having collected over forty-five pages of evidence, opened a preliminary investigation against the applicant concerning a series of five burglaries. The prosecutor in charge ordered that the applicant be detained on remand in view of the fact that there were another three preliminary investigations and sixteen enquiries pending against him for various other offences.
By order of the same day, issued by an investigator and confirmed by a prosecutor, the applicant was charged with the five burglaries and was detained on remand. No specific reasons were cited in the order of the investigator for detaining the applicant, but reference was made to the aforesaid order of the prosecutor to detain the applicant. The applicant was presented with the order and at 4:20 p.m. on the same day signed a statement that he had been informed of its content.
The applicant was questioned on an unspecified date and confessed to having committed the burglaries.
The charges against the applicant were amended on 18 October and 15 November 1999. The detention on remand was sustained on both occasions without specific reasons being cited by the authorities.
On 29 November 1999 the applicant appealed against his detention and argued, inter alia, that he had a permanent address, was planning to marry his pregnant girlfriend and had been in detention since 5 October 1999.
In a decision of 2 December 1999 the Velingrad District Court dismissed the appeal. Referring to the serious charges against the applicant, the other three preliminary investigations and the sixteen enquiries pending against him, the court considered that, if released, there was a likelihood that he might abscond or re-offend.
On an unspecified date the charges against the applicant were amended and he was charged with another three burglaries. Also on an unspecified date he confessed to having committed these burglaries.
The preliminary investigation was completed on 21 December 1999.
On 10 February 2000 an indictment was filed against the applicant with the Velingrad District Court for a series of eight burglaries.
A hearing was conducted before the Velingrad District Court on 21 March 2000 at which the applicant confessed to the offences he had been charged with.
At the next hearing on 19 April 2000 the applicant stated his readiness to endure an appropriate sentence for his offences.
By judgment of the same day, 19 April 2000, the Velingrad District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to two years' imprisonment, suspended for a period of five years. In determining his sentence, the domestic court took into account, inter alia, that he did not have a criminal record and that he had confessed. According to the minutes, the court also amended the measure for securing the applicant's appearance in court to bail in the amount of 50 Bulgarian levs [BGN : approximately 25 euros (EUR)], payable within three days, and ordered that he be released after provision of the said recognisance.
On 20 April 2000 a friend or relative of the applicant deposited the recognizance into the bank account of the Velingrad District Court. It is not clear when the District Court was informed that bail had been provided. The applicant was released on 21 April 2000.
Neither the applicant nor the prosecution appealed against the judgment and it entered into force.
The applicant contended, which the Government did not challenge, that from 5 October 1999 to 7 February 2000 he was detained at the Velingrad Investigation detention facility. He was then transferred to the Pazardzhik Prison where he remained until his release on 21 April 2000.
In the applicant's submission, at both of these detention facilities, (1) there was insufficient fresh air in the cells; (2) there was no exercise or healthy food; (3) hygiene was lacking (presence of parasites and rodents); (4) he was denied access to newspapers, books, radio and television; (5) he could not meet with his attorney in private, and (6) he could not maintain an active correspondence.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (the “CCP”) and the Bulgarian courts' practice before 1 January 2000 are summarised in the Court's judgments in several similar cases (see, among others, Nikolova v. Bulgaria [GC], no. 31195/96, §§ 25-36, ECHR 1999-II; Ilijkov v. Bulgaria, no. 33977/96, §§ 55-59, 26 July 2001; and Yankov v. Bulgaria, no. 39084/97, §§ 79-88, ECHR 2003-XII (extracts)).
As of 1 January 2000 the legal regime of detention under the CCP was amended with the aim to ensure compliance with the Convention (TR 1-02 Supreme Court of Cassation). The effected amendments and the resulting practice of the Bulgarian courts are summarised in the Court's judgments in the cases of Dobrev v. Bulgaria (no. 55389/00, §§ 32-35, 10 August 2006) and Yordanov v. Bulgaria (no. 56856/00, §§ 21-24, 10 August 2006).
On the basis of the relevant law before 1 January 2000, when ruling on appeals against pre-trial detention of a person charged with having committed a “serious” offence, the domestic courts generally disregarded facts and arguments concerning the existence or absence of a danger of the accused person's absconding or committing offences and stated that every person accused of having committed a serious offence must be remanded in custody unless exceptional circumstances dictated otherwise (see decisions of the domestic authorities criticised by the Court in the cases of Nikolova and Ilijkov, both cited above, and Zaprianov v. Bulgaria, no. 41171/98, 30 September 2004).
In June 2002, interpreting the amended provisions on pre-trial detention, the Supreme Court of Cassation stated that when examining an appeal against pre-trial detention the courts' task was not only to verify whether the initial decision on remand in custody had been lawful but also to establish whether continued detention was still lawful and justified. In such proceedings the courts had to examine all available evidence on all relevant aspects, including the amount of the recognisance as the case may be (TR 102 Supreme Court of Cassation).
Article 150 § 5 of the CCP provided at the relevant time:
“When the measure for securing [a person's appearance in court] is amended from a more [restrictive] one to bail, the [person] shall be released following provision of recognisance.”
The State Responsibility for Damage Act of 1988 (the “SRDA”) provides that the State is liable for damage caused to private persons by (a) the illegal orders, actions or omissions of government bodies and officials acting within the scope of, or in connection with, their administrative duties; and (b) the organs of the investigation, the prosecution and the courts for unlawful pretrial detention, if the detention order has been set aside for lack of lawful grounds (sections 1-2).
In respect of the regime of detention and conditions of detention, the relevant domestic law and practice under sections 1 and 2 of the SRDA has been summarised in the cases of Iovchev v. Bulgaria (no. 41211/98, §§ 76-80, 2 February 2006) and Hamanov v. Bulgaria (no. 44062/98, §§ 56-60, 8 April 2004).
The CPT visited  in 1995, 1999, 2002, 2003 and 2006. All but its most recent visit report have since been made public.
The Pazardzhik Prison was visited by the CPT in 1995. The Velingrad Investigation detention facility has never been visited, but there are general observations about the problems in all investigation service establishments in the 1995, 1999 and 2002 reports.
The CPT found that most, albeit not all, of the Investigation Service detention facilities were overcrowded. With the exception of one detention facility where conditions were slightly better, the conditions were as follows: cells did not have access to natural light; the artificial lighting was too weak to read by and was left on permanently; ventilation was inadequate; the cleanliness of the bedding and the cells as a whole left much to be desired; detainees could access a sanitary facility twice a day (morning and evening) for a few minutes and could take a weekly shower; outside of the two daily visits to the toilets, detainees had to satisfy the needs of nature in buckets inside the cells; although according to the establishments' internal regulations detainees were entitled to a “daily walk” of up to thirty minutes, it was often reduced to five to ten minutes or not allowed at all; no other form of out-of-cell activity was provided to persons detained.
The CPT further noted that food was of poor quality and in insufficient quantity. In particular, the day's “hot meal” generally consisted of a watery soup (often lukewarm) and inadequate quantities of bread. At the other meals, detainees only received bread and a little cheese or halva. Meat and fruit were rarely included on the menu. Detainees had to eat from bowls without cutlery – not even a spoon was provided.
The CPT also noted that family visits and correspondence were only possible with express permission by a public prosecutor and that, as a result, detainees' contacts with the outside world were very limited. There was no radio or television.
The CPT concluded that the Bulgarian authorities had failed in their obligation to provide detention conditions which were consistent with the inherent dignity of the human person and that “almost without exception, the conditions in the Investigation Service detention facilities visited could fairly be described as inhuman and degrading”. In reaction, the Bulgarian authorities agreed that the CPT delegation's assessment had been “objective and correctly presented” but indicated that the options for improvement were limited by the country's difficult financial circumstances.
In 1995 the CPT recommended to the Bulgarian authorities, inter alia, that sufficient food and drink and safe eating utensils be provided, that mattresses and blankets be cleaned regularly, that detainees be provided with personal hygiene products (soap, toothpaste, etc.), that custodial staff be instructed that detainees should be allowed to leave their cells during the day for the purpose of using a toilet facility unless overriding security considerations required otherwise, that the regulation providing for thirty minutes' exercise per day be fully respected in practice, that cell lighting and ventilation be improved, that the regime of family visits be revised and that pre-trial detainees be more often transferred to prison even before the preliminary investigation was completed. The possibility of offering detainees at least one hour's outdoor exercise per day was to be examined as a matter of urgency.
In this report the CPT found, inter alia, that the prison was seriously overcrowded and that prisoners were obliged to spend most of the day in their dormitories, mostly confined to their beds because of lack of space. It also found the central heating to be inadequate and that only some of the dormitories were fitted with sanitary facilities.
The CPT noted that new rules providing for better conditions had been enacted but had not yet resulted in significant improvements.
In most investigation detention facilities visited in 1999, with the exception of a newly opened detention facility in Sofia, conditions of detention were generally the same as those observed during the CPT's 1995 visit, as regards poor hygiene, overcrowding, problematic access to toilet/shower facilities and a total absence of outdoor exercise and outofcell activities. In some places, the situation had even deteriorated.
In the Plovdiv Regional Investigation detention facility, as well as in two other places, detainees “had to eat with their fingers, not having been provided with appropriate cutlery”.
During the 2002 visit some improvements were noted in the country's investigation detention facilities, severely criticised in previous reports. However, a great deal remained to be done: most detainees continued to spend months on end locked up in overcrowded cells twenty-four hours a day.
Concerning prisons, the CPT drew attention to the problem of overcrowding and to the shortage of work and other activities for inmates.