The case originated in an application (no. 30261/17) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a national of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (“the DRC”), Mr R.K. (“the applicant”), on 24 April 2017.
The applicant was represented by Mr Maivand Abdul Gani, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his being returned to the DRC would breach his rights guaranteed by Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention and that, in breach of Article 13, he had not had effective remedies in respect of this claim. The applicant also alleged that his detention in Russia had been in breach of Article 5 of the Convention
On 25 April 2017 the Court decided to indicate to the Russian Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the applicant should not be expelled to the DRC for the duration of the proceedings before the Court. The applicant’s case was also granted priority (under Rule 41) and confidentiality (under Rule 33), and the applicant was granted anonymity (Rule 47 § 4).
On 11 July 2017 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1990 in Kinshasa and is a national of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (“the DRC”).
On 20 October 2015 the applicant arrived in Moscow by plane from Kinshasa on a valid student visa and did not leave after the term of his visa had expired on 29 November 2015.
On 10 March 2016 the applicant asked the Moscow regional department of the Federal Migration Service (“the Moscow Region FMS”) to grant him temporary asylum in the Russian Federation. In his application for asylum, he submitted that he is a former member of the AJK (Alliance des Jeunes Kabilistes), an association composed of young supporters of President Joseph Kabila in the DRC. According to the applicant’s account of events,
“On 19 January 2015 I took part in organising a political protest against President Kabila, who was seeking to run for a third presidential term [beyond the two-year mandate]. At first, AJK was supporting the government in power and the President. However, when [that government] broke their campaign promises, the AJK party split, and on 19 January 2015 the part of the AJK opposed to the government blocked roads and approached the National Assembly to demand that the President withdraw his candidacy ... We burned car tyres, [and] overturned cars. I was in charge of public propaganda. The demonstration was supressed [by the President’s supporters], some participants were imprisoned and others were murdered. I managed to go into hiding, I escaped to a suburb of Kinshasa ... Nobody tried to find me... People who were looking for me sought information on my whereabouts from the migration centre in Congo. My friend told me about it in an email ... [I] decided to apply for a Russian visa ... the Russian embassy was in the vicinity of the safe place where I was staying at the time... [After the events in question], my sisters were raped and beaten by the authorities who came to look for me at their place of their residence...I do not wish to return to the DRC, owing to persecution by the government there... I will never be able to go back to the DRC ...”
On 11 April 2016 the Moscow Region FMS found no grounds for granting the applicant temporary asylum, and dismissed his application as unsubstantiated. In particular, the migration authorities relied on the report by the Africa Desk of the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, examined the applicant’s request for temporary asylum and assessed the situation in the DRC and held as follows:
“... during his [asylum] interview ... the applicant did not state that he had any problems with the national authorities... Taking into account his profile, there are no grounds to believe that he would be persecuted on the basis of his ... political convictions ... The political situation in the county is volatile and influenced by the upcoming presidential and parliamentary elections. The main intrigue and tension between supporters of President Kabila and his opponents result from the plan to change the Constitution of the DRC in order to allow President Kabila to stay for a third term. The conflict leads to street protests, clashes with police and attempts to seize government buildings... There is no ethnic, religious, political and other discrimination by the authorities. There are no grounds for political emigration ... the main reason for departure is the dire socio-economic situation. ... It follows that [the applicant’s] request is unsubstantiated ...”
The applicant appealed, reiterating his statements about his personal situation and complaining of a failure by the Moscow Region FMS to make a genuine assessment of the risk to his life and personal security.
On 31 May 2016 the Chief of the Migration Service of the Ministry of the Interior upheld the decision of 11 April 2016, stating that the applicant’s request had been duly examined by the the Moscow Region FMS and that their decision was lawful and well-reasoned.
On 13 January 2017 the applicant challenged the decision of 31 May 2016 before the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow.
On 6 March 2017 the applicant was arrested and charged with administrative offence of violation of migration regulations.
On 13 March 2017 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court examined the applicant’s case in his and his lawyer’s absence, having noted that, “[the applicant] did not appear at the hearing, having been informed of its date and location.” On the same date the court found the decision of 31 May 2016 lawful and justified. The court considered that the applicant did not make a plausible case for believing that, upon return, he would run a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention. It held that he had failed to substantiate his allegations of persecution in the DRC and that his personal circumstances could not justify granting him temporary asylum in Russia. In particular, the court held that,
“... The applicant’s statement that he organised a protest in the DRC and thus fears for his life does not serve as sufficient grounds for granting him temporary asylum status. The applicant left the DRC without any impediment ... He sought temporary asylum in Russia five months after his arrival. The Court notes that temporary asylum should not serve as an alternative to the standard ways of legalising one’s stay in Russia ... As follows from paragraph 124 of the [Court’s] judgment in Shakurov v. Russia, 55822/10, of 5 June 2012, ‘... [the] mere possibility of ill-treatment on account of an unsettled situation in the receiving country does not in itself give rise to a breach of Article 3 ...’ The applicant did not demonstrate that he was at a higher risk of persecution than the rest of the DRC population. Taking into account that the applicant did not submit any convincing arguments or facts regarding his persecution or ill-treatment in the country of which he is a national, there are no grounds for granting him temporary asylum in Russia ... The applicant’s dossier indicates that he did not engage in either political or civic activities... [He] was not persecuted or threatened by the national authorities ...”
On 17 April 2017 the applicant lodged a new request for temporary asylum in the Russian Federation. The Court has not been informed about the outcome of those proceedings. In the correspondence of 19 November 2018 the applicant’s representative noted that, on an unspecified date, the applicant lodged a new request for temporary asylum in the Russian Federation. However, the status or outcome of these proceedings remains unknown.
On 6 March 2017, the day of the applicant’s arrest, the Chertanovskiy District Court of Moscow examined the applicant’s case under the Code of Administrative Offences. The applicant attended the hearing and was assisted by an interpreter. During the hearing the applicant referred in passing to his fear of political persecution in the DRC and to pending proceedings for temporary asylum. He also stated that he had lost his passport in December 2016 and did not report the loss [to respective authorities]. The court found him guilty under Article 18.8 § 3.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences of the Russian Federation of breaching the rules governing the stay of foreign nationals in Russia, and ordered his administrative removal and payment of an administrative fine. The court ordered that the applicant was to be held at a centre for the temporary detention of aliens in Moscow until his removal, without specifying an exact date.
The applicant appealed, stating that he faced the risk of being subjected to treatment proscribed by Article 3 of the Convention if he was expelled to the DRC. In his appeal against the expulsion order before the Moscow City Court the applicant noted that he had applied for temporary asylum. The applicant did not attend the appeal hearing but he was represented by a lawyer who stated during the hearing that the applicant was not guilty of the administrative offence of which he had been charged.
On 12 April 2017 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 6 March 2017.
On 1 September 2017 the applicant filed a supervisory review complaint against the decision of 6 March 2017, but it was dismissed by the court.
On 9 February and 19 November 2018 the applicant’s representative informed the Court that the applicant remained in the detention centre for foreigners in Sakharovo, the Moscow Region.
For a summary of the relevant general provisions of the Refugees Act of Russia concerning refugee-status and temporary asylum proceedings (Law no. 4258-I of 19 February 1993), see K.G. v. Russia (Dec.), 31084/18, 2 October 2018, §§ 18-22.
Article 18.8 of the Code provides as follows:
“1.1. A breach of the regulations on staying or residing in the Russian Federation committed by a foreign national or a stateless person who has no document confirming the right to reside or stay in the Russian Federation ... shall be punishable by an administrative fine of between 2,000 and 5,000 Russian roubles (RUB) and administrative removal from the Russian Federation.
...
1 The offences described in paragraph 1.1 ... above, if committed in the federal-level cities of Moscow and St Petersburg or in the Moscow or Leningrad Regions, shall be punishable by an administrative fine of between RUB 5,000 and 7,000 and administrative removal from the Russian Federation.”
Article 3.10 § 5 and Article 27.19 § 3 of the Code allow the domestic courts to order the detention of a foreign national or stateless person with a view to his or her administrative removal.
Chapter 28 of the Code governs the procedure for placing an alien in a special purpose facility pending his or her deportation, and for the extension of the term of such detention. Article 269 § 2 requires the courts deciding on the detention of an alien to set a “reasonable time-limit” for such detention and to justify its duration; moreover, the operative part of the decision should set “a fixed term of detention” in the special facility.
In decision no. 6-P dated 17 February 1998, the Constitutional Court held, in particular, as follows:
“It is clear from Article 22 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation, taken in conjunction with Article 55 (paragraphs 2 and 3), that detention for an indefinite period cannot be regarded as a permissible limitation on the right to liberty and personal security, and is in fact a violation of that right. Therefore, the provisions ... concerning detention pending expulsion should not serve as a basis for detention for an indefinite period, even when the expulsion of a stateless person is delayed because no State is prepared to accept that person ... Otherwise, detention would go from being a measure necessary for ensuring the execution of an expulsion order to a ... punishment which is not provided for under Russian law, and which is incompatible with the provisions of the Constitution of the Russian Federation.”
As regards the political situation in January 2015 in the DRC, the report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, issued by the United Nations Security Council on 10 March 2015 (S/2015/172) stated the following:
 “2...The Government submitted to the Parliament a draft electoral law that conditioned the holding of the 2016 presidential and legislative elections on updated demographic data to be obtained through a population census. The last census was undertaken in 1984. The political opposition interpreted the clause as an attempt to delay the 2016 elections and allow the President, Joseph Kabila Kabange, to remain in power beyond his second and last term according to the Constitution. Opposition parties boycotted the vote on the draftlaw on 17 January. The National Assembly nevertheless passed the text. In protest, the political opposition called for demonstrations.
 3. On 19 January, student protests and street demonstrations broke out in various neighbourhoods in Kinshasa and other cities, including Bukavu, Goma, Lubumbashi, Mbandaka and Mbuji-Mayi. Demonstrations continued during the following days, evolving into a larger protest movement, spearheaded by youths, against the controversial clause in the law.
In Kinshasa, police stations, town halls and Chinese businesses were looted and vehicles burned, and some administrative buildings were set on fire in Goma. The Government promptly deployed riot police and troops, including the Republican Guard, to respond to the protests. Disproportionate force was used in some instances and there were reports of alleged human rights violations committed by the national security forces. MONUSCO documented the killing of at least 20 civilians and the wounding of 64 others by the police and the Republican Guard from 19 to 23 January in Kinshasa and Goma...At least 480 individuals across the country, many from the political opposition, were arrested.
...
On 22 January, the Senate passed the bill after having removed the clause referring to the population census. The protests subsided nationwide following the announcement by the President of the National Assembly, Aubin Minaku, on 24January, that there was agreement on removing the contentious clause. The revised text of the electoral law was adopted by both houses of Parliament on 25 January and was promulgated by the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 12 February ...”.
As regards the current political situation in the DRC, the two most recent reports of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, issued by the United Nations Security Council and covering the major developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the period from 4 January to 8 March 2019 (see S/2019/218, 7 March 2019) and from 2 October to 31 December 2018 (S/2019/6, 4 January 2019), respectively, state the following:
“... The security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remained relatively stable following the announcement of the results of the polls [following election on 30 December 2018 of President Félix Tshisekedi]. In the western part of the country, the security situation has remained relatively calm, notwithstanding an outbreak of violence in Kikwit, Kwilu Province [south-west], following the publication of the provisional results of the presidential election on 10 January. The security situation in Yumbi territory, Mai-Ndombe Province [west], has stabilized but has not improved significantly since the violent clashes of 17 and 18 December 2018, which resulted in the deaths of at least 535 people. Some Congolese armed groups and militias, particularly in the Kasai region [south-west], expressed readiness to lay down their weapons, and, in certain instances, surrendered. Congolese armed groups, however, while less active, continued to pose security concerns in Ituri [north-east], the Kasai region, Maniema [east] and North Kivu, South Kivu [both in the east] and Tanganyika Provinces [sout-east] ...”.
“...The security situation remained fragile in some parts of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, where armed groups continued to carry out destabilizing activities...”.
Further, on 29 March 2019 the UN Security Council adopted Resolution S/Res/2463 (2019) concerning the DRC, in which it, inter alia, noted:
“... the preliminary actions taken by President Tshisekedi to put an end to restrictions of the political space in the DRC, in particular arbitrary arrests and detention of members of the political opposition and of civil society, as well as restrictions of fundamental freedoms such as the freedom of opinion and expression, freedom of the press, and the right of peaceful assembly...”.
It also condemned:
“...the violence witnessed in Eastern DRC and the Kasaï region ... the violence committed in Yumbi territory on 16–18 December 2018, some of which the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office (UNJHRO) reported may constitute crimes against humanity...”,
It reiterated its concern about the increase in reported human rights violations by State agents in 2018 and welcomed:
“... in that regard the decision by President Tshisekedi to hold security forces and police accountable for violations of human rights, release political prisoners, and close irregular detention centres, and his commitments to ensure the Government of the DRC respects human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as to investigate violations of human rights by State agents ...
...investigations by the Congolese authorities on any disproportionate use of force by security forces on peaceful protesters...”.
The document entitled “Country Policy and Information Note”, issued by the United Kingdom Home Office in January 2019, contains a review of the country guidance case of BM and Others (returnees-criminal and non-criminal) examined in 2015 by the United Kingdom Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) (hereinafter, “the Upper Tribunal”), and provides the following information concerning the assessment of risk in respect of nationals of the DRC returning to their country of origin from the United Kingdom:
“2.4.7. Since the promulgation of BM and Others in June 2015, the UK has returned over 50 Congolese unsuccessful asylum seekers (mostly by forced removal) to the DRC. Other European states, including Belgium, Estonia, France, Norway, and Sweden have also returned Congolese nationals to the DRC, including unsuccessful asylum seekers (see Returns statistics). There is limited information about the situation faced by returnees [upon] arrival in the DRC, although there continue to be a number of organisations that monitor the general human rights situation in the DRC. Some NGO and media sources have reported that unsuccessful asylum seekers have faced difficulties on return to the DRC, including detention and ill-treatment [...] However, information about the treatment of returnees is limited, anecdotal, and lacks specific detail [...]. It continues to be the case that the Home Office is not aware of independently verified evidence of ill-treatment on return solely because the person is an unsuccessful asylum seeker from the UK.
4.8. When taken as a whole, the evidence does not establish that there are very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to depart from the case law of BM and Others. A person whose asylum claim has been carefully considered on its individual facts but found not to require protection because of their profile and activities is unlikely to be at risk of serious harm on return by virtue of the fact that they are an unsuccessful asylum seeker ...”.