The case originated in an application (no. 6095/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Igor Aleksandrovich Kalyapin (“the applicant”), on 24 December 2008.
The applicant was represented by Ms O. Sadovskaya, a lawyer practising in Nizhniy Novgorod. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his escorting to a police station had been unlawful and arbitrary and that he had had no enforceable right to compensation or effective remedies in this connection.
On 16 May 2012 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Nizhniy Novgorod.
The applicant is the head of the Committee against Torture, a nongovernmental organisation situated in Nizhniy Novgorod, which assists victims of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment by carrying out independent investigations, and monitors human rights violations involving ill-treatment in Russia, particularly in situations where there is a high risk of torture being used on individuals.
On 9 March 2007 three people lodged a notification with Nizhniy Novgorod city hall stating that they intended to hold a march and rally, collectively called the “Dissenters’ March”, at certain venues (one of them being Gorkiy Square) on 24 March 2007. On 12 March 2007 the city hall replied stating that it was not possible to hold the public event at those venues, and suggested another venue. One of the event organisers sought a judicial review of the city hall’s reply. On 22 March 2007 a district court judge upheld the reply. On 19 and 23 March 2007 the organisers received written documents from a prosecutor’s office warning them that they could be breaking the law in the event that the rally was held as planned.
According to the applicant, at some point he found out that the local opposition had informed the city hall of their intention to hold a protest rally, the “Dissenters’ March”, on 24 March 2007, and that the city hall had opposed it. Neither he nor any other staff members of the Committee against Torture took any part in organising or running the rally. The applicant knew that the event would take place at Gorkiy Square even without the authority’s approval, and supposed that the authorities would take measures to impede the rally by using police intervention, which might lead to human rights violations. In the applicant’s submission, he therefore decided to go to the venue of the protest as an “observer” so that he would be on hand to assist any individuals who might become victims of such violations. According to the applicant, he told the public relations unit of the regional office of the Ministry of the Interior of his plans.
On his arrival at the square where the rally was being held, the applicant saw a group of around twenty participants, several journalists, dozens of police officers, the Special Force squad (ОМОН) and other lawenforcement officials sealing off the square. He filmed the event. Several members of his staff were also present at the rally venue.
As soon as the protesters started shouting slogans, including those opposing “Putin’s regime”, and as soon as the journalists approached them, they were all surrounded by police officers who started forcibly taking demonstrators and journalists to buses parked nearby. When the buses started to become overcrowded, the police released certain journalists.
The applicant submitted several pieces of video footage recorded from different angles and taken from a video-recording made, inter alia, by the police. They show, inter alia, what may appear to be (i) several squad officers escorting a person past the applicant, who is extending his hand towards the arrestee; and (ii) the applicant talking on a mobile telephone and being apprehended by officers who then twist his arms behind his back, momentarily causing him fall to the ground. Some pieces of footage show a police officer with a loudspeaker reading a text and/or giving a speech representing a public announcement relating to the illegality of the rally and breach of the Public Events Act (“the PEA”).
The applicant intended to leave but was forced onto one of the buses by a police officer. Apparently, shortly before that he approached one of his colleagues, who was being apprehended. According to the applicant, he merely wanted to take a camera from him that belonged to the Committee and for which he was responsible.
According to the applicant, he was placed in a bus at around 12.30 p.m. After approximately half an hour, the bus arrived at the Avtozavodskiy District Office of the Interior (“the police station”). The applicant was taken inside the police station, where he was kept for several hours. It does not appear that any procedural measures were taken in respect of him. He was released later that day. According to the applicant, he spent approximately four hours in detention, from the time he had been apprehended at the place of the rally until the time he was released.
Immediately thereafter the applicant registered a written complaint with the chief of the Avtozavodskiy police station, indicating, inter alia, that he had been deprived of his liberty at 12.05 p.m. He was interviewed in relation to this complaint between 2.30 and 3.30 p.m. the same day.
On 24 March 2007, further to his complaint to the chief of the police station, the applicant also complained to the prosecutor’s office of the Nizhniy Novgorod Region (“the regional prosecutor’s office”) about his detention earlier that day. He stated that he had not been an organiser or active participant of the rally, just an observer who had not taken any action in breach of the law. Moreover, he had had his identity documents with him, but had nevertheless been forcibly taken to a police station and held there for some time. The applicant also complained that he had not been informed of the reasons for his detention or any charges against him, and that no formal record of his detention had been drawn up.
On 26 March 2007 the regional prosecutor’s office instructed the Nizhegorodskiy district prosecutor’s office of Nizhniy Novgorod (“the district prosecutor’s office”) to carry out a pre-investigation inquiry into the applicant’s allegations.
In a decision of 4 April 2007 the district prosecutor’s office refused to institute criminal proceedings in connection with the applicant’s complaint owing to the absence of any evidence that a crime had been committed. The decision referred to an explanation given by the applicant during the inquiry, where he had described the events of 24 March 2007 in detail. It then stated that to date no reply had been received to enquiries sent by that prosecutor’s office to medical facilities as to whether the applicant had sought any medical assistance on the date in question. The decision then concluded that the applicant’s allegations had not been confirmed during the inquiry and that there was no evidence that the police officers had committed a crime punishable under Article 286 of the Russian Criminal Code (abuse of power by a public official).
On 18 April 2007 a supervising prosecutor set aside the decision of 4 April 2007 as unfounded, stating that the inquiry was incomplete. He ordered that a number of steps be taken during an additional inquiry. In particular, it was necessary to verify whether any report or record of the applicant’s detention had been drawn up, to receive a reply to the enquiries sent to the medical expert body, and to take other necessary steps.
On 24 April 2007 the district prosecutor’s office again decided to dispense with criminal proceedings with reference to the absence of any evidence of a crime. The decision again referred to the applicant’s description of the events of 24 March 2007 given during the inquiry. It went on to note that, as was established, the applicant had not applied for any medical assistance during the relevant period. The decision also referred to an information note submitted by the police station, which stated that on 24 March 2007 he had been taken to that station without any accompanying documents, and that the identity of the arresting officers who had escorted him was unknown, with the result that it had been impossible to interview them in connection with the events in question. The decision then concluded that the applicant’s allegations had not been confirmed during the preinvestigation inquiry and that there was no evidence that any police officers had committed a crime punishable under Article 286 of the Criminal Code.
On 26 April 2007 a supervising prosecutor quashed the decision of 24 April 2007, stating that the inquiry was incomplete. He instructed the investigator in charge to conduct an additional inquiry and to take a number of steps, including examining a video-recording of the demonstration of 24 March 2007 and interviewing the applicants and officers in command of the police units who had been deployed to ensure crowd safety.
By a decision of 27 April 2007 the district prosecutor’s office refused to institute criminal proceedings for the same reasons as those invoked in its two previous decisions. It further referred to the absence of a crime (отсутствие события преступления) under Article 286 of the Criminal Code. The decision also referred to the applicant’s description of the events of 24 March 2007 which he had made previously, replies from medical facilities that he had not applied for any medical assistance, and the information report of the police station stating that on the date in question he had been brought to the station without any accompanying documents. In addition, the decision referred to explanations from some police officers, without providing their names, who had stated that they had taken part in apprehending participants of the unauthorised demonstration on 24 March 2007 and taking them to police buses. They denied applying any physical force to those apprehended or receiving any complaints from them. The decision also referred to a video-recording of the demonstration and stated that it could be seen that the applicant had shown resistance when being apprehended, and, in particular, had attempted to tear himself away from the police officers holding him. According to the decision, it was also clear from the video-recording that the police officers had not administered any blows to the applicant. The decision thus concluded that the applicant’s allegations had not been confirmed during the inquiry and that there was no evidence that the police officers had committed a crime under Article 286 of the Criminal Code.
The applicant’s lawyer challenged the decision of 27 April 2007 before the Nizhegorodskiy District Court of Nizhniy Novgorod (“the District Court”). He reiterated that there had been no reason to detain the applicant on 24 March 2007 and that he had never been charged with an offence or had any proceedings brought against him in connection with the events that day. The applicant’s detention had therefore been unlawful and arbitrary, in breach of Article 5 of the Convention. He also complained that the applicant had no effective remedies available to him in connection with his complaint concerning his detention, in breach of Article 13 of the Convention.
In a decision of 18 March 2008 the District Court rejected the applicant’s lawyer’s complaint, holding that the decision of 27 April 2007 had been lawful, well-founded and reasoned, and that the inquiry into the applicant’s allegations had been thorough. Those allegations had been carefully examined and found to be unsubstantiated, so the investigating authorities had been justified in concluding that there was no evidence of illegal conduct or abuse of power on the part of the police officers.
The applicant’s lawyer appealed against the first-instance court’s decision, complaining, inter alia, that the court had failed to address his arguments concerning the unlawful deprivation of the applicant’s liberty on 24 March 2007.
On 6 May 2008 the  (“the ”) quashed the decision of 18 March 2008 and ordered that the case be examined anew.
By a decision of 20 May 2008 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s lawyer’s complaint against the decision of 27 April 2007, stating that it had been lawful, well-founded and well-reasoned and had met the relevant requirements of the law. It further stated that the inquiry into the applicant’s allegations had been comprehensive and that all his arguments had been examined. The court also examined the video-recording of the events of 24 March 2007 and stated that it was clear that the applicant had not been assaulted while being apprehended by the police; moreover, he had never sought any medical assistance. The court thus confirmed that the conclusion of the investigating authorities concerning the absence of any evidence that a crime had been committed had been correct, as it had not been established during the inquiry that the police officers had used any physical violence against the applicant.
The applicant’s lawyer appealed against the first-instance judgment. He complained, in particular, that the court had not assessed his arguments concerning a violation of the applicant’s right to liberty by the police on account of his unlawful deprivation of liberty on 24 March 2007.
On 4 July 2008 the Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s lawyer’s appeal and upheld the decision of 20 May 2008, largely relying on the District Court’s reasoning. In particular, the court mentioned that the police had acted in compliance with the Police Act, particularly sections 10 and 11 thereof (see paragraphs 35 below). The Regional Court made no further findings relating to the applicant’s argument pertaining to his deprivation of liberty on 24 March 2007.
In 2012 the applicant brought civil proceedings before the Nizhegorodskiy District Court of Nizhniy Novgorod, seeking compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage caused by the unlawful deprivation of his liberty on 24 March 2007. He claimed 1,000 Russian roubles (RUB  equivalent to 30 euros at the time).
By a judgment of 28 November 2012 the applicant’s claim was dismissed. Referring to Article 61 of the Code of Civil Procedure (“the CCP”), the court relied on the decision of 27 April 2007 as upheld on judicial review (see paragraph 21 above) as regards the circumstances already established by an earlier final judgment. Relying on Articles 1069 and 1070 § 2 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 33 below) and Articles 55 and 56 of the CCP, the court concluded that the applicant had not adduced any evidence to show that any moral or physical suffering had been caused to him by any of the actions of the police officers. Lastly, the court noted that Article 1100 of the Civil Code contained a list of situations allowing for compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage, without the need to prove any guilt; the present case did not fall within the scope of those situations.
The applicant allegedly received a copy of the judgment in February 2013 after several unsuccessful requests for a copy to be sent to him by mail. He appealed in March 2013 with a request that the time-limit for appealing be reset. On 17 April 2013 the District Court refused to reset the time-limit, and did not process the appeal before the Nizhniy Novgorod Regional Court.
Until 15 September 2015 the procedure for examining complaints about decisions, acts or omissions of State and municipal authorities and officials was governed by Chapter 25 of the CCP and the Judicial Review Act (Law no. 4866-1 of 27 April 1993 on the judicial review of decisions and acts violating citizens’ rights and freedoms). They both provided that a citizen could lodge a complaint with a court about an act or decision by any State or municipal authority or official if he considered that the act or decision had violated his rights and freedoms (Article 254 of the CCP and section 1 of the Judicial Review Act). The complaint could concern any decision, act or omission which had violated the citizen’s rights or freedoms, impeded the exercise of his rights or freedoms or imposed a duty or liability on him (Article 255 of the CCP and section 2 of the Judicial Review Act). For a more detailed description of the Chapter 25 procedure, see Roman Zakharov v. Russia ([GC], no. 47143/06, §§ 92-100, ECHR 2015), and Lashmankin and Others v. Russia (nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, §§ 280-85, 7 February 2017).
Damage caused to a person or property of a citizen must be compensated in full by the tortfeasor. The tortfeasor is not liable for damage if he or she proves that the damage has been caused through no fault of his or her own (Article 1064 §§ 1 and 2 of the Civil Code). State and municipal bodies and officials are liable for damage caused to a citizen by their unlawful actions or omissions (Article 1069 of the Civil Code). Irrespective of any fault on the part of State officials, the State or regional treasury is liable for damage sustained by a citizen on account of (i) an unlawful criminal conviction or prosecution; (ii) an unlawful application of a preventive measure, and (iii) an unlawful sentence of administrative detention (Article 1070 § 1 of the Civil Code).
A court may impose on the tortfeasor an obligation to compensate non-pecuniary damage (physical or mental suffering). Compensation for non-pecuniary damage is unrelated to any award in respect of pecuniary damage (Articles 151 § 1 and 1099 of the Civil Code). The amount of compensation is determined by reference to the degree of fault on the part of the tortfeasor and other significant circumstances. The court also takes into account the extent of physical or mental suffering in relation to the victim’s individual characteristics (Article 151 § 2 and Article 1101 of the Civil Code). Irrespective of the tortfeasor’s fault, non-pecuniary damage must be compensated if the damage was caused (i) by a hazardous device; (ii) in the event of an unlawful conviction or prosecution, unlawful application of a preventive measure or unlawful sentence of administrative detention, and (iii) through dissemination of information damaging to honour, dignity or reputation (Article 1100 of the Civil Code).
Pursuant to section 10 of the Police Act 1991 (Federal Law no. 1026-1 of 18 April 1991), in force at the material time, the police had a duty to prevent and put an end to crimes and administrative offences, identify the circumstances in which they were committed, and escort (конвоировать) and detain arrestees and those remanded in custody. Section 11 of the Police Act provided that the police were empowered to require a person to end the administrative offence and to carry out administrative arrests or other measures prescribed by the legislation relating to administrative offences. An application could be lodged with a senior police officer, prosecutor or court to complain that the actions of a police officer had led to a violation of a citizen’s rights or freedoms (section 39).
It is pertinent to take into account the statutory conditions, aims and grounds for taking a person to a police station (for instance, by way of administrative escorting), as well as the specific circumstances of a given situation when it is applied. Thus, such a measure should not be arbitrary and should “take account of the proportionality as regards the scope of limitations on one’s rights (for instance, as the case may be, freedom of expression or freedom of assembly) vis-à-vis the actual necessity arising from the circumstances as well as the practicability of attaining the aim pursued by the measure” (Ruling no. 8-P of 17 March 2017 by the Russian Constitutional Court in relation to section 13(13) of the Police Act 2011). After an escort record has been compiled and if the grounds for escorting are no longer compelling, the person must be released without delay. Continued detention of the person in that case may become arbitrary, thus violating his or her right to liberty and personal security as protected by Article 22 of the Constitution and Article 5 of the Convention. Individuals have the right to challenge the escort measure applied to them (ibid.).
Article 27.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) provides for a number of measures, including administrative escorting (административное доставление) of a suspect to a police station and administrative arrest (административное задержание). Such measures may be used for the purpose of putting an end to an administrative offence, to establish an offender’s identity, to compile an administrative-offence record where this cannot be done on the spot, to ensure timely and correct examination of a case, and to enforce a decision taken in a case.
Article 27.2 of the CAO defines the procedure of escorting someone to a police station as where an offender is compelled to follow the relevant officer for the purposes of compiling an administrativeoffence record when it cannot be done on the spot.
The Constitutional Court has held that this measure of compulsion, which amounts to a temporary restriction of a person’s freedom of movement, should be applied only when it is necessary and within short time frames (Decision no. 149-O-O of 17 January 2012). Subsequently, the Constitutional Court stated that both administrative escorting and administrative arrest amounted to “restrictions imposed on [a person’s] liberty” (see, for instance, Ruling no. 14-P of 23 May 2017).
Pursuant to Article 27.3 of the CAO, in exceptional cases (в исключительных случаях) relating to the need (необходимо для) for proper and expedient examination of an administrative case or for securing the execution of any sentence imposed for an administrative offence, the person concerned may be placed under administrative arrest.
In Ruling no. 2 of 10 February 2009 the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia (paragraph 7) stated that the procedure under Chapter 25 of the CCP was not applicable to challenges against actions, omissions or decisions for which the CAO did not provide for a review procedure and which, being intrinsically linked to a given case of administrative-offence charges, was not amenable to a separate review (evidence in a case such as the record of certain measures, for instance an escort record or arrest record in administrative-offence cases). In such circumstances, arguments relating to the inadmissibility of a piece of evidence or a measure could be presented during examination of the administrative-offence case or on appeal against a decision in such a case. However, where CAO proceedings were discontinued, any actions taken during such proceedings could then be challenged under Chapter 25 of the CCP, if such actions impinged upon the person’s rights or freedoms, created obstacles to their being exercised, or unlawfully imposed liability. The same approach was applicable where no CAO proceedings were instituted. This Ruling ceased to be applicable in September 2016.
The Constitutional Court held that the special rules contained in Articles 1070 and 1100 of the Civil Code (concerning State liability, without the need to prove a public official’s guilt) had to be interpreted as affording individuals the opportunity to claim compensation for being placed under administrative arrest in the context of offences punishable by administrative detention or administrative removal (that is where Article 27.5 § 3, allowing the police to hold an arrested person for up to forty-eight hours, was applicable) (Ruling no. 9-P of 16 June 2009). The courts must assess both the formal lawfulness of the measure and the reasons for it, in terms of its fairness and proportionality (Decision no. 149O-O of 17 January 2012). With regard to the reasons cited in the administrative-arrest record, the courts must ascertain whether arrest was the only acceptable measure in the circumstances (Decision no. 1049-O of 2 July 2013).
The Ministry of the Interior Decree no. 444 of 2 June 2005 listed law enforcement officers who had statutory authority to compile an offence record on the spot, in particular for offences under Article 20.2 of the CAO (section 5.9 of the Appendix to the Decree).