The case originated in an application (no. 49658/09) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Greek national, Mr Dimitrios Dimopoulos (“the applicant”), on 4 September 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Vasiliadis, a lawyer practising in Thessaloniki. The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent’s delegates, Mrs F. Dedousi, Legal Adviser at the State Legal Council, and Mr D. Kalogiros, Legal Representative at the State Legal Council.
The applicant alleged that his conditions of detention amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment under Article 3. He also complained that his application challenging his provisional detention before the Indictment Division of the Thessaloniki Criminal Court was not decided speedily and that his request to appear in person before it was tacitly refused, in violation of Article 5 § 4.
On 19 November 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in .
On 16 January 2009 he was arrested by the Greek police for drug trafficking and criminal charges were brought against him.
On 21 January 2009, with the concurring opinion of the Prosecutor of the Criminal Court of Thessaloniki, the investigating judge remanded him in custody with effect from 16 January 2009, the date of his arrest (order no. 4/2009).
Subsequently, the applicant was transferred to the premises of the Thessaloniki General Police Headquarters.
On 26 January 2009 he lodged an application with the Indictment Division of the Thessaloniki Criminal Court, according to Article 285 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, challenging his provisional detention. He also included in his application a request to appear personally before the Indictment Division to support his request for release.
On 14 May 2009 the Indictment Division of the Thessaloniki Criminal Court – after hearing the prosecutor – dismissed the application (order no. 506/2009). No reference was made to the applicant’s request to appear in person before the Indictment Division. It was noted that the evidence gathered during the investigation of the case confirmed that the applicant was selling drugs on a commercial basis. Further it was considered that, taking into account the circumstances of the case, the provisional detention of the applicant was lawful, since it was likely that the applicant would commit more crimes if released.
Subsequently, on 25 June 2009, by order no. 700/2009, the Indictment Division of the Thessaloniki Criminal Court decided to extend the applicant’s detention until 16 January 2010. No information was provided as to whether the applicant is still in detention.
Between 16 January and 22 April 2009 the applicant was detained at the Thessaloniki General Police Headquarters.
He claims that the conditions of detention there were deplorable. In particular, he notes the lack of sanitary products and sleeping facilities. He submitted that the detention area was overcrowded, with poor ventilation and insufficient natural light. In particular, the applicant noted that there were ten inmates per cell, which was over two times its design capacity. Some detainees were forced to sleep on the floor. There was no space to walk around. The cells and sanitary facilities were dirty. The poor quality of the food offered forced inmates to order food from outside. The prisoners had no opportunity to see doctors, even though some were affected by infectious diseases and others were drug users suffering from withdrawal.
In particular, as far as the lack of medical care is concerned, the applicant stressed that he has been drug-addicted for many years and he submitted a medical certificate to support his allegation. In this connection, he claimed that he was deprived of sufficient pharmaceutical treatment and regular supervision by a physician.
On 22 April 2009 the applicant was transferred to Diavata Prison.
Article 285 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which concerns the right to lodge an application challenging remand in custody, reads as follows:
“1. An accused may lodge an objection to a remand order with the indictment division of the criminal court. The application shall be made within five days of the date of detention ... The application is transmitted to the First Instance Prosecutor and is submitted without delay to the indictment division, which decides definitively on the issue ...
The indictment division may overturn the remand order or replace it with preventive measures ...”
Further, as far as the provisions relating to the procedure before indictment divisions are concerned, in accordance with Article 306 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the deliberations of indictment divisions are not public.  Decisions are taken by a majority, after the prosecutor has been heard and has left the room (Article 138).
Article 572 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, reads as follows:
“1. The First Instance Prosecutor of the place where the sentence is served, shall exercise the powers provided by the Code [of Criminal Procedure] regarding the treatment of prisoners, and shall monitor the execution of sentences and the application of security measures in accordance with this Code, the Criminal Code and other related laws.
To perform the above functions, the First Instance Prosecutor visits the prison at least once a week. During these visits, meetings are held with inmates who have previously requested them ...”
From 15 to 16 March 2007 the Ombudsman visited the Thessaloniki General Police Headquarters in order to examine, inter alia, the prisoners’ conditions of detention.
The Ombudsman noted that there had been a significant increase in the number of inmates detained on police premises of the Thessaloniki General Police Headquarters since 2005. In particular, he emphasised that there was a large number of aliens for whom deportation proceedings were pending. He added that they were detained in police stations for periods varying between ten days and three months. The Ombudsman observed that the infrastructure of the Thessaloniki Police Headquarters and of police stations in general was quite unlike that of detention centres, and therefore they were only suitable for detentions of very short duration. The Ombudsman made reference to a police document (no. 1026/5/22/1-θ/30.3.2007) which acknowledges a lack of sufficient space in police stations, total absence of space to walk around, hygiene problems, deficiencies with respect to medical care, and security problems. In addition, the Ombudsman notes the lack of infrastructure for feeding the prisoners. It was observed that, instead of providing food to inmates, each one received from the authorities the amount of 5.87 euros (EUR) per day. For the Ombudsman, this amount would not always be sufficient, since this depended on the pricing of the dishes offered by the restaurant, which was the sole meal provider for the police station.
The Ombudsman concluded that detention in police stations for long periods constituted a violation of Article 3 of the Convention. He recommended that the competent authorities ensure as soon as possible for each person detained for more than twenty-four hours the opportunity to exercise in the open air and receive proper meals.
The Ombudsman reminded the Ministry about his report dated 11 May 2007 (see paragraphs 19-21 above) and underlined again the problem of long periods of detention in police stations. According to the Ombudsman, this problem proved to be more important in northern Greece because of the refusal of the  judicial prison to accept a greater number of inmates. The Ombudsman noted that the conditions of detention had not improved in the two year period that had elapsed since May 2007. He noted that the situation was critical for both detainees and police officers, as it was also confirmed by a report of the Police Directorate of Imathia. The Ombudsman had already received complaints on the subject from the Thessaloniki Bar Association and the Greek League of Human Rights. At the same time, a group of detainees began a hunger strike. In conclusion, the Ombudsman asked the Ministry to take all necessary steps to tackle the issue in question.
The CPT visited, among others, the  immigration detention premises. It noted the lack of beds in the cells and that detainees were sleeping on dirty mattresses on the floor. In addition, the report observed the absence of space to walk and do physical exercise, and stressed that each inmate was entitled to EUR 5.87 per day to order meals delivered to them from outside prison. On this point, the CPT referred to the prisoners’ complaints alleging that with this amount of money they could not buy more than two sandwiches per day. The CPT recommended to the national authorities to ensure that everyone detained in places for aliens awaiting deportation was served a dish (preferably hot), at least once a day.