The case originated in an application (no. 11620/07) against the Italian Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Venezuelan national, Mr Manuel Rogelio Gallardo Sanchez (“the applicant”), on 7 March 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Koulouroudis, a lawyer practising in Athens. The Italian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Spatafora.
The applicant alleged that the length of his detention pending extradition entailed a violation of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention.
It was decided that this complaint would instead be examined under Article 5 § 1 (f). On 2 May 2013 notice of the application was given to the Government.
On 16 December 2013 a copy of the Government’s observations was sent to the applicant’s representative, inviting him to file with the Court his observations in reply and his claims by way of just satisfaction. In spite of the interest manifested by the applicant in pursuing the examination of the case, his representative did not file any observations within the time-limit fixed for such purpose.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant, Mr Manuel Rogelio Gallardo Sanchez, is a Venezuelan national who was born in 1965 and lives in Cape Town (South Africa).
On 19 April 2005 the applicant, who had been accused of arson by the Greek authorities, was taken into custody pending extradition by the Rome police on the basis of an arrest warrant issued by the Athens Court of Appeal on 26 January 2005 under the European Convention on Extradition of 13 December 1957.
On 22 April 2005 the L’Aquila Court of Appeal validated the applicant’s arrest and ordered his detention.
On 26 April 2005 the Ministry of Justice asked the Court of Appeal to extend his detention.
At the hearing of 27 April 2005, the President of the Court of Appeal, ruling under Article 717 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 25 below), established the applicant’s identity and asked if he gave his consent to his extradition. He did not consent.
On 9 June 2005 the Ministry of Justice informed the Court of Appeal that, on 25 May 2005, the Greek authorities had sent a request for extradition together with all the requisite supporting documents.
On 21 June 2005 the public prosecutor’s office asked the Court of Appeal to grant the extradition request.
The hearing was scheduled for 15 December 2005. At the request of the applicant’s representative, it was postponed until 12 January 2006.
Without any prior investigation the Court of Appeal approved the extradition by a decision of 12 January 2006, deposited on 30 January 2006. It verified the conformity of the extradition request with the European Convention on Extradition and its compliance with the ne bis in idem and double-criminality principles, and it ruled out the possibility that the proceedings had been brought for any discriminatory or political reasons.
On 3 March 2006 the applicant appealed on points of law, arguing in particular that the request for his extradition had been sent by the Greek authorities after the forty-day time-limit provided for in Article 16 § 4 of the European Convention on Extradition, which meant in his view that his detention had been unlawful. He further argued that the charges laid against him by the Greek authorities were not based on serious indications of guilt. He submitted that he should therefore be released.
In a judgment of 11 May 2006, deposited with the registry on 18 September 2006, the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal with only one page of reasoning, in particular because it found that the extradition request had been received within the time-limit provided for in the European Convention on Extradition and that it did not have jurisdiction to examine whether serious indications of guilt had been adduced.
In the meantime, on three occasions between June and September 2005, the applicant had applied to the Rome Court of Appeal, unsuccessfully, requesting his release. In its last decision of 27 October 2005, adopted in private in compliance with the adversarial principle, and without any prior investigation, the Court of Appeal found that there was no reason to depart from its two previous decisions, having regard to the ongoing risk that the applicant might abscond, even though the authorities had taken away his passport, and to the State’s obligation to comply with its international commitments.
On 9 October 2006 the Minister of Justice signed the extradition order.
On 26 October 2006 the applicant was extradited to Greece.
RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENT
The European Convention on Extradition, signed in Paris on 13 December 1957 and ratified by Italy by Law no. 300 of 30 January 1963, came into force in respect of Italy on 4 November 1963. It was amended by the Second Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Extradition, signed on 17 March 1978, which came into force in respect of Italy on 23 April 1985. The relevant provisions, as amended, read as follows.
“The requested Party may refuse to extradite the person claimed if the competent authorities of such Party are proceeding against him in respect of the offence or offences for which extradition is requested.”
“Extradition shall not be granted if final judgment has been passed by the competent authorities of the requested Party upon the person claimed in respect of the offence or offences for which extradition is requested. Extradition may be refused if the competent authorities of the requested Party have decided either not to institute or to terminate proceedings in respect of the same offence or offences.”
“1.  The request [for extradition] shall be in writing and shall be addressed by the Ministry of Justice of the requesting Party to the Ministry of Justice of the requested Party; however, use of the diplomatic channel is not excluded. Other means of communication may be arranged by direct agreement between two or more Parties.
The request shall be supported by:
(a)  the original or an authenticated copy of the conviction and sentence or detention order immediately enforceable or of the warrant of arrest or other order having the same effect and issued in accordance with the procedure laid down in the law of the requesting Party;
(b)  a statement of the offences for which extradition is requested. The time and place of their commission, their legal descriptions and a reference to the relevant legal provisions shall be set out as accurately as possible; and
(c)  a copy of the relevant enactments or, where this is not possible, a statement of the relevant law and as accurate a description as possible of the person claimed, together with any other information which will help to establish his identity and nationality.”
“1.  In case of urgency the competent authorities of the requesting Party may request the provisional arrest of the person sought. The competent authorities of the requested Party shall decide the matter in accordance with its law.
The request for provisional arrest shall state that one of the documents mentioned in Article 12, paragraph 2.a, exists and that it is intended to send a request for extradition. It shall also state for what offence extradition will be requested and when and where such offence was committed and shall so far as possible give a description of the person sought.
A request for provisional arrest shall be sent to the competent authorities of the requested Party either through the diplomatic channel or direct by post or telegraph or through the International Criminal Police Organisation (Interpol) or by any other means affording evidence in writing or accepted by the requested Party. The requesting authority shall be informed without delay of the result of its request.
Provisional arrest may be terminated if, within a period of 18 days after arrest, the requested Party has not received the request for extradition and the documents mentioned in Article 12. It shall not, in any event, exceed 40 days from the date of such arrest. The possibility of provisional release at any time is not excluded, but the requested Party shall take any measures which it considers necessary to prevent the escape of the person sought.
Release shall not prejudice re-arrest and extradition if a request for extradition is received subsequently.”
RELEVANT DOMESTIC LAW AND PRACTICE
As regards the application of precautionary measures, Article 715 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP) provides that, at the request of a foreign State, the Court of Appeal may order the provisional arrest of an individual for the purposes of extradition proceedings. The request may be accepted (a)  if the foreign State is acting pursuant to an enforceable judgment of conviction or an arrest warrant and intends to send an extradition request; (b)  if the foreign State has provided a description of the relevant acts in support of the extradition request, indicated the offence with which the wanted person is charged, and provided a description of that person; (c)  if there is a risk that the person might abscond. Notification of the application of the measure is given by the Minister of Justice to the authorities of the foreign State. The precautionary measure will be discontinued if the foreign State does not send the extradition request and supporting documents, within forty days following that notification, to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Justice.
Under Article 716 § 3 of the CCP, the President of the Court of Appeal must confirm the provisional arrest within ninety-six hours and order the application of a custodial measure.
Under Article 716 § 4 of the CCP, the precautionary measure will be discontinued if the Ministry of Justice does not ask the Court of Appeal, within ten days from the date of the confirmation of the arrest, to order the individual’s retention in custody.
Under Article 717 of the CCP, where the domestic authorities have ordered a custodial measure, the President of the Court of Appeal will schedule a hearing in order to identify the individual concerned and establish whether the latter gives his or her consent to extradition.
In accordance with Article 714 of the CCP, the length of the custodial measure may not exceed one year and six months. It may, however, be extended for a total period not exceeding three months.
Under Article 718 of the CCP, the custodial measure may, at the request of one of the parties or spontaneously, be discontinued by the Court of Appeal or the Court of Cassation, sitting as a court of first instance. The Court of Appeal deliberates in private after hearing the parties. The decision of the Court of Appeal may be appealed against before the Court of Cassation in so far as the grounds of appeal are based on a violation of statute law. In that connection the Court of Cassation has, on several occasions, established that it does not have jurisdiction to examine appeals on points of law in which the appellant is seeking release on the ground that the risk of his or her absconding, which was initially the justification for the custodial measure, has ceased to exist (see, for example, Court of Cassation, judgment no. 33545 of 7 September 2010, deposited with the registry on 13 September 2010; more generally, on the lack of jurisdiction to examine grounds based on arbitrariness in the reasoning of the Court of Appeal’s decisions, see Court of Cassation, judgment no. 37123 of 24 September 2012, deposited with the registry on 26 September 2012).
As regards the judicial phase of the extradition, as provided for in Article 704 of the CCP, the Court of Appeal rules in private having heard the parties, gathered the relevant information and carried out the necessary verifications. It must establish whether the conditions laid down by domestic and international law have been satisfied: in addition to the rules of the European Convention on Extradition, Article 705 of the CCP requires the courts to verify whether the person concerned has been charged with a political offence, whether he or she risks being tried according to procedures which do not guarantee the protection of fundamental rights, or whether, once extradited, he or she risks being subjected to treatment that is inhuman, degrading or discriminatory, or to any action that may breach one of the person’s fundamental rights. Under the same Article, where the European Convention on Extradition applies, the courts are not entitled to examine whether or not there are serious indications of guilt (gravi indizi di colpevolezza).
Under Article 706 of the CCP, that decision may be challenged, on the facts and on points of law, before the Court of Cassation, which will rule in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 704 of the CCP.
Article 708 of the CCP provides that the Minister of Justice must decide, within a period of forty-five days following the depositing of the Court of Cassation’s decision approving the extradition, whether the individual is to be extradited. If the Minister fails to issue a decision, or decides to reject the extradition, the custodial measure must be discontinued.