The case originated in an application (no. 10424/05) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Ruslan Kurkaev (“the applicant”), on 21 March 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr H. K. Elban, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent. The Russian Government did not exercise their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b)).
On 29 September 2009 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in Istanbul.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant was living in Grozny, Chechnya. Fearing for his life he left for Azerbaijan in August 2000, from where he flew to  on 4 September 2000.
On 23 June 2004 the applicant and a number of other individuals were taken into custody by police officers of the Anti-Terrorist Branch of the Istanbul Security Headquarters, within the framework of the security measures implemented for the 2004 NATO summit in .
On 25 June 2004 the applicant was transferred to the Foreigners' Department of the Istanbul Security Headquarters with a view to deportation. On 29 June 2004 the  issued a decision of non-prosecution, holding that there was no evidence to initiate criminal proceedings against the applicant or other individuals taken into detention in connection with the 2004 NATO summit.
The applicant then continued to be held in the Foreigners' Department of the Istanbul Security Headquarters under section 23 of Law no. 5683 as an administrative measure pending deportation proceedings.
On 25 September 2004 the applicant was released and since then has been living in Istanbul on renewable temporary residence permits.
The applicant alleged that he had been detained for a period of ninety-one days in an overcrowded room at the Foreigners' Department of the Istanbul Security Headquarters, which had no windows, hence no natural light. According to the applicant it had thirty-six beds for a number of asylum seekers varying from 100 to 200. Due to the large number of asylum seekers present in the establishment the applicant, on numerous occasions, had been forced to sleep on the ground without sheets or blankets. He had not been allowed to get any fresh air or exercise throughout his stay. The hygienic conditions were extremely poor, in particular the showering facilities. There were three toilets and two showers serving a minimum of one hundred asylum seekers. The food served was insufficient and was the same every day. In support of his complaints the applicant presented drawings of the facility and referred to the reports of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT), in particular CPT/Inf (2002)8 dated 24 April 2002 and CPT/Inf (2000)17 dated 7 December 2000.
The Government stated that the applicant had been held in the men's section of the Foreigners' Department of the Istanbul Security Headquarters, which measured 220 square metres. There were three toilets, two showers, twenty bunk beds, a television, two telephones, two air conditioners and a cafeteria. According to the Government all the rooms were sufficiently lit and ventilated. They were cleaned twice a day. Breakfast, lunch and dinner were served every day. Asylum seekers could be visited by their relatives in the visitors' room. Those who needed medical help were taken to the local State hospital and their medical expenses were born by the State.
A description of the relevant domestic law and practice concerning asylum procedures may be found in the case of Abdolkhani and Karimnia v.  Turkey (no. 30471/08, §§ 29-44, 22 September 2009).
The relevant paragraphs of the CPT/Inf (2002)8 - Report concerning the CPT's visit to the Foreigners' Department of the Istanbul Security Headquarters (referred to as “the holding facility” or “detention unit” at “Istanbul Police Headquarters”) from 2-14 September 2001 are as follows:
“63.  The holding facility at İstanbul Police Headquarters was not overcrowded at the time of the visit (35 persons). Further, some limited renovation work (e.g. painting of walls) had been carried out shortly before the visit, and all the detainees had a bed and mattress. In addition, the ventilation system worked satisfactorily and the cell doors were unlocked, thereby enabling detainees to have ready access to the facilities in the corridor (e.g. drink dispenser, telephone, etc.) as well as to the sanitary facilities. However, in the same way as during the 1999 visit, it would appear that this relatively favourable state of affairs was atypical.
Consultation of the relevant register indicated that the facility frequently accommodated between 100 and 200 persons; the space available is totally inadequate for such numbers. Further, despite denials from staff, it subsequently became clear that, due to pressure of numbers in early July, detained foreign nationals had also been placed in the basement-level holding areas in building B; conditions in those areas are totally unsuitable for periods of detention exceeding a few hours. In addition, the information gathered indicated that the provision of mattresses and blankets was a very recent development.
It should also be noted that cells and sanitary facilities were in a poor state of repair and cleanliness. Moreover, detainees were still not offered any form of occupational activities (e.g. reading material, toys for children, etc.), and the CPT was particularly concerned to learn that no progress had been made as regards offering outdoor exercise.
At the end of the visit, the delegation called upon the Turkish authorities to attach a high priority to the implementation of already existing plans to extend the holding facility at the Foreigners' Department at Istanbul Police Headquarters. In their reply of 19 December 2001, the Turkish authorities informed the Committee of progress made in this respect.”
The relevant paragraphs of the CPT/Inf (2006)30 Report concerning CPT's visit from 7 to 14 December 2005 are as follows:
“35.  As already indicated (cf. paragraph 9), the situation observed by the CPT's delegation in the detention unit for immigration detainees at İstanbul Police Headquarters was the subject of an immediate observation under Article 8, paragraph 5, of the Convention. With a capacity – according to staff – of 90, the unit was holding more than double that figure (147 men and 43 women) on the day of the delegation's visit. The outrageous overcrowding and general sordidness of the conditions in the facility beggared belief, a state of affairs which is all the more serious in view of the fact that some of the detainees had been held there for more than six months.
The CPT first drew the Turkish authorities' attention to the unacceptable nature of the arrangements for immigration detainees at İstanbul Police Headquarters as long ago as 1997, and has subsequently reemphasised this point, most recently in the report on the September 2001 visit (cf. CPT/Inf (2002) 8, paragraphs 62 to 66). Some minor improvements have been made over the years. However, the facts found during the December 2005 visit have highlighted once again the fundamental inadequacy of the existing detention unit; above all, it is too small.
A solution to this long-standing problem might finally be in sight. By letter of 23 February 2006, the Turkish authorities confirmed that a much larger facility for this category of detainee, offering far better conditions, would be brought into service towards the end of 2006, once extensive renovation work at the site concerned (in the Eminönü District) had been completed.
The CPT calls upon the Turkish authorities to give a very high priority to the bringing into service of the above-mentioned facility; every attempt should be made to accelerate the completion of the ongoing renovation work.
As regards the material conditions and regime activities to be offered in the new facility and the staffing arrangements, the CPT recommends the Turkish authorities to take fully into account the standards set out in paragraph 29 of the 7th General Report on the CPT's activities (CPT/Inf (97)10).
The entry into service of the new facility will in any event not occur for some months. In the meantime, steps must be taken to alleviate the intolerable situation in the existing detention unit for immigration detainees at Istanbul Police Headquarters.
In their letter of 23 February 2006, the Turkish authorities state that during the transitional period, immediate measures have been taken to improve conditions at the existing facility, including as regards sanitary conditions and the provision of food. The CPT would like to receive further details of the measures concerned.
For so long as the existing detention unit for immigration detainees remains in service, the Committee recommends that every effort be made so that the official capacity of the facility is not exceeded. Further, immediate steps must be taken to ensure that all detainees are offered outdoor exercise on a daily basis; the current situation, in which persons can spend weeks if not months without ever having access to the open air, is inadmissible.”