The case originated in an application (no. 37040/07) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Iranian nationals, Mr Alireza Ranjbar, Mr Pejman Piran, Mr Abolfazl Ajorlu, Mr Seyid Ali Alemzadeh and Mr Mostaba Naderani Vatanpur (“the applicants”), by an e-mail sent in the evening of Friday 24 August 2007.
The applicants were represented by Mr S. Efe and Mr V.R. Turgut, lawyers practising in Ankara and Van respectively. Their forms of authority were issued by the applicants' immediate relatives in Iran and . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicants' representative alleged that his clients' deportation to Iran would subject them to ill-treatment and torture and that they were not afforded protection under Article 5, in particular as they had been unlawfully detained for a period of more than six days and had no means to challenge the lawfulness of their detention.
A request for an interim measure under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court was processed on Monday 27 August 2007, and the applicants' representative was asked to submit additional supporting information. In the morning of 28 August 2007 the Acting President of the Chamber to which the case had been allocated initially decided to apply Rule 40 (urgent notification of an application) until the requisite information was provided. Following the submission of this information on the same day, the President subsequently indicated to the Government, under Rule 39, that the applicants should not be deported to Iran until further notice.
On 4 September 2007 the respondent Government informed the Court that the applicants had already been deported to Iraq on 22 August 2007, two days before the Rule 39 request had been filed by their representative. The interim measure was consequently lifted on 6 September and further information concerning the applicants' deportation was requested from the respondent Government.
On 9 April 2008 the applicants' representative informed the Court that the applicants had been resettled in  and wished to pursue their application. Forms of authority issued by the second, third and fourth applicants were subsequently submitted, but the applicants' representative informed the Court on 1 October 2009 that he had not been able to contact the first and fifth applicants.
On 13 May 2008 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicants were born in 1972, 1982, 1985, 1978 and 1983 respectively and currently live in Sweden.
The applicants fled Iran and entered Turkey illegally on various dates in 2005 and 2006.
On various dates between 19 April 2005 and 3 October 2006, the applicants appeared at the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (“the UNHCR”) in Turkey, which recognised their refugee status and issued them with refugee certificates on 24 August 2007.
On unspecified dates the applicants lodged asylum applications with the Turkish authorities and sought residence permits. They were questioned twice by police officers from the Aliens Department on various dates in November 2006 for an assessment of their asylum request. During the questioning the applicants stated that they had been members of different illegal organisations and had been involved in anti-regime activities in Iran. They had either been detained on numerous occasions or sentenced to imprisonment and/or punishment by lashing. They all maintained that they would face a personal risk of ill-treatment or death if they were to be returned to Iran.
The applicants were permitted to live in Van pending the asylum proceedings and were allowed to leave the city boundaries subject to specific permission. In this connection one of the applicants (Mostaba Naderani Vatanpur) was issued with a permit allowing him to travel to Ankara between 22 and 31 August 2007 for various resettlement interviews.
On an unspecified date the applicants' asylum request was rejected by the authorities on the ground that they had not complied with the relevant criteria. In respect of the fourth applicant, the interview forms indicated that the authorities did not find the applicant's replies credible and considered that he had left his country for higher economic standards.
On an unspecified date the applicants were apprehended and held at the Van Security Directorate for an undetermined period before they were notified of the deportation orders on 22 August 2007 at 12.30 p.m. The deportation orders bear the signatures of the applicants and a translator. The applicants were deported to Iraq on the same day.
Upon their arrival in Iraq the applicants claimed to have been held in detention for about a month. They then had lived in Northern Iraq for some five months before they were resettled in Sweden on 10 February 2008.
A description of the relevant domestic law can be found in the Court's judgment in the case of Abdolkhani and Karimnia v. Turkey (no. 30471/08, §§ 29-45, 22 September 2009).