The case originated in an application (no. 36188/09) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Tiberiu Mircea Tiba (“the applicant”), on 12 June 2009.
The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained, in particular, under Article 5 of the Convention of the lawfulness and lack of judicial review of the period he spent under the control of the police and at the prosecutor’s office for questioning prior to his placement in police custody.
On 18 March 2014 the above-mentioned complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Oradea. He has been a lawyer since 1997.
On 11 December 2008 the National Anticorruption Department instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant and a police officer for traffic of influence (trafic de influenţă). The applicant was accused, as a lawyer, of having requested and received money from a client in return for persuading certain judges, other than in the context of the judicial proceedings, to adopt a favourable judgment in his client’s case.
On the same day the case prosecutor authorised several police officers to enforce a warrant to appear (mandat de aducere) issued in the applicant’s name on the basis of Articles 183 and 184 of the Criminal Procedure Code. According to the warrant, the applicant’s presence was required in order to be heard as a suspect (învinuit) in the criminal investigation instituted in File no. 206/P/2008. No other reasons or conditions were stated on the authorisation or the warrant itself.
On 12 December 2008 at 8 a.m. a police officer went to the applicant’s office in the city of Oradea to enforce the warrant to appear. According to the police officer’s report, the applicant was shown the warrant to appear and was escorted to the police station in the nearby town of Salonta. At 9.40 a.m. the applicant was handed over to two other police officers who escorted him to the Timişoara office of the National Anticorruption Department (T.N.A.D.). According to the escorting police officers’ report, which was signed also by the applicant, he was handed over to the prosecutor at 11.40 a.m.
According to the record of the statements the applicant made before the prosecutor, he was heard as a suspect by the prosecutor at the T.N.A.D. from 12 noon to 4.50 p.m. After the questioning the applicant was charged with the crime of traffic of influence.
According to the applicant, his phone, wallet and watch had been confiscated by the police officers and were held during this entire time. Moreover, he had been constantly guarded by the police.
By an order issued on 12 December 2008 the applicant was placed in police custody for twenty-four hours commencing at 5.10 p.m.
On 13 December 2008 the prosecutor’s request for the placement of the applicant in pre-trial detention for thirty days was allowed by the Timişoara Court of Appeal. The applicant complained before the court that he had been unlawfully deprived of his liberty from 8 a.m. to 5.10 p.m. on the previous day. He requested that the above-mentioned period be deducted from his time in custody. The court considered that it was not competent to decide on this complaint and suggested that the applicant should have used the procedure provided by Article 1401 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law (recurs) against that judgment, reiterating that he had been unlawfully deprived of his liberty. On 17 December 2008 the High Court of Cassation and Justice rejected the applicant’s appeal on points of law as ill-founded without addressing his complaint regarding the lawfulness of his detention prior to his placement in police custody.
On 12 March 2010 the applicant was found guilty with final effect and given a suspended sentence of four years’ imprisonment for traffic of influence.
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code regarding complaints against prosecutors’ decisions that were in force at the time of the events in question read as follows:
“(1) Any complaint against ... a prosecutor’s order for placement in police custody must be lodged before the hierarchically superior prosecutor within twenty-four hours, reckoned from the moment the measure was taken, under the conditions set in Article 278 ...
(2) The prosecutor must take a decision before expiry of the twenty-four hour period reckoned from the moment the measure was taken.
(3) The prosecutor shall quash the measure if he decides that it was unlawful or unjustified.”
“(1) Everyone has the right to complain against measures taken during the criminal investigation...
(4) The lodging of a complaint does not suspend the enforcement of the measure against which it was addressed.”
“The prosecutor must resolve the complaint within a maximum of 20 days from its receipt...”
“(1) A complaint against the investigative measures taken by the prosecutor shall be resolved by the hierarchically superior prosecutor...”
The provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code concerning police custody and warrants to appear, as in force at the relevant time, read as follows in their relevant parts:
“1. Police custody may last for a maximum of twenty-four hours. The period during which the person was deprived of liberty pursuant to the administrative measure of being taken to the police premises, as provided by Law no. 218/2002 on the organisation and functioning of the police, must be deducted from the duration of the police custody.”
“(1) A person may be brought before [a] criminal-investigation body or [a] court on the basis of a warrant to appear,..., if, having been previously summoned, he/she has not appeared, and his/her hearing or presence is necessary.
(2) The suspect (învinuitul) or accused (inculpatul) may be brought [before the authorities] on the basis of a warrant to appear even before being summoned if the criminal-investigation body or the court provides reasons demonstrating that this measure is necessary in the interest of solving the case.
(3) Any person appearing by virtue of the warrant referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be available to the judicial or non-judicial authorities for only such time as is required to question them, save where an order has been made for them to be placed in police custody or pre-trial detention.
(4) A person brought before a judicial or non-judicial body on the basis of a warrant to appear shall be heard immediately.”
“(1) The warrant to appear is enforced by the police, gendarmerie or by community officers. ...
(31) If the suspect or the accused refuses to obey the warrant or tries to run away, he/she shall be taken by force.”