The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 19 April 1991, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 13770/88) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) on 22 October 1986 by a Hungarian citizen, Mr Zoltan Istvan Megyeri. In the proceedings before the Commission the applicant was designated by the initial "M."; however, he subsequently consented to the disclosure of his identity.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) of the Convention.
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of the Rules of Court, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and sought leave, which was granted by the President of the Court, to be represented by Prof. K. Bernsmann, a law professor at a German university (Rule 30). He subsequently indicated that he no longer wished that lawyer to act for him and sought leave to present his own case; the President refused, but gave him the possibility of nominating a new representative within a specified time-limit. As he had not done so, the President decided that the proceedings should continue on the basis that the applicant was not taking part therein.
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr R. Bernhardt, the elected judge of German nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)). On 23 April 1991 the President drew by lot, in the presence of the Registrar, the names of the other seven members, namely Mrs D. Bindschedler-Robert, Sir Vincent Evans, Mr C. Russo, Mr N. Valticos, Mrs E. Palm, Mr I. Foighel and Mr F. Bigi (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43). Subsequently, Mr L.-E. Pettiti and Mr J. De Meyer, substitute judges, replaced Mrs Bindschedler-Robert and Sir Vincent Evans, who had resigned and whose successors at the Court had taken up their duties before the hearing (Rules 2 para. 3 and 22 para. 1).
Mr Ryssdal assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5) and, through the Deputy Registrar, consulted the Agent of the German Government ("the Government") and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the procedure (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38).
In accordance with the order made in consequence, the Registrar received, on 9 September 1991, the Government’s memorial. On 10 December, in accordance with Rule 50 read in conjunction with Rule 1 (k), certain claims under Article 50 (art. 50) of the Convention were filed on the applicant’s behalf by his guardian (Vormund; see paragraph 12 below); they were supplemented by additional particulars lodged on 14 February 1992.
By letter of 20 December 1991, the Secretary to the Commission informed the Registrar that the Delegate would submit his observations at the hearing.
On 12 February 1992 the Commission filed a number of documents which the Registrar had sought from it on the President’s instructions.
As directed by the President, the hearing took place in public in the , , on 26 February 1992. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand and the President had, on 28 January 1992, granted the members of the Government’s delegation leave to use the German language (Rule 27 para. 2).
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
The Court heard addresses by Mr Meyer-Ladewig for the Government and Mr Weitzel for the Commission, as well as replies to its questions.
Mr Megyeri is a Hungarian citizen who has been living in  since 1975.
In November 1981, after proceedings had been instituted against the applicant with a view to his confinement in a psychiatric hospital, he was provisionally detained in such an institution.
On 14 March 1983 the  (Landgericht), before which the applicant was represented by officially-appointed counsel, ordered that he be detained in a psychiatric hospital, pursuant to Article 63 of the Criminal Code. The court found that he had performed acts which constituted criminal offences (insulting behaviour, assault occasioning bodily harm, resisting the police, causing a traffic hazard and unauthorised departure from the scene of an accident) but that he could not be held responsible because he was suffering from a schizophrenic psychosis with signs of paranoia. Relying in particular on a medical expert’s opinion, the court stated that Mr Megyeri posed a danger to the general public because it had to be expected that he would commit further serious unlawful acts.
On 7 September 1984 the  (Verwaltungsgericht), in one of numerous proceedings instituted by the applicant concerning his detention, declared that he was incapable of conducting (betreiben) court proceedings himself. The court considered that his mental illness was so obvious that it was not necessary to order an expert opinion on the point.
On 3 September 1984 and again on 5 August 1985 the  Regional Court, referring to Article 67 e para. 2 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 16 below), directed that the detention should continue. In the latter decision the court found that Mr Megyeri’s delusions had become more severe and suggested that guardianship proceedings (Entmündigungsverfahren) be instituted against him.
On 3 March 1986 Mr Megyeri, who had tried to have the criminal proceedings against him (see paragraph 7 above) reopened, asked the Aachen Regional Court to replace the lawyer who had acted for him in those proceedings; he also asked why that lawyer had not been present when his detention had subsequently been reviewed. The court informed him in writing, on 12 March, that there was no legal provision to the effect that counsel had to be officially assigned to detainees in review proceedings.
On 7 July 1986 the  again considered the applicant’s possible release on probation under Article 67 e para. 2 of the Criminal Code and decided against it. Referring to its decision of 5 August 1985, it found that it was too early to put to the test whether he would no longer commit offences if he were not in hospital. It relied in particular on a written report by three experts, including two doctors from the hospital, according to which Mr Megyeri’s state of mental health had further deteriorated, he was not willing to undergo treatment and he showed a distinct propensity towards aggressive behaviour and violence. It also relied on its own impression of the applicant, formed when it heard him on 7 July, on which occasion he had made numerous complaints and claimed to be someone else. Referring to recent case-law of the  (Bundesverfassungsgericht - see paragraph 17 below), the  considered that the applicant’s continued detention was proportionate to the aim pursued, that is the protection of the public. It also noted that proceedings with a view to placing him under guardianship were pending.
On 2 September 1986 the Cologne Court of Appeal (Oberlandesgericht) dismissed Mr Megyeri’s immediate appeal (sofortige Beschwerde) against the ’s decision.
The applicant was not represented by counsel in the 1986 proceedings concerning his possible release. Whilst he had previously raised the question of legal assistance (see paragraph 9 above), he apparently did not specifically ask the  or the Court of Appeal to assign counsel to him and this point was not mentioned in their decisions. According to the Agent of the Government, it was to be assumed, since German law required the appointment of counsel in certain circumstances, that those courts had considered the matter of their own motion.
On 10 February 1987 a panel of three judges of the Federal Constitutional Court (which, in accordance with its usual practice in such cases, had not held a hearing) declined to accept for adjudication the applicant’s constitutional complaint (Verfassungsbeschwerde) against the decisions of the Regional Court and the Court of Appeal, on the ground that it did not offer sufficient prospects of success. The Federal Constitutional Court considered that there could be no objection under constitutional law to the fact that the courts had not assigned defence counsel in the 1986 proceedings, since it had not until then been obvious that the applicant could not defend himself due to his illness (see paragraph 18 below). It added, however, that having regard to the stabilising clinical situation and the fact that the end of his detention was not foreseeable, the appointment of an official lawyer would in future come into the picture (in Betracht kommen wird).
On 19 March 1987 the Cologne District Court (Amtsgericht) decided to place Mr Megyeri under guardianship. After hearing the applicant and having regard to an expert opinion of July 1986, it found that he was suffering from a serious mental illness that prevented him from dealing with his private affairs.
In subsequent review proceedings after May 1987 the applicant was represented by court-appointed counsel. Continuation of his detention was ordered by the  on 4 July 1988, but it reduced to six months the period for a further review as it was expected that medical treatment would lead to an improvement in his state of health.
On 4 January 1989 the , which regarded as particularly relevant the fact that Mr Megyeri was now under guardianship, directed that he be released on probation as from 8 May 1989. It fixed a period of three years for supervision of his conduct and instructed him not to leave specified accommodation without the supervisory agency’s approval.
Since then, the applicant has been living in an open ward of a psychiatric hospital in . His requests for restoration of his legal capacity have, to date, been rejected, on the ground that his condition has not improved.
The following provisions of the Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch) are relevant in the present case.
Article 67 d para. 2 (Suspension of detention on probation)
"Where there is no provision for a maximum period ..., the court shall suspend on probation the further execution of the detention as soon as the detainee can responsibly be allowed out of the psychiatric hospital to see whether he will desist from further unlawful acts. Suspension shall be followed by supervision of conduct."
Article 67 e (Review of detention)
"(1) The court may at any time review the question of whether the further execution of the detention should be suspended on probation. It shall review this before the expiry of certain periods.
(2) The periods shall be:
- ...
- [for detention] in a psychiatric hospital, one year;
- ..."
According to case-law of the Federal Constitutional Court (decision of 8 October 1985 - 2 BvR 1150/80, 2 BvR 1504/82 - Entscheidungssammlung des Bundesverfassungsgerichts, vol. 70, pp. 297 et seq.), the principle of proportionality governs the detention of a person in a psychiatric hospital and its continuance. When deciding whether to suspend on probation the further execution of such detention, the court has to consider in particular the risk of significant (erhebliche) criminal offences, the detainee’s previous conduct and criminal behaviour, relevant changes in the circumstances since his detention was ordered and the detainee’s future living conditions. The longer the detention in a psychiatric hospital lasts, the stricter the test of proportionality becomes.
The question of the defence of an accused by counsel is governed by Article 140 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Strafprozessordnung). Paragraph 1 lists a number of specific cases in which the participation of counsel is obligatory; paragraph 2 provides:
"In other cases, the presiding judge, upon request or ex officio, shall appoint a defence counsel if, having regard to the seriousness of the crime or the difficulty of the factual or legal issues involved, the assistance of a defence counsel appears to be necessary, or if it is obvious that the accused cannot defend himself ..."
Paragraph 2 is applied by analogy to review proceedings under Article 67 e of the Criminal Code.
In his application (no. 13770/88) lodged with the Commission on 22 October 1986, Mr Megyeri raised complaints concerning a number of different sets of proceedings relating to his detention in a mental institution; he invoked Articles 2 to 14, 17 and 18 of the Convention (art. 2, art. 3, art. 4, art. 5, art. 6, art. 7, art. 8, art. 9, art. 10, art. 11, art. 12, art. 13, art. 14), Articles 1 and 2 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-1, P1-2) and Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 (P4-2).
By partial decision of 12 October 1988, the Commission adjourned its examination of his complaint about the 1986 proceedings before the  and the Cologne Court of Appeal concerning his possible release from detention and declared the remainder of the application inadmissible. On 10 July 1989 the Commission, having concluded that Mr Megyeri did not intend to pursue his application, decided to strike it off its list. However, on 13 February 1990 it restored the aforesaid complaint to the list and declared it admissible.
In its report of 26 February 1991 (Article 31) (art. 31), the Commission expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been a violation of Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) of the Convention, in that no official lawyer had been appointed to assist the applicant in the above proceedings.
The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.