The application concerns the applicant’s alleged ill-treatment during his unrecorded detention in police custody and the lack of an effective investigation into his complaints.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Yoshkar-Ola. He was represented by Mr A.I. Ryzhov, Ms O.A. Sadovskaya and Mr I.A. Kalyapin, lawyers with the Committee against Torture, a non-governmental organisation based in Nizhniy Novgorod.
The Government were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On the night of 14-15 July 2005 a certain S. was robbed of her handbag on a street in Yoshkar-Ola. Later that night, at about 12.30 a.m. (according to the applicant) or at 1.40 a.m. (according to the official inquiry) a police patrol (consisting of officers D.P. and D.Ts.) stopped the applicant and his friend, Mr G., on the street on suspicion of committing a crime and took them to the Tsentralnyy police station of Yoshkar-Ola. According to the applicant, at the police station he was held in a cell for administrative offenders from 1 a.m. to 3 a.m.
The applicant’s account of subsequent events is as follows. At 3 a.m. a police officer took him to room no. 307 on the second floor (the third floor, as expressed in Russian). G. was in a corridor near that room, handcuffed. In that room one of the police officers introduced himself as Ch. The applicant was asked if he had committed any crime that night. He denied having committed any crime. The police officers beat him, in particular kicking him and hitting his head with a rubber truncheon three times. The applicant fainted. When he regained consciousness, he found himself lying outside the room with his head bleeding.
According to a report by police officer D.P. to the head of the Tsentralnyy police station (dated 15 July 2005), at 1.40 a.m. on 15 July 2005 D.P., together with police officer D.Ts., arrested and took to the police station the applicant and G., who, according to S., had robbed her of her handbag; at 3.05 a.m. (the time given in a copy of the report is not entirely legible) D.P. handed the detainees over.
According to the records of the police station, the applicant was escorted to the police station at 3.30 a.m. on 15 July 2005 and handed over to police officer S.P. at 4 a.m. that day. There were no records of the applicant’s detention that day in a cell for administrative offenders or in the temporary detention facility for criminal suspects.
The applicant and G. were interviewed by police officer S.P., and each of them gave statements in the form of an “explanation” (объяснение), signed by them and police officer S.P. on 15 July 2005, in which they denied committing any crime.
According to a report by police officer S.P. to the acting head of the Tsentralnyy police station, dated 15 July 2005, the applicant had been taken to the police station at around 2 a.m. on suspicion of committing the robbery, and at around 5 a.m. during a “talk” in office no. 307 the applicant had attempted to jump out of a window. Wrestling techniques had been used to restrain him. The applicant had put up resistance. S.P. had attempted to grab the applicant’s hand. The applicant had broken free and had hit his head against a safe. An ambulance had been called and the applicant had been provided with first aid. Police officer Ch. had been present in the office during all those events.
According to the ambulance records, an ambulance called by the police arrived at the police station at 5.50 a.m., the applicant was diagnosed with a wound in the parietal area, and his head was bandaged.
At 9 a.m. criminal proceedings were initiated in respect of the robbery and S., the victim of the robbery, was questioned. She did not identify the applicant and G. as her robbers. At 11 a.m. the applicant was questioned as a suspect in the presence of a State-appointed lawyer. The applicant felt very weak because of the head injury and refused to make any statements. After signing, at an investigator’s request, an undertaking to appear before the investigating and judicial authorities, the applicant was taken by a police officer to a traumatology clinic, where the wound on his head was stitched up. He was then transferred to a hospital for treatment, where he was diagnosed with brain concussion, a contused wound in the parietal area of the head, convulsive syndrome and multiple abrasions on the torso and upper limbs. In the evening he left for home.
The prosecution proceedings in respect of the applicant and G. were subsequently terminated for lack of any evidence of their involvement in the robbery (at the decision, dated 15 September 2005, of an investigator from the Yoshkar-Ola police department).
According to statements by Ms P. and Mr G., who were with the applicant immediately before his apprehension by the police on 15 July 2005, the applicant had had no injuries before his apprehension. Their statements were given on 17 October 2005 and 18 July 2005, respectively, to Chelovek i Zakon, an NGO based in Yoshkar-Ola, which represented the applicant in the subsequent domestic proceedings.
On 16 July 2005 the applicant complained of his arrest and illtreatment to the Yoshkar-Ola prosecutor’s office. On the same day S., the investigator, heard from the applicant his account of his arrest and alleged ill-treatment. The investigator also received from G. his own account of his arrest and alleged ill-treatment. G. stated as follows: he had been apprehended together with the applicant at 12.30 a.m. on 15 July 2005; the applicant had been beaten up in room 307 at the police station by two police officers, one of whom had held a rubber truncheon; they had kicked the applicant and hit him with a chair; then they had dragged him into the corridor and called an ambulance, which had arrived twenty minutes later. G. also stated that one of the police officers had introduced himself as Ch.
On 18 July 2005 S. issued an order for an expert forensic medical examination to be conducted on the applicant in connection with his complaint of ill-treatment by police officers – notably of his having allegedly been punched and kicked, hit with a chair on the head, and hit with a rubber truncheon. According to the expert’s report of the same date, the applicant had the following injuries: a 3.2 cm by 2 cm injury on the parietal area of the head, a stripe-shaped abrasion in the area of the right eyebrow and a bruise on the upper eyelid of the right eye, an irregularovalshaped bruise on the left shoulder and two oval-shaped bruises on the left upper arm, abrasions on the right elbow and left forearm, and six stripeshaped abrasions on the hand. The expert found that all the injuries had been inflicted by a blunt object three or four days before the examination. The head injury had caused a short-term (that is to say not lasting more than twenty-one days) health disorder, and was therefore classified as minor health damage.
On the dates specified below, the investigators of the prosecutor’s office of Yoshkar-Ola issued successive refusals to open criminal proceedings against the police officers. The refusals, except for the last one, were systematically revoked by the higher authority within the prosecutor’s office for, inter alia, not being based on a thorough inquiry, and the investigators were ordered to undertake an additional pre-investigation inquiry.
The first and the third refusals to open a criminal case were revoked after the applicant lodged appeals with Yoshkar-Ola City Court’s under Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”). Those appeals were not examined and the proceedings were terminated on the grounds that the decisions had been revoked (Yoshkar-Ola City Court’s decisions of 12 October 2005 and 21 August 2007, respectively). The second refusal to open a criminal case was revoked as unlawful and unfounded following the Yoshkar-Ola City Court’s decision of 1 December 2006 allowing the applicant’s appeal for, inter alia, the reason that not all the applicant’s injuries had been explained by the investigator. The third refusal to open a criminal case was revoked by the Yoshkar-Ola deputy prosecutor on 13 August 2007 for the reason that the flaws in the inquiry identified in the City Court’s decision of 1 December 2006 had not been corrected.
In the last decision, of 18 August 2007, the investigator ordered, inter alia, pursuant to Article 24 § 1 (2) of the CCrP, that no criminal case be opened for lack of the constituent elements of a crime (Abuse of authority with violence) under Article 286 § 3 (a) of the Criminal Code, in the acts of police officers S.P. and Ch.
The investigator established the facts as follows. At 12.40 a.m. on 15 July 2005 a woman was robbed (criminal proceedings were initiated under Article 161 of the Criminal Code in respect of the robbery). At 1.40 a.m. the applicant and G. were arrested on suspicion of committing that crime and taken to the Tsentralnyy police station of Yoshkar-Ola. Upon their arrival, they were interviewed about the circumstances of the crime. They denied their involvement in the robbery.
The investigator stated that the applicant’s allegations of illtreatment by two police officers in room no. 307 had not been confirmed by the inquiry. The investigator relied on police officer S.P.’s report of 15 July 2005 (see paragraph 10 above), which had been confirmed by his and officer Ch.’s “explanations”. The investigator also relied on the following “explanations”. Z. and E., police officers on duty at the police station during the night from 14 to 15 July 2005, stated that the applicant had been escorted to the police station at 3.30 a.m. on 15 July 2005 on suspicion of committing a robbery; that he had been handed over to police officer S.P. at 4 a.m.; and that sometime after S.P. had come over and told them that the applicant had tried to jump out of the window of S.P.’s office and that his head had been injured during his apprehension. Police officer K. stated that he had heard from S.P. about a suspect trying to jump out of the window and his being apprehended with the use of force. A certain L., who had been detained at the police station at the same time as the applicant and G., stated that he had seen police officer S.P. taking one of two young men to room no. 307 and that he had then heard someone screaming, learning later “from talks” that the young man had tried to jump out of a window.
The investigator concluded that when being interviewed at the police station the applicant had attempted to jump out of a window. In order to stop him, physical force had been used. When being grabbed by his hand the applicant had broken away and had hit his head against a safe. That was how he could have received his injuries, which had been recorded by the ambulance and the forensic medical expert.
An appeal lodged by the applicant with the Yoshkar-Ola City Court against the investigator’s decision of 18 August 2007 was dismissed on 27 October 2009; that decision was upheld, following a further appeal by the applicant, on 21 December 2009 by the Supreme Court of the Mariy El Republic, which found the investigator’s decision to have been wellreasoned and based on a full and thorough inquiry.
Under Article 91 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“CCrP”), as in force at the material time, an investigating authority or a prosecutor could arrest a person on suspicion of committing a criminal offence punishable by a prison term in the following circumstances: (i) where the person had been apprehended during or immediately after committing the offence in question; (ii) where a victim of or an eyewitness to a crime had identified the person in question as the perpetrator of the crime; or (iii) where manifest evidence of the crime had been discovered on the body, clothes or belongings of the person concerned or in his or her residence. In other situations giving rise to suspicion against a specific person, it was possible to arrest him or her in circumstances where he or she had attempted to flee; had no fixed place of residence; his or her identity had not been established; or where an application had been lodged for judicial authorisation to remand the suspect in custody (Article 91 § 2 of the CCrP).
Following the escorting of the person before the investigating authority or the prosecutor, it is necessary to draw up, within three hours, an arrest record, noting that the arrestee has been apprised of his or her procedural rights. The arrest record must indicate the time and date it has been drawn up; the time, date, place and grounds for the arrest; and other circumstances of the arrest. It must be signed by an official who has drawn it up and the suspect (Article 92 §§ 1 and 2 of the CCrP). Written notice must be given to a prosecutor within twelve hours and the suspect is to be given access to a lawyer and questioned (Article 92 §§ 3 and 4 of the CCrP).