The case originated in an application (no. 26826/10) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Şafi Onat (“the applicant”), on 20 April 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr İ. Akmeşe, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 16 January 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1988 and lives in Istanbul.
On 12 May 2009 the judge at the Istanbul Assize Court decided to restrict access to the investigation file relating to an investigation against the applicant and others pursuant to Section 10 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713), which was in force at the material time.
On 31 October 2009 the applicant was arrested and taken into custody on suspicion of membership of a terrorist organisation.
On 1 November 2009 the applicant’s police statement was taken at the Anti-Terror Branch of the Istanbul Security Directorate, in the presence of his lawyer. He was questioned at length about his telephone conversations that had been intercepted. The police read out the transcripts of the said telephone conversations and asked the applicant to comment on them. He was further questioned in relation to allegations about aiding and abetting a terrorist organisation as well as his participation in several illegal demonstrations on behalf of this terrorist organisation and several incidents of assault and battery. He was further asked questions about a coaccused’s incriminating statements.
On 2 November 2009 the public prosecutor questioned the applicant in the presence of his lawyer. The prosecutor read out the transcripts of the intercepted conversations to the applicant. The applicant did not deny that he had had these conversations but claimed that they were not made with the intention to plan a terrorist action.
On the same day the judge at the Istanbul Assize Court ordered his pre-trial detention.
On 2 November 2009 the applicant’s lawyer asked the court to lift the restriction of access to the investigation file. On 10 November 2009 the Istanbul Assize Court rejected this objection.
On 4 November 2009 the applicant’s lawyer filed an objection against the decision on the applicant’s detention, and requested his release. On 12 November 2009 the Istanbul Assize Court, relying on the public prosecutor’s written opinion, which had not been communicated to the applicant or his representative, dismissed the objection without holding a hearing.
On 25 November 2009 the Istanbul public prosecutor filed an indictment with the Istanbul Assize Court, charging the applicant with aiding and abetting of a terrorist organisation, and looting.
On 4 December 2009 the Istanbul Assize Court accepted the indictment. On the same date the restriction on the file was lifted.
On 26 February 2010 the applicant was released.
According to the latest information in the case file, the criminal proceedings against the applicant are still pending.