The case originated in an application (no. 33809/16) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr George Vichente Bădoiu (“the applicant”), on 6 June 2016.
The applicant was represented by Mr F. David, a lawyer practising in Arad. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr V. Mocanu, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 27 February 2017 notice of the complaint concerning Article 5 § 1 of the Convention (alleged unlawful deprivation of liberty at the police station) was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in Arad.
At 11.08 a.m. on 16 September 2014 the applicant was stopped by two police patrol officers in Zăbrani for a roadside check. He gave his name, but informed the police officers that he did not have his identity papers or driving licence with him. When his name was checked against the database, he was found to have been driving his car while suspended.
The applicant was taken to the Zăbrani police station, where he remained for about two hours under the supervision of several police officers. He alleged that he had not been allowed to use his mobile telephone during this time. He was then taken to the Lipova police station, some 10 km from where he was stopped. The applicant explained that he had remained under police escort at all times.
The police immediately started a criminal investigation to establish the facts. T.M., one of the police officers who participated in the roadside check, drafted a report on the events (proces verbal de constatare), stating as follows:
“On 16 September 2014, at about 11.08 a.m., while carrying out a roadside check operation in the village of Zăbrani, at the intersection in the centre of the village, together with a representative from the Romanian Car Registry in Arad, we stopped ... for a check, a white [model] car, [licence number], being driven by [the applicant’s name in full], son of [the parents’ first names in full], born on [date of birth], in [place of birth], living at [full address], [the applicant’s personal identification number], holder of the identity card [full number] delivered by [the authority’s name in full], who declared orally that he did not have any identity documents or his driving licence on him, and that he had been driving the above-mentioned car on county road no. 682 from the village of Neudorf with the intention of going to Arad.
Based on the above, in the presence of the assistant witness [full identification of eyewitness S.D.V.], we found that [the applicant’s full identification] is registered in the police database as having had his driving licence suspended since 2013, for the offence of driving a car on a public road while having a blood alcohol level of 0.8 g/l.
We thus drafted the present report.”
The police officer also drafted a report in similar terms with a view to starting an investigation (proces-verbal de sesizare din oficiu).
The police interviewed S.D.V., the eyewitness who had been present when the applicant was stopped by the police. After the interview, T.M. drafted a report on starting a prosecution (ordonanţă de începere a urmăririi penale), in similar terms to his previous reports, and asking the prosecutor’s office to start an investigation against the applicant. The latter thus became a suspect in the case and was questioned in this capacity from 5.50 to 6.20 p.m., in the presence of a court-appointed lawyer.
At 6 p.m. that day the applicant was arrested and placed in police custody for twenty-four hours, from 6 p.m. on 16 September 2014 to 6 p.m. on 17 September 2014 (see paragraph 19 below). He did not lodge a complaint against the decision to place him in police custody.
On 17 September 2014 he was interviewed again, from 11.50 a.m. until noon, in the presence of the court-appointed lawyer. He did not complain in any of his statements that he had been detained at the police station unlawfully or prevented from leaving the premises.
On 4 March 2015 the applicant was interviewed by the prosecutor in the presence of a lawyer of his own choosing. He complained that he had been held against his will at the police station until 6 p.m. on 16 September 2014.
On 30 June 2015 the applicant was convicted by the Lipova District Court. He received a suspended prison sentence of one year and four months. In his final written address to the court, the applicant argued that he had been unlawfully deprived of liberty on 16 September 2014.
On 12 December 2014 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the prosecutor’s office attached to the Timişoara Court of Appeal against T.M., the police officer who had taken him to the police station on 16 September 2014. He accused T.M. of illegal deprivation of liberty and abuse of power. On 8 February 2015 the criminal complaint was forwarded to the prosecutor’s office attached to the Lipova District Court for investigation.
The prosecutor started an investigation into the criminal complaint brought by the applicant against T.M. The prosecutor conducted interviews with the applicant on 28 October 2015, a witness on 29 October 2015, and T.M. on 6 November 2015. The latter claimed that the applicant had been allowed to wait for his chosen lawyer at the front of the police station, with his mobile telephone on him. At 5 p.m. the applicant had entered the building, informed T.M. that his lawyer was not coming, and asked for a court-appointed lawyer.
On 6 November 2015 the prosecutor’s office ended the investigation on the grounds that the applicant’s detention had been ordered at 6 p.m., in compliance with the applicable legal provisions.
The applicant complained and in a final decision of 22 March 2016 the Lipova District Court found that the period of six hours and fifty-two minutes from the time he had been stopped by the roadside until the time he had been arrested had been necessary in order to take him to the police station and process the case.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”), in force since 1 February 2014, read as follows:
Article 209 – Police Custody
“...
An arrested person shall be informed promptly, in a language which he understands, of any charge against him and of the reasons for his arrest.
Police custody may be ordered for a maximum of twenty-four hours. The time strictly necessary for bringing a suspect or accused to the judicial body’s premises in accordance with the law shall not be included in the period of police custody.
...
Police custody may only be ordered after the suspect or accused is heard, in the presence of a lawyer of his own choosing or appointed by the court.
...
The chosen lawyer is under an obligation to attend the judicial body’s premises within two hours of being notified. If [he or she] fails to do so, the investigative body or prosecutor shall appoint a lawyer.
...
A suspect or accused may, before the period ends, complain to the prosecutor’s office overseeing the investigation about the investigative body’s decision to place him in custody. The prosecutor shall decide the matter promptly. If the prosecutor observes that the legislative provisions concerning the taking of that measure have been breached, [he or she] shall revoke it and order the person’s immediate release.
A suspect or accused may, before the period ends, complain to the prosecutor in chief or the hierarchically superior prosecutor’s office about the prosecutor office’s decision to place him in custody. The prosecutor shall decide the matter promptly. If the prosecutor observes that the legislative provisions concerning the taking of that measure have been breached, [he or she] shall revoke it and order the person’s immediate release.”
Article 31 of the Police Act (Law 218/2002 on the organisation and functioning of the Romanian Police) provides that police officers have a duty to:
“(b)  escort those to the police station who are, by their actions, a danger to others, public order or other social values, as well as those who are suspected of having committed a criminal act and whose identity could not be verified in accordance with the law; ... the situation of such persons must be verified and legal measures taken, if necessary, within twenty-four hours, as an administrative measure;”