The case originated in an application (no. 17963/08) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Corneliu Savca (“the applicant”), on 7 April 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Postica and Mr V. Vieru, lawyers practising in Chisinau. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Apostol, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Moldova to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been unlawfully detained in inhuman and degrading conditions of detention in the absence of any reasonable suspicion that he had committed an offence and without relevant and sufficient grounds for detention.
On 7 July 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Chisinau.
At the time of the events in question, the applicant was a high-ranking police officer. On 26 March 2008 he was arrested on suspicion of being part of a criminal gang specialised in the smuggling of heroin through Moldova to the European Union. His arrest took place as a result of the seizure of a large quantity of heroin in Chişinău. He was indicted with the offence of circulating large quantities of narcotics, an offence provided for in Article 217/1 of the Criminal Code and punishable with seven to twenty years of imprisonment.
On 5 September 2008 the criminal investigation into the circumstances of the case was completed and the case was referred to a trial court for determination.
On 21 October 2009 the applicant was found guilty of having committed other offences than that for which he had been put in detention on remand and sentenced to five years and nine months’ imprisonment. The offences of which the applicant was found guilty concerned negligence, abuse of power and aiding and abetting in the commission of an offence. On 21 June 2010 the judgment was set aside by the Chisinau Court of Appeal and the applicant was released from detention. The proceedings are still pending.
Between his arrest and his sentencing the applicant was detained on remand. A detention warrant was issued every month and the reasons given for prolonging his detention were the same throughout the entire period: the applicant had been accused of a serious criminal offence punishable by more than two years’ imprisonment and there was a risk he might abscond or hinder the investigation. All of the applicant’s habeas corpus requests were dismissed.
The applicant was detained in two detention facilities. Between his arrest and 17 November 2008 he was detained in solitary confinement at the detention facility of the Centre for Fighting Economic Crime and Corruption (CFECC) and between 17 November 2008 and 21 June 2010 he was held in Prison no. 13. According to the applicant, the conditions of detention in Prison no. 13 were tantamount to inhuman and degrading treatment. In particular, the cells were dirty and overcrowded. In the cell in which the applicant was detained, each inmate had only 2.5 square metres of available space. The food was of a very poor quality, the inmates smoked, and he was held along with detainees convicted of violent crimes who threatened him with violence on account of his status as a police officer. The inmates were not provided with bed linen and the cell was infected with vermin.
During his detention the applicant’s state of health deteriorated and a panel of doctors diagnosed him with gastritis, duodenitis, pancreatitis, hepatitis and hypertension. They recommended he be hospitalised for in-patient treatment. The applicant was hospitalised between 7 October and 17 November 2008 in a prison hospital belonging to the Ministry of Justice but he refused treatment, asking instead to be treated in a military hospital accredited by the Ministry of Healthcare. His request was rejected on grounds which were not communicated to the Court by the parties.
“(4)  Detention on remand takes place on the basis of a warrant issued by a judge for a maximum period of 30 days. A detained person may challenge the legality of the detention warrant before a judge who shall be obliged to rule on the complaint by means of a reasoned decision. The period of detention on remand may be extended to a maximum period of six months, but in exceptional cases, and with the Parliament’s consent, to a maximum period of 12 months.”
“(4)  Detention on remand takes place on the basis of a warrant issued by a judge for a maximum period of 30 days. The lawfulness of the detention warrant may be challenged, in accordance with the law, before a hierarchically superior court. The period of detention on remand may be extended only by a court, in accordance with the law, to a maximum period of twelve months.”
The relevant parts of the Special Rapporteur’s report on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment compiled following his visit to Moldova from 4 to 11 July 2008 (The United Nations Human Rights Council, document A/HRC/10/44/Add.3, 12 February 2009) read:
“B.  Conditions in places of detention
Institutions under the Ministry of Justice
Undoubtedly, progress has been achieved in improving conditions of detention. However, some of the institutions visited by the Special Rapporteur were heavily overcrowded. The authorities themselves pointed out that Institution No. 13 in Chişinău was severely overcrowded - on the day of the visit it held 931 persons with the official capacity being 600 (see also appendix). The Special Rapporteur was informed of Government plans to close down this institution.
Common problems at all pre- and post-trial prisons are the poor hygienic conditions, restricted access to health care and lack of medication as well as risk of contamination with tuberculosis and other diseases. Whereas the Special Rapporteur notes that the minimum norms regarding nutrition of detainees (Government Decision n. 609 of 29 May 2006) are checked on a daily basis and that, according to the financial plan of the Penitentiary Department, the food budget for 2008 had almost doubled in comparison to 2004 and is set to rise further, he also received consistent allegations regarding the poor quality and quantity of food. ...”
In its report for 2009 (page 117 – “Conditions of detention”), the Centre for Human Rights in Moldova (“the Human Rights Centre”, which also acts as the Moldovan Ombudsman) found, inter alia, that:
“Regarding personal hygiene, clothing and bedding, despite [the fact that] Government decision no. 609 (29 May 2006) concerning minimum daily food requirements and the issuing of items of personal hygiene provides for the issuing of soap to detainees for bathing and other sanitary-hygienic needs, this has remained unfulfilled during 2009.”
In its report for 2009 (page 117, “Conditions of detention”), the Centre for Human Rights in Moldova (“the Human Rights Centre”, which also acts as the Moldovan Ombudsman) found, inter alia, that:
“Regarding personal hygiene, clothing and bedding, despite [the fact that] Government decision no. 609 (29 May 2006) concerning minimum daily food requirements and the issuing of items of personal hygiene provides for the issuing of soap to detainees for bathing and other sanitary-hygienic needs, this has remained unfulfilled during 2009.”
In its report for 2010 (page 142 et seq. “Conditions of detention”) the Human Rights Centre found, inter alia, that:
“Failure to adhere to the statutory cell size (4 square metres per person) in the living blocks of the institution has become an unpleasant problem which now affects the prison system across the entire country. ...
The same situation was confirmed during a visit to Chişinău Prison no. 13 on 9 September 2010. In some cells the living space was not proportionate to the number of detainees. During the visit, eight detainees were being held in cell no. 38, which measured 24 square metres. This situation has been seen repeatedly during visits by the Centre’s staff to the Chişinău Pre-trial Detention Centre. Similar findings were made during visits to Rusca Prison no. 7 on 19 May 2010, where six detainees were being held in a cell measuring 15.5 square metres and to Cricova Prison no. 4, where (in living block no. 7) over twenty detainees were being held in a cell measuring 65 square metres.
Overcrowding comes directly within the Ombudsman’s remit as part of the National Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture, which on many occasions has recognised overcrowding in the country’s prisons. ...
... [T]he Prisons Department informed the Ombudsman that meat and fish products are provided [to detainees] whenever possible. At the same time, the authority stated that, owing to the difficult financial situation, during 2010 the detainees in Rezina Prison no. 17 received only 75% and 80% of their normal quotas of meat and fish products respectively. In this connection, the Minister of Justice provided information to the Ombudsman about the expenditure on prisoners’ food in 2010. The cost amounted to MDL 24.05 million, whereas the budgetary need for the same year was, according to the Ministry of Finance’s draft budget, MDL 29.05 million. The daily cost of feeding a detainee in 2010 was MDL 10.24, whilst the daily budgetary need was MDL 12.35. This statistic was often cited by prison authorities to justify why they were unable to provide detainees with meat and fish.
...
As regards sanitary conditions, lighting and ventilation problems continue to exist in the majority of living blocks in Moldovan prisons, with the exception of Taraclia Prison no. 1 and Rusca Prison no. 7.
The Republic of Moldova inherited old gulag-type prisons in dilapidated buildings, corresponding to former Soviet standards. The prisons do not conform to current national and international standards; however, the budget constraints upon the State do not allow for their reconstruction or renovation.
In the prisons, with the exception of Taraclia Prison no. 1, detainees are held in large-capacity cells insufficiently equipped for their daily needs, namely areas for sleeping, for everyday living and for sanitary equipment. Detainees are held in extremely overcrowded, dark, damp and unventilated spaces full of cigarette smoke. In certain prisons the bunk beds essentially prevent daylight from reaching the living space.”