The case originated in an application (no. 28749/18) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Osman Kavala (“the applicant”), on 8 June 2018.
The applicant was represented by Mr K. Bayraktar, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
Relying on Article 5 of the Convention, the applicant alleged, in particular, that his arrest and pre-trial detention had not been justified and had been carried out in bad faith. He also complained that the Constitutional Court had not ruled speedily on the lawfulness of his pre-trial detention. Under Article 18 of the Convention, he submitted that his rights had been restricted for purposes other than those prescribed in the Convention. In this connection, he argued that the detention measure imposed on him amounted to a form of judicial harassment, the purpose of which was to exert a dissuasive effect on human-rights defenders.
On 23 August 2018 the Court decided to apply Rule 41 of the Rules of Court and grant the applicant’s request for priority treatment of the application. Under its new prioritisation policy, effective since 22 May 2017, cases where applicants have been deprived of their liberty as a direct consequence of an alleged violation of Convention rights, as in the present case, are to be given priority.
On 30 August 2018 the complaints under Article 5 §§ 1 (c), 3 and 4 and Article 18 of the Convention were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, in accordance with Rule 54 § 3.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the case.
The Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights (“the Commissioner for Human Rights”) exercised her right to intervene in the proceedings and submitted written comments (Article 36 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2).
In addition, written comments were submitted to the Court by the following non-governmental organisations: PEN International, Turkey Human Rights Litigation Support Project and the Association for Freedom of Expression (“the intervening non-governmental organisations”). The Section President granted leave to the organisations in question to intervene under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3.
The Government and the applicant each replied to the intervening parties’ comments.
On 25 June 2019 the Government submitted further observations and informed the Court that the Constitutional Court had decided to dismiss the applicant’s individual application. In a letter dated 26 June 2019 the Court invited the applicant to submit comments on the matter. The applicant did not submit observations on this point. On 10 July 2019 the Government sent a copy of the Constitutional Court’s judgment.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Istanbul. He is currently being held in detention.
The applicant, a businessman, is a human-rights defender in Turkey. He has been involved in setting up numerous non-governmental organisations (“NGOs”) and civil-society movements which are active in the areas of human rights, culture, social studies, historical reconciliation and environmental protection.
In 2002 he set up the limited public company Anadolu Kültür, which works to promote peace, reconciliation and human rights by supporting artistic and cultural initiatives, particularly those organised outside Turkey’s major cultural centres. Several of this NGO’s projects, organised in collaboration with the Turkish local authorities, have received support from many internationally known arts foundations and from the European Union.
In her written observations, the Commissioner for Human Rights explained that the applicant has been a long-standing and trusted partner of many international bodies working on human rights in Turkey, including the Commissioner’s Office. She indicated that, like all four Commissioners since the inception of the Office, she has been in contact with many of the NGOs he helped to found or with him personally. In her view, he and these NGOs have been reliable and objective sources of information about the human-rights situation in Turkey, always displaying the highest level of professionalism, dedication and respect for human rights. She added that during their numerous dealings with them, neither she nor her predecessors had received any indication of any incitement to violence or crime, or justification and trivialisation of violence on their part.
The applicant was arrested in Istanbul on 18 October 2017. He was suspected of having committed two offences under Article 312 (attempting to overthrow the Government) and Article 309 (attempting to overthrow the constitutional order) of the Criminal Code. The accusations against the applicant were related to the Gezi Park events which occurred between May and September 2013 (Article 312 of the Criminal Code) and the attempted coup of 15 July 2016 (Article 309 of the Criminal Code).
In September 2011 the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipal Council (Istanbul Büyükşehir Belediye Meclisi) adopted a plan to pedestrianise Taksim Square in Istanbul. This plan included blocking traffic routes around Taksim Square and rebuilding barracks (demolished in 1940) in order to create a shopping centre in the new premises. These barracks were to be built on the site of Gezi Park, one of the few green spaces in the centre of Istanbul. Professional bodies such as the Chamber of Architects and the Chamber of Landscape Architects brought numerous administrative proceedings in an attempt to have the project set aside. In 2012 several demonstrations were organised to protest against the planned destruction of Gezi Park. Platforms bringing together several associations, trade unions, professional bodies and political parties, including the “Taksim Solidarity” (Taksim Dayanışma) collective, were accordingly set up to coordinate and organise the protests.
Following the start of demolition work in Gezi Park on 27 May 2013, about fifty environmental activists and local residents occupied the park in an attempt to prevent its destruction. The protest movements were initially led by ecologists and local residents objecting to the destruction of the park. On 31 May 2013, however, the police intervened violently to remove the persons occupying the park. There were confrontations between the police and the demonstrators. The protests then escalated in June and July and spread to several towns and cities in Turkey, taking the form of meetings and demonstrations which sometimes led to violent clashes. Four civilians and two police officers were killed, and thousands of people were wounded.
The Government considered that the incidents which occurred in Gezi Park (“the Gezi Park events”) had admittedly originated in a movement opposing the decisions about the park’s future and the use of force by the police, but that they had subsequently been transformed into an insurrection (« kalkışma ») backed by numerous terrorist organisations. In this connection, they alleged that flags and posters of terrorist organisations, including the PKK (the Kurdistan Workers’ Party) or the DHKP-C (People’s Revolutionary Liberation Party Front), had been displayed in several areas where the demonstrations took place, and that members of these organisations had mingled with the demonstrators in order to sow terror.
The Government also noted that the Gezi Park events had occurred between 28 May and 25 September 2013 and that 3,611,208 persons had taken part. 5,513 individuals had been arrested and 189 persons had been placed in detention; 697 law-enforcement officers and 4,329 civilians had been injured, and four civilians and two police officers had lost their lives. They indicated that violent demonstrators had committed multiple acts of vandalism, targeting, according to the official figures, 292 company premises, 116 police vehicles, 271 private vehicles, 14 buildings belonging to the Justice and Development Party (the ruling party, “the AKP”) and numerous public buildings.
According to the Government, foreign media had also shown a keen interest in the events and had broadcast them live, presenting them to the international community as peaceful demonstrations organised by environmental protection groups and contesting the legitimacy of the democratically elected Government. Falsified images and false information on social media had also given the impression that the police had systematically committed acts of torture or even murder. In addition, the prosecutors’ offices had opened numerous criminal investigations into the Gezi Park events, in relation to offences such as homicide, the illegal possession or swapping of dangerous substances, the display of symbols openly challenging State sovereignty, disseminating propaganda in support of terrorist organisations, damage to public property, grievous bodily harm, membership of an armed terrorist organisation, etc.
The Commissioner for Human Rights considered that her Office could provide an objective overview of the Gezi events on account of the extensive work conducted by it during the relevant period. She explained that her predecessor had visited Turkey immediately after the events of 1 to 5 July 2013, where he had met not only various civil society actors who had been involved in these events, but also the Turkish authorities, including the Minister of Justice, the Undersecretary of the Ministry of the Interior and the then Governor of Istanbul. Moreover, he had published his conclusions on these events in a report focusing on the conduct of law-enforcement officials in Turkey (see Report by Nils Muižnieks, Commissioner for Human Rights, following his visit to Turkey from 1 to 5 July 2013, CommDH(2013)24, 26 November 2013, ).
According to the Commissioner for Human Rights, these events were triggered as a result of the excessive use of force against a small number of peaceful protestors trying to stop the cutting of trees in Gezi Park in Istanbul and the construction of a shopping centre on Taksim Square at the end of May 2013. Another important factor was the failure of the mainstream media to report on the initial events owing to self-censorship. The initial confrontation led to a wave of demonstrations against the government across Turkey, unprecedented both in their geographic scope and in the numbers of participants. During the initial phases of the events, participation was wide-ranging, including professional associations such as the Chambers of Architects and Engineers, Bar Associations and Medical Associations, trade unions, and many NGOs active in different sectors, such as the environment, women’s rights, LGBTI rights, and human rights in general, as well as citizens’ platforms and other spontaneous initiatives co-ordinating the participation of civil society. Among these, “Taksim Solidarity” was considered to be the most representative and had played a very prominent role during these events. Accordingly, the Commissioner’s predecessor had also met representatives of this platform during the above-mentioned visit. The applicant was not part of this civil-society platform.
The Commissioner for Human Rights submitted that the Gezi events had also been marked by heavy-handed interventions by the authorities. The Commissioner’s Office had received a large number of serious, consistent and credible allegations of human-rights violations committed by law-enforcement officials against peaceful demonstrators or bystanders. According to the Commissioner, the overwhelming majority of these allegations had not been effectively investigated by the Turkish judiciary on account of the long-standing pattern of impunity for the security forces in Turkey.
The applicant was also suspected of having sought to overthrow the constitutional order. This second charge was related to the attempted coup of 15 July 2016.
During the night of 15 to 16 July 2016 a group of members of the Turkish armed forces calling themselves the “Peace at Home Council” attempted to carry out a military coup aimed at overthrowing the democratically installed parliament, government and President of Turkey. During the attempted coup, soldiers under the instigators’ control bombarded several strategic State buildings, including the Parliament building and the presidential compound, attacked the hotel where the President was staying, held the Chief of General Staff hostage, attacked television channels and fired shots at demonstrators. During the night of violence, more than 250 people were killed and more than 2,500 were injured. The day after the attempted military coup, the national authorities blamed the network linked to Fetullah Gülen, a Turkish citizen living in Pennsylvania (United States of America) and considered to be the leader of an organisation described by the Turkish authorities as FETÖ/PDY (“Gülenist Terror Organisation/Parallel State Structure”). Several criminal investigations were subsequently initiated by the appropriate prosecuting authorities in respect of suspected members of that organisation.
On 20 July 2016 the government declared a state of emergency for a period of three months as from 21 July 2016; the state of emergency was subsequently extended for further periods of three months by the Council of Ministers, chaired by the President.
On 21 July 2016 the Turkish authorities gave notice to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe of a derogation from the Convention under Article 15.
During the state of emergency, the Council of Ministers, chaired by the President, passed thirty-seven legislative decrees (nos. 667-703) under Article 121 of the Constitution. The legislative decrees also placed significant restrictions on the procedural safeguards laid down in domestic law for anyone held in police custody or pre-trial detention (for example, extension of the police custody period, restrictions on access to case files and on the examination of objections against detention orders).
On 18 July 2018 the state of emergency was lifted.
As indicated above (see paragraph 14), on 18 October 2017 the applicant was arrested in Istanbul and placed in police custody. He was suspected of having sought to overthrow the constitutional order and the Government through force and violence.
Later that day, following a request by the Istanbul public prosecutor, the applicant’s office was searched in his presence. During the search, nine USB keys, three computer hard drives and a mobile telephone were seized.
On 20 October 2017 the Istanbul 10th Magistrate’s Court decided to restrict access to the investigation file, in accordance with Article 153 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. In its decision the magistrate’s court held that, given the nature of the alleged offence and the evidence submitted to the file, examination of the investigation file by the suspect and his lawyers would jeopardise the conduct of the investigation.
An objection to this decision, submitted on 1 February 2018 by the applicant’s representatives, was dismissed on 9 February 2018.
In the meantime, on 25 October 2017 the Istanbul public prosecutor decided to extend the applicant’s custody by seven days, in accordance with Article 91 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“CCP”) and Articles 10 and 11 of Legislative Decree no. 684 on the measures taken in the context of the state of emergency.
On 30 October 2017 M.P., a witness against the applicant, gave statements to the police (see also paragraphs 36, 53 and 62 below).
On 31 October 2017 the applicant, assisted by his lawyers, was questioned about the accusations against him by police officers from the anti-terrorist branch of the Istanbul Security Headquarters. According to the Government, before this interview the applicant had been informed in detail of the offences with which he was charged and about the evidence gathered.
According to the record of this interview, the applicant was questioned about the Gezi Park events, about his relations with journalists, academics, numerous human-rights defenders and members or heads of NGOs, and about his alleged contacts with Professor H.J.B., former director of the Wilson Center in the United States. The Government indicated that a criminal investigation was pending against Prof. H.J.B. in connection with the attempted coup of 15 July 2016; in particular, he is suspected of having instigated it.
The relevant parts of the record of the applicant’s questioning read as follows:
“[The police officers read out statements by M.P., who accused the applicant of acting for G.S. [an American businessman and founder of the Open Society Institute] in Turkey and of having organised and financed the “Gezi insurrection”, and asked questions about his alleged ties to terrorist organisations.]
Mr Kavala: These are unfounded and defamatory statements ... I work actively with three NGOs, Anadolu Kültür, the Foundation for an Open Society and TESEV, and I take part in meetings organised in the context of their activities. However, I did not take part in any international meeting about the Gezi Park events prior to their occurrence. As you can see from my emails, I merely added my voice to the demands that Gezi Park remain a public part and I supported the activities to that end. I am convinced that parks are essential sites in urban life. In addition, my office and the building where I was born are located on the Elmadağ district, near the park; as a result, I regularly use this park on my daily travels. It is for this reason that I took part in peaceful activities to defend the environment ... I have no other aim than to protect Gezi Park as a public park. I do not have any links to the organisations in question. I am against the activities carried out by these organisations for other purposes.
I know that NGOs are carrying out activities to ensure that Gezi Park remains a public park. So far as I am aware, the Solidarity Taksim collective, set up following the involvement of the union of Turkish Chambers of Architects, was responsible for organising and coordinating the events. I was not part of this group. I took part in the movement in a personal capacity, and did not take any steps to mobilise the NGOs ...
The allegation that I provided financial support to the campaign [in question] is incorrect. My only contribution was to supply young trees. I was previously accused of having conducted fund-raising activities in order to provide gas masks. As a result, an inspection was carried out in the premises of the Foundation for an Open Society. However, no evidence was found to corroborate these allegations.”
The police officers read out transcripts of a telephone conversation with F.B.G. on 24 July 2013, and asked the applicant for information about his ties with that individual and about his bid to obtain financial support from European Union funds as part of his plans to set up a news channel.
The applicant replied that F.B.G. was a journalist who had lost her job and wanted to set up a news channel, and that she had asked for his backing. He added that it had proved impossible to implement this project. In response to the question about the financial support requested by F.B.G., the applicant replied as follows:
“.. The Europe in question refers to the grants paid to NGOs by the European Commission. So far as I remember, this conversation took place after the Gezi events...”
The applicant was also questioned about a telephone conversation with O.K. The police officers read out an extract from this conversation in which the following phrase was used: “the lobby has taken a decision about the place where the meeting will be held” (“lobinin toplantının nerede yapılacağı konusunda karar aldığı”). The applicant replied as follows:
“I did indeed have this conversation. I have known O.K. for a long time. He is the founder of the Bir Zamanlar publishing company, which publishes books on history and cultural history ... The lobby discussed in the conversation is a woman, Lori Z., who is a member of [an ONG]”.
The police officers also asked the applicant several questions about his telephone conversations with O.Y., who wished to organise an exhibition about the Gezi events in Brussels, with C.M.U., who had set up a film production company and was hoping for financial backing from the Foundation for an Open Society, and with G.T., director of the Foundation for an Open Society, who was planning to organise a campaign about the events of 1915. In this connection, the applicant was asked about a telephone conversation which he had had with O.K. on 19 August 2013:
“It appears from your telephone conversation that a large-scale event was planned to mark the centenary of the so-called Armenian genocide of 1915, and that in order to mitigate the backlash it was decided to present this event as a way of boosting tourist revenue. During this conversation, why did you make comments about the strength of the demonstrations about the so-called Armenian genocide which would be organised in our country?”
The applicant: I did indeed have this conversation. It was a conversation that I had with O.K. about the participation of American citizens of Armenian origin in the 2015 commemorations ... O.K. made a joke and said that this group’s arrival would provide an occasion to boost tourist revenue and have the genocide recognised. However, it is clear from this conversation that the aim of the visit was not to obtain recognition of the genocide from the Turkish Government, but to [enable this group] to share a moment of emotion .... Furthermore, several groups composed of individuals of Armenian origin ... took part in the 2015 commemorations and there was no tension. The then Prime Minister, R.T. Erdoğan, issued a message of condolence.”
The applicant was questioned about a telephone conversation he had had on 7 September 2013 with A.G., an activist and member of the Association for Human Rights, concerning allegations of breaches of the rights of Turkey’s Alevi community.
The applicant was also asked about a telephone conversation he had had on 24 September 2014 with a foreign journalist concerning an academic conference on the Gezi events. It was stated that the applicant had held a telephone conversation on 25 October 2013 with an individual named I.P., with a view to using the Gezi Park events to exert political pressure on the authorities. This conversation reads as follows:
“I.P.: Hello, Osman, I’m going to ask you a question. What are we going to talk about tomorrow at six o’clock?
Applicant: What are we going to talk about?
P.: Did I understand correctly? That’s why I’m doing this [I’m asking this question].
Applicant: O.K. We could talk about [the following topics]; before the local elections [local elections were held in Turkey on 30 March 2014], our dream is actually to see a more transparent, more participatory model of local government emerge following the Gezi events; that is, the energy that has emerged from this [the events in Gezi Park] should continue to be an element of democratic opposition or to function as a means of democratic pressure (“demokratik muhalefet unsuru olarak veya demokratik baskı aracı olarak işlev görmeye devam etmesi”)... Now, to realize these dreams or plans, we have thought of some things, to see what the new political equation will be or how political alliances could be formed, while also of course thinking a bit about certain aspects that are related to the objectives at the outset. In other words, if we start thinking about this, what model can best serve these objectives? What political actors could be useful for these objectives, and without focusing too much on names, are there a few things we could do? For example, [could we] support municipal council candidates who accept such and such requests? That is, how can we make progress in strengthening transparency within municipalities in an institutional way and civil society’s control over these bodies [“belediyelerin kurumsal olarak şeffaflaşmalarına ve sivil toplumun denetimine açık olmalarına imkan verecek bir takım adımlar nasıl atılabilir”]? After all this, we will probably achieve something [.] But we can ask ourselves the question how things will go if the AKP wins the elections again. [On the other hand,] we can also ask ourselves another question: if the CHP [the main opposition party] candidate is not sensitive to these issues, what will happen then [?] Here we will probably [address these topics]; i.e. we will see if we can achieve something around these themes.
P.: You asked, ‘Should we invite another person?’ That’s why I’m asking this question.
Applicant: Do you have someone in mind?
P.: I have friends who were in the park collective [this must refer to one of the Gezi Park collectives]. There are even people who are part of Çarşı’s group [a group of supporters of the Beşiktaş football team]. These are friends who organized the ‘Come in September’ meeting. They are still active in several Park collectives and are continuing their actions [it seems that the Gezi Park collectives in some districts did not disperse even after the events had ended]. I wonder if we could invite one of these people.
Applicant: As you wish.”
The police officers read out transcripts of telephone conversations between third parties, dated 16 September 2013, 18 September 2013, 4 October 2013 and 4 February 2014, in which the speakers had spoken of their intention to ask the applicant for money. The applicant replied that he did not know the individuals concerned and that he had not provided them with any financial support.
The police officers also showed the applicant photographs taken in the course of surveillance operations against him, showing that the applicant had met: A.H.A., a member of the management board of Anadolu Kültür, on 3 August 2013; A.Z., a journalist, on 12 August 2013 (with other persons); B.F., president of an association bringing together music producers, and other persons, on 18 August 2013; and U.K., a financial adviser, on 6 September 2013. The applicant confirmed that he had indeed met those persons.
The applicant was asked about meetings with representatives of foreign countries and telephone conversations with academics, journalists and NGO representatives. He was also questioned about: several incoming calls from the number “123456”; photos taken with his mobile phone during the Gezi events; the funeral of S.E., a politician of Kurdish origin; messages exchanged by him on 2 October 2017 with A.F.I., an academic and journalist, and with A.E., a journalist, with regard to the financial difficulties encountered by a daily newspaper and the possibility of obtaining financial support from European Union funds; an exchange of messages and a meeting, on 9 May 2017, with C.D., a journalist who lived in Germany and was subject to criminal proceedings in Turkey for, among other charges, divulging documents that were classified as secret (spying) and attempting to overthrow the constitutional order; and a visit by a delegation of the EUTCC (EU Turkey Civic Commission) which included members of the European Parliament, academics and journalists [this visit had taken place between 13 and 19 February 2017]. Furthermore, he was questioned about a message in which he had stated as follows:
“[o]ne might even say that it is problematical to compare DAESH [a terrorist organisation with a Salafist jihadist ideology] to the PKK and to [claim that], while DAESH’s Salafist ideology is legitimate, the nationalist and leftist ideology advocated by the PKK is illegitimate and irreligious. However, the limits of the ideas which coincide with the PKK’s political aims but do not support terrorism are much wider than in the other [Salafist ideology] (“Halbuki, PKK’nın siyasi hedefleriyle çakışan ama terör destekçisi olmayan düşünce alanının sınırları öbüründen çok daha geniştir”).”
The applicant was also questioned about his relations with H.J.B., whom the prosecutor’s office suspected of having been one of the instigators of the attempted coup and of having stayed at Istanbul’s Büyükada Hotel on that occasion. He replied that he was acquainted with H.J.B., an academic and director of the Wilson Center in the United States, and that he had contacts with the latter’s sister, K.B., who was a professor of anthropology at the University of Columbia and wished to organise an exhibition on the theme of shared sacred sites. He also explained that he had met H.J.B. at dinner in an Istanbul restaurant on 18 July, and that they had spoken briefly.
The police officers also quoted from an interview with the applicant, broadcast by Web TV on YouTube on 4 August 2015, in which he had stated:
“Ultimately, although some people compare the PKK to DAESH or similar organisations, nowadays the PKK is an organisation which is capable of conducting a rational policy and this is what comes across in their negotiations ... This is a major responsibility for the Government, but in certain situations, an opposition movement, an armed opposition movement, plays an important role in determining policy ...”
In reply, the applicant emphasised that he had been referring in this interview to the negotiations between the leaders of the PKK and the Government in Oslo [in the context of secret meetings which had been held in Norway at the beginning of the 2010s].
Lastly, the applicant explained that he had spoken several times with the then Prime Minister, and had worked with the director of prison services in order to improve prison conditions. He also specified that he had always supported the State institutions and that he had attempted to ensure coordination between them and the NGOs.
On 1 November 2017 the public prosecutor’s office called for the applicant to be placed in pre-trial detention for “attempting to overthrow the constitutional order through force and violence” (Article 309 of the Criminal Code) and for “attempting to overthrow the Government or to prevent, through force and violence, the authorities from exercising their functions” (Article 312 of the Criminal Code). In justifying the suspicions in relation to the Gezi events, the prosecutor’s office alleged in its application for placement in detention that the applicant had led and organised the demonstrations more usually known as “the Gezi events”, which were in fact an insurrection in which all the terrorist organisations (FETÖ/PDY and the PKK, as well as the DHKPC and MLKP, two extremist left-wing armed organisations) had actively participated with the aim of overthrowing the Government and preventing it, through force and violence, from exercising its functions. With regard to the charge concerning the attempted coup, the public prosecutor’s office relied on evidence from the case file which, in its opinion, showed that the applicant had had intensive and unusual contacts with foreign nationals and especially with H.J.B., whom the prosecutor’s office suspected of having been one of the instigators of the attempted coup and of having stayed in the Büyükada Hotel on that occasion. The prosecution’s argument was based, in particular, on reports from base transceiver stations indicating that on 18 July 2016 the applicant’s mobile telephone and that of H.J.B. had emitted signals from the same station.
On the same date the applicant, assisted by his two lawyers, was brought before the Istanbul 1st magistrate’s court. Before it, he denied the accusations against him. He explained that he campaigned for peace and for the protection of human rights and that, in order to achieve these aims, he had worked in collaboration with members of NGOs, intellectuals, civil servants and politicians. He added that he had always drawn public attention to the dangerous and obscure nature of the activities carried out by the Gülenist organisation [Fetullah Gülen’s network]. He repeated his statements about the intercepted telephone conversations, the photographs taken during the physical surveillance operations, the reports from the base transceiver stations and other evidence that had been included in the case file.
At the close of the hearing, the magistrate ordered that the applicant be placed in pre-trial detention, on the grounds that there existed concrete evidence (“somut deliller”) indicating that he had been the instigator of the “Gezi events”, which were in fact an insurrection, supported by numerous terrorist organisations with the aim of overthrowing the Government; that the applicant had provided financial support to persons who had taken part in the demonstrations; and that he had been in contact, inter alia, with one of the instigators of the attempted coup, Professor H.J.B. He also referred to the existence of strong suspicions against the applicant, the nature of the offences with which he had been charged and the fact that these offences were among those listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP – namely, the so-called “catalogue offences”, for which a suspect’s pre-trial detention was deemed justified in the event of strong suspicion – and to the danger of absconding. He further noted that a judicial review measure would be insufficient at this stage and that it would not correspond to the aim pursued.
On 8 November 2017 the applicant lodged an objection against the order for his pre-trial detention. In support of the objection, he argued that there was no concrete evidence that could justify a measure of pre-trial detention. In particular, he submitted that the prosecution’s argument that the Gezi events could have been orchestrated by a single individual or organisation was simply not credible. He reiterated the statements that he had made, as recorded by the police (see paragraph 36 above) and by the magistrate’s court (see paragraph 38 above). In addition, emphasising that his placement in detention had been ordered about five years after the Gezi events, he challenged the magistrate court’s argument that a judicial supervision measure would be insufficient at this stage and would not serve the aim pursued.
On 13 November 2017, without commenting on any of the arguments raised by the applicant, the Istanbul 2nd magistrate’s court dismissed an appeal lodged before it by the applicant against the decision to maintain his detention, on the grounds that the contested decision had complied with the procedure and the law.
According to the Government, on 8 and 29 November, 28 December 2017, 2 January, 7 March, 8 March, 26 June, 6 August, and 9 and 3l August 2018 the applicant submitted applications for provisional release. Those applications were examined by the competent magistrates’ courts and dismissed by decisions of 13 and 30 November 2017, 22 January, 9 March, l9 March, 9 July, 13 and 31 August 2018 respectively. The Government argued that the applicant’s requests for provisional release had been examined by the relevant courts within a maximum period of 30 days, as required by Article 3 of Emergency Legislative Decree no. 668, which had entered into force on 27 July 2016. They added that the magistrates issued their decisions without holding hearings, in accordance with Article 6 of Emergency Legislative Decree no. 667 (see paragraph 73 above).
According to the Government, the magistrates, in their decisions extending the applicant’s detention, had referred not only to the evidence mentioned in the decision of 1 November 2017, but also to a report by the Financial Crimes Investigation Committee (“MASAK”). The courts had also indicated that the alleged offences were among the so-called ‘catalogue’ offences listed in Article 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure; that pre-trial detention was a proportionate measure in view of the length of the sentence provided for by law; and that alternative measures to detention were insufficient, given the risks of absconding and of damage to evidence.
According to the Government, on 26 October, 24 November and 2l December 2018, then on 18 January and 15 February 2019, the competent courts examined, of their own motion, whether to maintain the applicant in detention. The Government indicated that, in accordance with Article 10l § 3 of the CCP, the applicant’s court-appointed lawyers were able to attend the review hearings on 26 October and 24 November 2018 and 15 February 2019, and were able to submit oral arguments against the applicant’s continued detention.
It appears from the case file that:
- On 30 November 2017 the magistrate’s court ruled – in the context of the examination, of its own motion, on the applicant’s detention – on a request for release dated 29 November 2017, thus also acting in accordance with Article 6 (i.) of Legislative Decree no. 667 and Article 3(ç) i. of Legislative Decree no. 668 (see paragraph 73 above). It stated that the public prosecutor had requested that the contested measure be maintained, and it granted that request. It considered that there existed concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion that the offence in question had been committed, and it emphasised the seriousness of this offence and the fact that all the evidence had not yet been gathered. Further, considering that the alleged offence was among the so-called ‘catalogue’ offences listed in Article 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, it concluded that pre-trial detention was a proportionate measure in view of the length of the sentence provided for by law, and that a judicial supervision measure would be insufficient.
- On 22 December 2017 the magistrate’s court, ruling of its own motion and relying essentially on the grounds set out in its decision of 30 November 2017, ordered that the applicant be maintained in pre-trial detention.
- On 27 December 2017 the applicant submitted a request for release pending trial and for a hearing. Relying on Article 5 of the Convention and on the Court’s case-law in this area, he argued that there was no legitimate and proportionate evidence that could justify his continued pre-trial detention. He also reiterated his previous statements concerning the elements cited as evidence by the prosecution. He also challenged the decisions maintaining his pre-trial detention, arguing that they had not been properly reasoned.
- On 22 January 2018 the magistrate’s court, ruling of its own motion and relying essentially on the grounds set out in its decision of 30 November 2017, ordered that the applicant be maintained in pre-trial detention.
- On 5 February 2018 the magistrate’s court dismissed the objection lodged by the applicant against the decision to extend the pre-trial detention, on the grounds that the contested decision had been compatible with the procedure and the law.
- On 17 February 2018 the magistrate’s court, ruling of its own motion and relying essentially on the grounds set out in its decision of 30 November 2017, ordered that the applicant be maintained in pre-trial detention.
- On 9 March 2018 the magistrate’s court dismissed the objection lodged by the applicant against the decision to extend the pre-trial detention, on the grounds that the contested decision had been compatible with the procedure and the law.
- On 19 March, 18 April, 16 May, 11 June, 9 July and 3 August 2018 the magistrate’s court, ruling of its own motion and relying essentially on the grounds set out in its decision of 30 November 2017, ordered that the applicant be maintained in pre-trial detention.
- On 13 August 2018, relying essentially on the grounds set out in its previous decisions, the magistrate’s court dismissed the objection lodged by the applicant. Furthermore, it also listed in its decision the evidence which, in its view, indicated that the suspicions against the applicant were well-founded, including the MASAK report (report by the Financial Crimes Investigation Committee – see paragraph 42 above).
- On 31 August, 28 September, 26 October, 24 November and 21 December 2018 the magistrate’s court, ruling of its own motion and relying essentially on the grounds set out in its decision of 30 November 2017, ordered that the applicant be maintained in pre-trial detention.
- On 18 January 2019 the magistrate’s court, ruling of its own motion and relying essentially on the grounds set out in its decision of 30 November 2017, ordered that the applicant be maintained in pre-trial detention and held that there was evidence indicating that the suspect could abscond.
On 5 February 2019 it was decided to disjoin the criminal investigation into the accusation under Article 309 of the Criminal Code (attempted overthrow of the constitutional order) from the investigation into the accusation under Article 312 (attempting to overthrow the Government). In addition, in another decision issued on the same date, it was decided that the offence under Article 309 of the Criminal Code would be the subject of a separate investigation (no. 2017/196115).
At the date of adoption of the present judgment, the prosecutor’s office had not yet lodged a bill of indictment against the applicant in relation to the accusation of attempted overthrow of the constitutional order (Article 309 of the Criminal Code).
On 15 February 2019 the magistrate’s court, ruling of its own motion and relying essentially on the grounds set out in its decision of 30 November 2017, ordered that the applicant should remain in pre-trial detention.
On 19 February 2019 the Istanbul public prosecutor filed a bill of indictment in respect of the applicant and 15 other suspects, including actors, NGO leaders and journalists. He accused them, in particular, of having attempted to overthrow the government by force and violence within the meaning of Article 312 of the Criminal Code, and of having committed numerous breaches of public order – damaging public property, profanation of places of worship and of cemeteries, unlawful possession of dangerous substances, looting, etc.
The bill of indictment in question is a voluminous document of 657 pages. In their written observations, the Government submitted a summary, divided into three main parts.
The indictment may be summarised as follows:
In the first part of the bill of indictment, the prosecutor’s office set out the context underlying the Gezi events. It specified at the outset that it would present “elements which [would] show that the Gezi insurrection [had been] organised by Turkish “distributors” trained by Serbian “exporters” (who [were] professional revolutionaries), with financial support from the West” (“Gezi kalkışmasının Batı finansörlüğünde, Sırp profesyonel devrim ihracatçılarının eğittiği Türkiye distribütörleri tarafından organize edildiğine dair elde edilen bulgular”, see p. 29 of the act of indictment).
According to the prosecutor’s office, the methods developed by Gene Sharp [an American political scientist, known for his extensive writings on non-violent struggle] had influenced several resistance movements across the world, including the Occupy movement, the orange revolution in Georgia [this was probably a reference to the “rose revolution” in Georgia in 2003], and even the so-called “Arab spring” events which had occurred in countries such as Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen. It perceived significant similarities between those events and the Gezi events: all had allegedly been planned in advance on the basis of a well-defined scenario (“planlı bir senaryonun ürünü”); all had been deliberately directed by individuals who were backed by international players (“uluslararası aktörlerden destek alan şahıslarca bilinçli bir şekilde yönlendirildiği”); social media, which enabled the public to communicate with a view to organising anti-government demonstrations, had been widely used; and the symbols, slogans and images already used in the above-mentioned episodes had been reemployed in the Gezi events. In particular, G.S., who was well-known as an international financial speculator, had allegedly backed the civil unrest in eastern bloc and Arab countries through the intermediary of the Open Society Institute, which conducted its activities in Turkey via the Foundation for an Open Society. The bill of indictment was worded as follows:
“... G.S.’s influence on the Gezi insurrection has been widely covered in the press and discussed in political and social circles; it is thus understood that G.S., founder of the Open Society Institute, played a leading role in the Gezi insurrection, as he had already done in the context of insurrections in other countries.”
The prosecutor’s office also alleged that the founders of the political movement Otpor had visited Turkey on numerous occasions in 2012 and 2013. [This movement, whose name means “resistance” in Serbian, advocates non-violent action; it is generally considered as one of the key players in toppling Slobodan Milošević’s regime in Serbia].
The prosecutor’s office listed the dates of the overseas trips which, in its view, the applicant had organised with a view to coordinating the Gezi events (particularly to Belgium, Germany and the United States). It also alleged that the applicant had been in Hungary on 5 and 6 April 2013, and that in July 2012 he had spent 25 days abroad and had made several trips with the other defendants or with A.F.I., an academic.
The prosecutor’s office quoted long extracts from transcripts of telephone conversations in which other defendants had referred to a visit to Turkey by I.V. – co-founder of the Otpor movement and founder of an NGO known as CANVAS (Centre for Applied Nonviolent Action and Strategies) – and their contacts with non-violent movements across the world.
The prosecutor’s office provided a list of 198 types of non-violent actions which, it alleged, had been used during the Gezi events: “the standing man” [“duran adam”, literally, “the man who stops”; this is a form of peaceful demonstration, first used in the Gezi events, which consists in remaining standing for a long period without moving], “the man who plays the piano” [during the Gezi events, a German pianist played the piano on Taksim Square], etc. It concluded that the defendants had intended to generalise non-violent actions throughout Turkey and that there existed a parallel between the Gezi events and those in 2000 which had led to the overthrow of the Serbian government.
The prosecutor’s office alleged that the applicant had received money from the Foundation for an Open Society, and that it was established that I.V. – a co-founder of the Otpor movement – had been in Turkey before and after the Gezi events. It argued that videos existed of demonstrations in Gezi Park as far back as 2011, in which M.A.A., an actor who was one of the defendants, called on the population to gather in Gezi Park on 11 November 2011 and spoke of an “Istanbul uprising”. According to the prosecutor’s office, these elements showed that the Gezi events had been planned in advance, in line with a well-defined scenario.
At the end of the first part of the bill of indictment, the prosecutor’s office provided a chronological summary of the incidents which occurred before and during the Gezi events.
It then described the events which had led, in its opinion, to the overthrow of two former Egyptian presidents. Alleging that Europe and the United States had violently suppressed similar demonstrations in their own countries, it criticised their attitude towards Muslim and anti-globalisation countries, finding it to be hypocritical. It concluded as follows:
“It may thus be considered that the Gezi insurrection occurred against the background of globalist thinking [küresel düşünce] described above. Such actions sometimes achieve their aim. It is agreed that the political aim of those actions was to harass the government formed by the Justice and Development Party, and especially the Prime Minister ....
In the light of this information, it is established that the Gezi insurrection was led and promoted by globalist structures which are likely to control armed terrorist organisations or illegal structures that appear to be legal ..., [which are] likely to manipulate the public in order to achieve their aim .... [In this connection], it is established that the Gezi insurrection was planned and staged by the defendants... In the current global situation, the fact that such events do not occur in countries which are considered as allies or strategic partners but which are governed by an anti-democratic regime or a monarchy confirms the validity of this argument.
Moreover, the fact that similar actions succeeded in changing the existing political structure in Georgia, Ukraine, Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Syria, Bahrain, Algeria, Jordan and Yemen shows that the events in question are not merely preparatory steps but are in fact operational actions ....”
In the second part of the bill of indictment, the prosecutor’s office listed the acts that it accused the applicant and the other suspects of having committed prior to and during the Gezi Park events, and the evidence that it considered relevant. It alleged that the applicant had supported the Gezi insurrection, and that his aim had been to generalise such actions across Anatolia and to popularise so-called “civil disobedience”, with the aim of creating generalised chaos in the country. It held that this evidence showed that the Foundation for an Open Society, to which the applicant belonged in his capacity as a member of the administrative board, had provided financial backing for the Gezi events. It also argued that the applicant had organised secret and public meetings with persons who had played an active role in organising those events, and that he had cultivated relationships with several individuals with a view to setting up a media outlet.
With regard to the charges against the applicant, the prosecutor’s office gave an overview of the activities conducted by the Foundation for an Open Society, and alleged that the “branches” to which the defendants belonged amounted to a sui generis structure, and that their aim was to immobilise the Government. It argued that G.S. was the external branch of this structure and that the applicant was its leader and coordinator at national level. In this connection, it reiterated its allegation that the applicant had intended to create a private television channel. It considered that the applicant had directed the Gezi events through the intermediary of individuals who had infiltrated the “Taksim Solidarity” collective and other NGOs, with a view to creating an “impression of victimisation” (mağduriyet algısı) and generalising the “civil disobedience” actions being conducted by professional activists, and that the ultimate aim of this operation had been to force the Turkish government to resign under pressure from foreign countries and, if possible, to prepare the ground for triggering a civil war (p. 92 and 93 of the bill of indictment).
Quoting from the transcripts of numerous telephone conversations between the applicant and certain other defendants, the prosecutor’s office argued that the defendants had acted in a coordinated manner in order to generalise purportedly non-violent action across the country, had controlled and directed the “Taksim Solidarity” collective, had organised meetings with several persons, including artists and politicians, had held meetings with individuals working for the European Union, the European Commission and the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR), and had helped to organise exhibitions and round tables, as well as film and video recordings, with the aim of ensuring public support for the Gezi events.
The prosecutor’s office also stated that in July 2012 and April 2013 M.A.A. (an actor who was one of the defendants) had appeared in “Mi Mineur”, a theatre play in which the population was called upon to rise up against the dictator of an imaginary country.
The prosecutor’s office further referred to several articles in the daily press describing the applicant as “a red billionaire” and the “Turkish G.S.”.
In the same part of the bill of indictment, the prosecutor’s office also included long extracts from transcripts of telephone conversations in which the applicant and the other defendants had discussed the progress of the actions during the Gezi events, had referred to examples of non-violent movements in various countries, had discussed participation in festivals and funding for these various activities, had considered how the NGOs that were led by the applicant, specifically the Foundation for an Open Society and the limited company Anadolu Kültür, could put together films or videos about the Gezi events, and had discussed the preparation of a documentary film entitled Video Occupy.
In particular, the prosecutor’s office cited a telephone conversation of 21 June 2013 (p. 159), the relevant parts of which read as follows:
“H.H.G.: The resistance is continuing and perhaps you have seen that many strange things are happening in various places ... a little... probably very soon, there is a risk that the movement will run out of steam ... we spoke with the same team about how we could reinvigorate the movement, give it a wider impact and deeper roots by increasing participation ....
The applicant: OK.
H.G.: In reality, the main aim is to bring together the initial team with a team of 40 persons, including B.T., who is part of the “Taksim Solidarity” collective ... some people think that we should generalise [the movement] in Anatolia... I shall send you the programme and the provisional list of participants...
The applicant: OK.
H.G.: I can receive an email from you. Professor (T.T.) sent a message [asking] to shorten the length of the programme and about the date. We would definitely like to have you as part of this team.....
The applicant: OK.
H.G.:   [We must] grow and to become more representative, [since] Taksim Solidarity and the other city collectives are unable to agree on common ground... Some people think that [we] should find a common position and widen [the movement].
The applicant: I agree.
H.G.: Some think that [we] should generalise [the movement] across Anatolia.
The applicant: I agree.
H.G.: We need an action plan for each of us ... a meeting is being planned.
The applicant: OK.
H.G.: Some people want to organise a meeting at Garage Istanbul ... Could we perhaps ask for your support regarding Cezayir [a restaurant managed by the applicant in Istanbul]?
The applicant: For Cezayir there’s no problem - that can be arranged if it’s available.
H.G.: OK. I’m now going to send you the draft programme and the provisional list of participants.
The applicant: I agree.
H.G.: We will speak further on the basis of those documents”.
The prosecutor’s office alleged that the applicant, in his capacity as a leader of the Foundation for an Open Society and of Anadolu Kültür, had conducted numerous activities with a view to setting up “people’s forums”, training activists in carrying out non-violent actions such as those organised by the Otpor movement, gaining the support of European Union countries for securing a ban on the sale of tear gas to Turkey, and keeping the European Court of Human Rights informed about those events.
The prosecutor’s office quoted from reports by the MASAK detailing banking operations by Anadolu Kültür, and alleged that these documents showed that the company in question had made several bank transfers to individuals, commercial companies and NGOs working in the fields of art, human rights and minorities, and that it had received financial support from several foundations, international organisations and universities, such as the Civitas Foundation, the University of Columbia and the Council of Europe. It stated that the 120 foundations supported by Anadolu Kültür included a foundation that had been dissolved following the declaration of the state of emergency on account of its presumed links with the organisation FETÖ/PYD.
The prosecutor’s office claimed that the physical surveillance operations in respect of the applicant had made it possible to establish that on 16 July 2013 he had met the legal director of the German Consulate. It also alleged that another defendant (T.K.) had met with a French journalist on 5 July 2013, that the applicant had met a member of the European Parliament on 26 July 2013, and that a telephone conversation had taken place with a former representative of the European Commission of the European Union. It further stated that during a telephone conversation with an academic, the applicant had also mentioned the visit of the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights.
The prosecutor’s office also alleged that the applicant had contacted journalists and business leaders with a view to setting up a new media outlet and that, in particular, he had contacted Germany, England, other European countries and the Guardian Foundation in order to obtain funding.
The prosecutor’s office also quoted from a telephone conversation of 16 June 2013, the relevant parts of which read:
“... O.E.: You saw an absolutely unbelievable evening on television. Thirty thousand people marched from Kartal [a district in Istanbul] to here... It’s incredible. All the way to Mecidiyekoy [a district of Istanbul], every district is out on the streets .... Now I am back on Taksim again, I have been covered in [tear] gas. This cannot be stopped ....
The applicant: Yes, yes. What kind of action, how can it be organised in a planned way? In other words, protests are arising spontaneously. How can they be planned? They are happening every week.
E.: In fact, we did plan this .... The people cannot be stopped. There is no one to negotiate with. Yesterday I said during a programme on a German channel that T. Erdoğan [the then Prime Minister] was going to say something, that he was going to speak at a meeting. We will see what he says. The people are listening attentively and all of his remarks provoke indignation.
The applicant: Yes. He hasn’t spoken yet, has he?
...
The applicant: He has not yet spoken. But even the governor’s statements increase the human losses. A. was with a 14-year-old girl who was in a terrible state. The doctors say that it’s not clear if she will survive ....
The applicant: ... The events so far have been very serious. This has gone beyond authoritarian actions ....”
According to the prosecutor’s office, the applicant had criticised the then prime minister during this conversation. He had stated that the prime minister was a populist who defended the theory of an international conspiracy, although in reality there was international pressure. He had also supported O.E.’s proposals to organise weekly meetings on the theme of “Law and Justice”, and had criticised the police operations.
The prosecutor’s office also referred to a conversation between the applicant and another defendant, the actor M.M.A., on 6 June 2013. It alleged that, in the course of this conversation, there had been an exchange about a group of football supporters, and that the applicant had stated that this group ought to be encouraged, in order to demonstrate that people from various backgrounds were taking part in the demonstrations. It also indicated that, during the same conversation, the applicant had raised the question of police violence and his conversations with the then Minister of Justice on the subject.
The prosecutor’s office also referred to the statements made to the press by the “Taksim Solidarity” collective during the Gezi events, the meetings organised by various NGOs during this period, and to the activities conducted in various towns in Turkey in support of the Gezi events.
With regard to the presumed links between the FETÖ/PDY organisation and the defendants, the prosecutor’s office alleged that the organisation had supported the Gezi events. In support of its argument, it referred to:
– a message of 30 December 2013 in which the applicant had stated as follows: “for the time being, we need the cemaat [literally, the word ‘cemaat’ means “community”; however, at the relevant time, this term was commonly used to describe the followers of Fetullah Gülen, the presumed head of the FETÖ/PDY organisation] as much as [we need] the Government. Through them, we are informed about acts of corruption and infiltration within the justice system”;
– a telephone conversation between S.C.A., one of the defendants, and a columnist from the Zaman daily newspaper [considered by the Turkish authorities as a news media allied to the FETÖ/PDY organisation], in the course of which S.C.A. had criticised the newspaper’s attitude towards the Gezi events and the columnist had stated: “we fully support the Gezi events ...”;
– an undated telephone conversation during which A.H.A., a former president of the Foundation for an Open Society, had told his interlocutor that he was going to “have dinner with Hoca Efendi [Fetullah Gülen]’s men ...”;
– several telephone conversations between the defendants and journalists working for the Zaman newspaper;
– the prosecution of the head of the security police, who had allegedly ordered police officers to set fire to the tents erected in Gezi Park on 29 May 2013 and to use tear gas against the demonstrators, and who had been dismissed on 20 July 2016 under an emergency legislative decree on account of his presumed links to the FETÖ/PDY organisation.
The prosecutor’s office also cited statements by a police officer (H.G.), questioned as a witness, who stated that he had seen the applicant among the demonstrators during the Gezi events and that the persons around him were seeking his advice, and statements from another witness, M.P., who said that G.S., the applicant and several NGOs and representatives of political parties had supported the Gezi events, and that, under the pretext of human-rights violations, those persons had intended to cause chaos in the country (see paragraphs 34 above and 62 below).
The prosecutor’s office also listed several acts which, in its view, had been intended to put Turkey in an awkward position at international level (“Türkiye’yi Uluslararası alanda zor durumda bırakmak için yapılan faaliyetler”):
– the organisation of an exhibition in Brussels about the Gezi events;
– the preparation of a report about the Gezi events, intended for submission to the European Parliament;
– support for individual applications lodged with the European Court of Human Rights concerning the use of tear gas during demonstrations;
– telephone conversations about cooperation and the exchange of information with various bodies of the Council of Europe, including the Commissioner for Human Rights and the Secretariat General of the Council of Europe ;
– telephone conversations concerning several reports by Amnesty International.
In the same part of the bill of indictment, the prosecutor’s office communicated, in no particular order, the evidence against the applicant, which may be classified and summarised as follows:
Firstly, it indicated that between 2001 and 2006 the applicant had been one of the advisers to the Foundation for an Open Society, and that he had also sat on the administrative boards of that foundation and of the company Anadolu Kültür, which received funding from G.S. It then cited the transcripts of multiple telephone conversations which had taken place during the Gezi events and had concerned, in particular:
– the opening of a bank account, in the context of a public fundraising campaign to purchase gas masks for the demonstrators taking part in the Gezi events;
– providing a table so that the demonstrators gathered in Gezi Park could assemble;
– the plan to create a group of representatives of the Gezi demonstrators, which would be responsible for negotiating with the Government;
– meetings with the then Minister of Justice, who was considered by the speakers to be a decent statesman;
– the organisation of multiple meetings during the Gezi events;
– relationships with several foreign nationals.
The prosecutor’s office also alleged that, during a telephone conversation, the applicant had described the then Prime Minister as a liar.
It also referred to a telephone conversation between the applicant and B.T., a member of the “Taksim Solidarity” collective, on 31 May 2013 (following the security forces’ intervention against the demonstrators in Gezi Park, there had been numerous violent confrontations on that date), the relevant parts of which read as follows:
“... B.T.: Many people have been injured; several people are in intensive care, [the police] have put up barriers everywhere. I am not there, and I won’t be going. The situation is catastrophic. Osman, if you have friends on the Wise Persons’ Commission [at the end of 2012 and in January 2013, a commission made up of 63 individuals from various backgrounds was set up by the Government to accompany the peace process, known as the “solution process”, which had been launched in order to find a peaceful and permanent solution to the “Kurdish question”], they could be asked to make a joint statement. I mean, this is no longer a situation which can go along with the peace process, some people (Yani bu barış süreci ile birlikte gidecek bir durum deǧil artık, birilerinin).
The applicant: Yes, yes, yes.
T.: I’ve written something and I’ve sent it to you.
The applicant: But what is important is to hold a press conference in Cezayir for those living abroad, for the journalists.
...
The applicant: “OK! You said that there had been one death – are you serious?
T.: There has been a death. We don’t know the cause of death; some say that the victim had a heart attack ... But there has been a death. (Taksim) Solidarity is preparing a document; the attack began at 5 a.m. The people gathered there included five masked individuals who were throwing stones at the police. In other words, there was provocation, and now Solidarity’s document will come out. [The document will state that this attack] was not carried out by our members and [that we] hope that those individuals [who were throwing stones at the police] will be identified. The public did not use violence at all.
...
T.: “I myself have written to the Wise Persons, to L., M. and O. It would maybe be useful to put pressure on the Wise Persons, because they have met for the peace process. The Government has declared war on the people.
The applicant: Yes, yes. ...
The applicant: It is necessary to continue lodging criminal complaints ...”
The prosecutor’s office also referred to telephone calls from foreign numbers, the origin of which, it alleged, remained unknown.
In support of its allegations, it mentioned numerous telephone conversations between the applicant and individuals from various backgrounds, without however indicating how they were relevant to its accusations against him. It cited, in particular, conversations between the applicant and:
– A.F.I., a journalist and academic, about an article that he had written which was due to be published in Libération. During this conversation, the applicant had severely criticised the then Prime Minister for making a distinction between lifestyles that he considered “legitimate” and those that he regarded as “illegitimate”. It emerged from this conversation that members of the Prime Minister’s party had expressed their dissatisfaction vis-à-vis the Prime Minister’s position. The applicant, who described the Prime Minister as a “successful fascist leader” (“başarılı faşist lider”) and mentioned the risk of harassment run by unmarried couples, had made the following remark to A.F.I.: “They [presumably, the members of the ruling party] must get rid of this person”. Furthermore, he had claimed that [Turkey had] a “dictatorial regime” and that the Prime Minister must not be allowed to become President of the Republic.
In the indictment, a report of this telephone conversation was cited. It appears that at 1.15 p.m. on 8 November 2013 A.F.I. telephoned the applicant. The transcript of this telephone conversation reads as follows:
F.I.: “Now I am doing one thing; I sent an article to Libération [and] to Radikal 2 [a weekly publication, annexed to the daily newspaper Radikal, which publishes articles by intellectuals] about the Imam of Turkey.
The applicant: O.K.
F.I.: I need something related to the title [of the article] about Erdoğan, so that another version can be published in Libération explaining these events more...
The applicant: I don’t believe you, I haven’t been following [the news] – he even said that!” ....
F.I.: He said so in Finland,
The applicant: Ah, well! ... I missed it!
F.I.: Yes, I will address this subject.... The members of the AKP [the Prime Minister’s party] want to restrict him; he [Prime Minister] says worse things when he is abroad.
The applicant: Yes.
 A.F.I.: In other words, the members of the AKP are also in a confused state (“şaşkın”) ... one of their own even told me that the man has gone mad.
The applicant: If this man does something about it, [he] will become a successful fascist leader ...
 A.F.I.: They can’t pass... a law.
The applicant: Perhaps he could be placed under tutelage (“ya da hacir altına”) ...
F.I.: ... They can’t do that...
The applicant: Or he would be placed under tutelage, i.e. one of these options.
F.I.: Yes, they are unable to adopt a law, but because of this man, they will encounter many difficulties; [for example], the zealous (“işgüzar”) prefect of Adana [a city in Turkey] will conduct searches, the zealous neighbour will denounce [his neighbours].
The applicant: ... It is a headache (“bela”) so... it is a headache in our eyes, but this man does not consider it like that.
F.I.: No, when events happen, they will say that it is an interference in lifestyles. Many AKP members are in shock ....
The applicant: That’s what I’m saying, that’s what I’m saying, that’s the AKP...
F.I.: They’re going to put him under tutelage ...
The applicant: They must get rid of this man after all this, because...
F.I.: I completely agree!
The applicant: ... if a boy and a girl have been together in such places, [if such information becomes known], their lives are ruined ... in Turkey, there are many ways to harass [someone]...
F.I.: I know that of course. They try to present it as the activity of a terrorist organization (“terör örgütüne sardırmaya çalışıyorlar”), it’s like it was a terrorist [activity] (“sanki terör”)... when girls and boys get together, a terrorist organization [is formed] (“kızlı erkekli yerlerde terör örgütü”).
The applicant: Yes.
...
F.I.: I see that the cemaat (see paragraph 53 above) is also very disturbed ... Their problem is about the houses of Işık [Fetullah Gülen network’s student housing], the students’ houses.
The applicant: Yes, yes!
F.I.: These houses, they’re also illegal; they’re not legal student residences.
The applicant: Yes, yes!
F.I.: After the preparatory courses (“dershane”), they [this presumably refers to the members of the Gulenist network] think that he [the Prime Minister] is obsessed with these houses ...
The applicant: Yes, it is a possibility, yes.
...
The applicant: In the end, there is a climate in which the man [this presumably refers to the Prime Minister] wants to do something, this could only be a dictatorial regime, what else could it be? Okay, he’s not going to get involved in everything; but, when it comes to the subjects he considers important...
F.I.: The subjects he considers to be important perhaps from a moral and political point of view.
The applicant: Okay, he wants to do what he wants.
F.I.: Yes.
The applicant: In general, we act according to the laws, but.
F.I.: Yes, Yes.
The applicant: [But] I have to do what I want about certain issues, that’s it!
F.I.: Yes, yes, yes. That’s right. That’s right.
The applicant: No! If he [this presumably refers to the Prime Minister] said that, then he should not be allowed to become President of the Republic, though I said [earlier] that he would become President of the Republic.
F.I.: It seems to me that this is the case. If he became president of the Republic, he would start harassing the Government.”
– R.T., a politician and former judge at the European Court of Human Rights, about the possibility of putting up a joint opposition candidate for the local elections which were due to be held on 30 March 2014 in the Beyoğlu district;
– A.E., a journalist who was working at the relevant time for the daily newspaper Cumhuriyet, about that newspaper’s financial situation (this conversation had taken place on 2 October 2017).
The prosecutor’s office also mentioned a telephone conversation by the applicant on 17 February 2017 about organising a visit by a delegation from the EU Turkey Civic Commission (EUTCC), composed primarily of members of the European Parliament, academics and journalists [this visit took place between 13 and 19 February 2017].
In addition, the prosecutor’s office quoted from an interview given by the applicant to a Web TV on YouTube on 4 August 2015 (see paragraph 36 above), as well as another interview in which the applicant had stated:
“From now on, will the (PKK) activists be required to leave Turkey in order to lay down their weapons?”
In the third part of the bill of indictment, the prosecutor’s office referred, in particular, to the evidence that it had gathered in respect of the other defendants, included photographs of the symbols used and provided information about them, quoted from articles published during the Gezi events, and submitted photographs of the damage caused by acts of vandalism.
It concluded as follows:
“... before the Gezi insurrection, known as the “Gezi Park events”, all of the defendants had been trained with a view to overthrowing the government; they began to implement their plan in May 2013; legal and illegal structures, as well as illegal structures that were ostensibly legal and seemingly independent of each other, began to act by converging around a single aim; all the defendants sought to incite the public to take to the streets by organising so-called “non-violent” actions that were intended to gain public sympathy; they made numerous appeals and tried to increase participation in collective demonstrations by claiming that the police had intervened violently in the demonstrations; their aim was to plunge the country and society into chaos, as had occurred during the 1960 and 1980 coups d’état, by providing left-wing terrorist organisations with a favourable environment and attempting to overthrow the government of the Republic of Turkey or to prevent it from exercising its functions; they very probably wished to force the Government to resign and to hold early elections, as in certain foreign countries; should this attempt fail, they intended to lay the groundwork for a civil war and a coup d’état, as in Syria and Egypt; the armed terrorist organisation FETÖ/PDY made similar attempts; after the Gezi insurrection had ended ... the armed terrorist organisation FETÖ/PDY took to the stage with the aim of achieving the same goal; in the light of the evidence in the case file, the suspects committed the offences with which they are charged.”
The prosecutor’s office called for the sentences provided for in the Criminal Code to be imposed on the applicant and the other defendants.
On 4 March 2019 the assize court accepted the bill of indictment and agreed to the applicant’s committal for trial; the trial process thus began. The criminal proceedings are still pending before that court.
On 29 December 2017 the applicant lodged an individual application with the Constitutional Court. He alleged, inter alia, a violation of Article 5 (lack of reasonable suspicion, absence of relevant and sufficient reasons, lack of access to the investigation file, no public hearing when his applications for release were examined, etc.) of the Convention. He also submitted that his deprivation of liberty had been imposed with a view to dissuading human-rights defenders from carrying out activities to protect rights and freedoms. In particular, referring to the requirement of rapidity imposed by Article 5 § 4 of the Convention, he asked that his application be given priority.
In the context of the proceedings before the Constitutional Court, the Ministry of Justice submitted its observations on 4 January 2019.
On 22 May 2019 the Constitutional Court deliberated on the applicant’s application. On the following day it published the outcome of its deliberations on its internet site. It declared the applicant’s complaint concerning the lawfulness of the order for his pre-trial detention admissible, but found that there had been no violation of Article 19 of the Constitution. It also dismissed the applicant’s complaint based on the lack of a public hearing when his requests for release had been examined.
On 28 June 2019 the Constitutional Court’s judgment was published in the Official Gazette. With regard to the lawfulness of the order placing the applicant in pre-trial detention, it concluded, by ten votes to five, that there had been no violation of Article 19 of the Constitution. In so doing, the Constitution Court noted, inter alia, that numerous violent acts had been committed during the Gezi events, civilians and police officers had lost their lives, thousands of persons had been injured and several criminal investigations had been opened against the persons responsible for these acts. It considered that, by virtue of his social status and having regard to his national and international contacts, the applicant had been in a position to foresee the consequences of those events and the fact that the demonstrations in question would degenerate into violence. It considered that, taken together, the following elements - listed in the decisions relating to the applicant’s pre-trial detention and in the bill of indictment (see paragraphs 67-69 of the judgment) - were sufficient to give rise to a strong suspicion concerning his responsibility with regard to the acts of violence committed during the Gezi events and the ultimate aim of those acts, namely the overthrow of the Government: the content of the conversation between the applicant and H.H.G. (see paragraph 51 above); the fact that the applicant had mentioned the political repercussions of the Gezi events during a telephone conversation; the fact that he had given assistance to the demonstrators by providing premises for meetings and equipment, including gas masks; the fact that he had organised meetings and taken part in them; the fact that he had provided financial backing to persons who supported these events; and the fact that he had worked to obtain public support for the Gezi events. The Constitutional Court concluded that in the light of these elements, the finding that there existed factual evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion that the alleged offence has been committed seemed neither arbitrary nor unjustified.
As to the complaint regarding the lack of a public hearing when examining the applications for release, the Constitutional Court pointed out that in the period between 1 November 2017 (the date on which the applicant was placed in pre-trial detention) and 30 April 2019 (the date on which his applicants were present at the hearing) – which lasted more than seventeen months –, the applicant had not been brought before the courts which were required to decide on the extension of his pre-trial detention. Holding that the applicant had had the opportunity to bring an action for damages, it nonetheless declared this complaint inadmissible for failure to exhaust the ordinary remedies.
In their dissenting opinions, three of the judges in the minority held, in particular, after examining the evidence in the case file, that there was not strong evidence in the present case that the applicant had committed an offence. They considered that the mere fact that the applicant had taken part in the Gezi events and provided support to peaceful demonstrations or non-violent actions could not be regarded as an act punishable under criminal law, in so far as everyone had the right to take part in such demonstrations. They also stated that the case file was not sufficient to establish that the applicant had been involved in committing violent acts. They added that in its previous judgments in cases concerning the Gezi events, the Constitutional Court had held on several occasions that there had been a violation of the right to peaceful assembly, and had even held that the disproportionate use of force by the police, against a demonstrator who had not participated in violence, was likely to have a dissuasive effect on the exercise of the right to freedom of peaceful assembly. They also criticised the fact that the applicant had been placed in pre-trial detention four years after the Gezi events. In particular, they emphasised that the evidence had been gathered during the initial phase of the investigation and it did not appear from the case materials that the authorities had gathered significant new evidence in the subsequent phases of the investigation that was likely to alter its course. Two of the three also considered that the evidence in the file did not prove that offences punishable under Articles 309 and 312 of the Criminal Code had been committed. In particular, they stressed that one of the material elements constituting the alleged offences was the use of “force” or “violence”.
Further, the fourth dissenting judge, without ruling on the reasonableness of the suspicions against the applicant, noted that a large part of the evidence had been gathered in 2013. In his view, the fact of ordering the placement in detention of a suspect more than four years after the events could not be considered as a “necessary” measure.
Lastly, the fifth dissenting judge criticised the manner in which the majority had examined the individual application. He emphasised that in its judgment the Turkish Constitutional Court should have ruled on the link between the evidence in the case file and the constituent elements of the offence, namely “force and violence” and “criminal intent”. Referring to the relevant case-law of the Constitutional Court, he stated that that court ought to have examined the items of evidence one by one, but that in the present case, it had, on the contrary, taken a holistic approach. He added that the main problem in the majority decision was, in his view, the question of the proportionality of the measure. In his opinion, the fact of placing a suspect in pre-trial detention four years after the events in question could not be considered as a proportional measure. In this connection, he considered that the courts had provided stereotyped reasons to justify this measure.
The applicant submitted to the Court two statements made by the President of the Republic.
The first statement was made by the President of the Republic on 21 November 2018 at a public meeting with local elected officials. The relevant parts of the statement read as follows:
“Did you ever think of that? Someone financed terrorists in the context of the Gezi events. This man is now behind bars. And who is behind him? The famous Hungarian Jew G.S. This is a man who encourages people to divide and to shatter nations. G.S. has huge amounts of money and he spends it in this way. His representative in Turkey is the man of whom I am speaking, who inherited wealth from his father and who then used his financial resources to destroy this country. It is this man who provides all manner of support for these acts of terror...”
The second declaration was made on 3 December 2018 following the press statement published on the occasion of the G20 Summit [the Group of Twenty (G20) is a forum of nineteen countries, including Turkey, and the European Union; the thirteenth G20 summit was held on 30 November and 1 December 2018]. The relevant parts of this statement read as follows:
“I have already disclosed the names of those behind Gezi. I said that its external pillar was G.S., and the national pillar was Kavala. Those who send money to Kavala are well known. And now they have taken the decision to close the foundation, to leave Turkey, and so on; this is how they have occupied our agenda.”
The applicant also mentioned statements made by M.P. to the relevant prosecutor’s office on 22 November 2018 (see, in particular, paragraphs 34, 36 and 53 above). He alleged that in those statements M.P. had complained about the fact of his previous statements being used to justify the opening of a criminal investigation against the applicant. According to the applicant, M.P. explained that he had met members of the Security Directorate on several occasions to discuss his academic research and had replied to their questions. However, he denied having made an incriminating statement. M.P. stated that he taken an active part in the Gezi events, which, in his view, were legitimate and fair demonstrations, and that he had been injured during disproportionate police interventions. He refuted the version that these demonstrations had been directed and financed by international institutions. In this connection, he denied having established a link between the applicant and an international conspiracy.
The applicant submitted that the Gezi protest movements had been the subject of numerous academic studies, from various perspectives, and that none of this research had shown that those events had been premeditated by foreign forces. He submitted six published articles about the Gezi Park events to the Court.
The applicant also referred, inter alia, to the following documents:
- “Opinion on the amendments to the Constitution adopted by the Grand National Assembly on 21 January 2017 and submitted to a national referendum on 16 April 2017”, adopted by the Venice Commission at its 110th plenary session (Venice, 10-11 March 2017),
- Resolution no. 2156 (25 April 2017) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, entitled “Functioning of Democratic Institutions in Turkey”.
The Government argued that the applicant had submitted the same allegations to the United Nations High Commission on Human Rights and more specifically to its Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (“the Working Group”). In this connection, they communicated to the Court a letter entitled “Joint urgent appeal under the special procedures”, which had been sent to the Turkish Government on 2 November 2017 and signed by the Vice-Chair of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, the UN Special Rapporteur on minority issues, the UN Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights, the UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, and the UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human-rights defenders.
The letter concerned the applicant’s arrest and detention. Its authors summarised the information they had received about the applicant’s detention and, in particular, the public statements made in this respect by the President of Turkey on 24 October 2017. Referring to the information forwarded to them concerning the applicant’s arrest and placement in detention, they called on the Government, in accordance with Articles 9, 10 and 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights not to deprive him of his liberty arbitrarily and to take all necessary measures to ensure that he was tried by independent and impartial courts.
In the urgent appeal, the United Nations Human Rights Council, by virtue of the powers vested in it, invited the Government to submit their observations on a number of points concerning the applicant’s deprivation of liberty. The relevant part of the letter reads:
“We would like to inform your Excellency’s Government that after having transmitted an urgent appeal to the Government, the WG may transmit the case through its regular procedure in order to render an opinion on whether the deprivation of liberty was arbitrary or not.”
The Government specified that they had transmitted their observations on the above-mentioned points.
For his part, the applicant explained that this application had been made without his knowledge and that he had never taken part in the proceedings in question.
The relevant parts of Article 19 of the Constitution read as follows:
“Everyone has the right to personal liberty and security.
...
Individuals against whom there are strong presumptions of guilt may be detained only by order of a judge and for the purposes of preventing their absconding or the destruction or alteration of evidence, or in any other circumstances provided for by law that also necessitate their detention. Il No one shall be arrested without an order by a judge except when caught in flagrante delicto or where a delay would have a harmful effect; the conditions for such action shall be determined by law.
 ...
Everyone who is deprived of his or her liberty for any reason whatsoever shall be entitled to apply to a competent judicial authority for a speedy decision on his or her case and for his or her immediate release if the detention is not lawful. ...”
Article 309 § 1 of the Criminal Code is worded as follows:
 “Anyone who attempts to overthrow by force and violence the constitutional order provided for by the Constitution of the Republic of Turkey or to establish a different order in its place, or de facto to prevent its implementation, whether fully or in part, shall be sentenced to aggravated life imprisonment.”
Article 312 § 1 of the Criminal Code provides:
“Anyone who attempts to overthrow the Government of the Republic of Turkey by force and violence or to prevent it, whether fully or in part, from discharging its duties shall be sentenced to aggravated life imprisonment.”
A detailed description of the relevant provisions of the CCP concerning pre-trial detention are to be found in the Court’s judgments in the cases of Agit Demir v. Turkey (no. 36475/10, § 30, 27 February 2018) and Mehmet Hasan Altan v. Turkey (no. 13237/17, §§ 71-73, 20 March 2018).
The relevant parts of Article 100 §§ 1 and 2 of the CCP provide:
“1.  If there are facts giving rise to a strong suspicion that the [alleged] offence has been committed and to a ground for pre-trial detention, a detention order may be made in respect of a suspect or an accused. Pre-trial detention may only be ordered in proportion to the sentence or preventive measure that could potentially be imposed, bearing in mind the significance of the case.
In the cases listed below, a ground for detention shall be presumed to exist:
(a)  if there are specific facts grounding a suspicion of a flight risk ...;
(b)  if the conduct of the suspect or accused gives rise to a suspicion
of a risk that evidence might be destroyed, concealed or tampered with,
of an attempt to put pressure on witnesses or other individuals ...”
For certain offences listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP (the so-called “catalogue offences”), there is a statutory presumption of the existence of grounds for detention. The relevant passages of Article 100 § 3 of the CCP read:
“(3)  If there are facts giving rise to a strong suspicion that the offences listed below have been committed, it can be presumed that there are grounds for detention:
(a)  for the following crimes provided for in the Criminal Code (no. 5237 of 26 September 2004):
...
crimes against the constitutional order and against the functioning of the constitutional system (Articles 309, 310, 311, 313, 314 and 315);
...”
Article 101 of the CCP provides that reasons must be given for extending detention and for finding that alternative measures would be insufficient.
Two successive legislative decrees (nos. 667 and 668), which entered into force on 23 July 2016 and 27 July 2016 respectively, had the effect of amending certain investigative measures and procedural acts. Under Article 6 § 1 (ı) of legislative decree no. 667, the question of continued detention, objections lodged against detention and applications for release “may” be examined on the basis of the file. Under Article 3 § 1 (ç) of legislative decree no. 668, applications for release submitted by a detained person are examined on the basis of the file when the court, of its own motion, examines [detention orders] every thirty days in application of Article 108 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The relevant Council of Europe and international texts on the protection and role of human-rights defenders are set out in the Aliyev v. Azerbaijan judgment (nos. 68762/14 and 71200/14, §§ 88-92, 20 September 2018).
In particular, on 6 February 2008 at its 1017th meeting the Committee of Ministers adopted a Declaration on Council of Europe action to improve the protection of human-rights defenders and promote their activities. The relevant parts of the Declaration read as follows:
“The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe ...
...
Condemns all attacks on and violations of the rights of human rights defenders in Council of Europe member States or elsewhere, whether carried out by state agents or non-state actors;
Calls on member States to:
(i) create an environment conducive to the work of human rights defenders, enabling individuals, groups and associations to freely carry out activities, on a legal basis, consistent with international standards, to promote and strive for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms without any restrictions other than those authorised by the European Convention on Human Rights;
(ii) take effective measures to protect, promote and respect human rights defenders and ensure respect for their activities;
...
(vi) ensure that their legislation, in particular on freedom of association, peaceful assembly and expression, is in conformity with internationally recognised human rights standards and, where appropriate, seek advice from the Council of Europe in this respect;
(vii) ensure the effective access of human rights defenders to the European Court of Human Rights, the European Committee of Social Rights and other human rights protection mechanisms in accordance with applicable procedures;
(viii) co-operate with the Council of Europe human rights mechanisms and in particular with the European Court of Human Rights in accordance with the ECHR, as well as with the Commissioner for Human Rights by facilitating his/her visits, providing adequate responses and entering into dialogue with him/her about the situation of human rights defenders when so requested;
...”
On 26 June 2018 the Parliamentary Assembly adopted Resolution 2225 (2018) on protecting human rights defenders in Council of Europe member States, which in the relevant parts read as follows:
“1.  The Parliamentary Assembly recalls its  and  on the situation of human rights defenders in Council of Europe member State and its  and  on strengthening the role and protection of human rights defenders in Council of Europe member States. It pays tribute to the invaluable work of human rights defenders for the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Human rights defenders are “those who work for the rights of others” – individuals or groups who act, in a peaceful and legal way, to promote and protect human rights, whether they are lawyers, journalists, members of non-governmental organisations or others.
...
The Assembly notes that in the majority of Council of Europe member States, human rights defenders are free to work in an environment conducive to the development of their activities. Nevertheless, it notes that over the past few years the number of reprisals against human rights defenders has been on the rise. New restrictive laws on NGO registration and funding have been introduced. Many human rights defenders have been subject to judicial, administrative or tax harassment, smear campaigns and criminal investigations launched on dubious charges, often related to alleged terrorist activities or purportedly concerning national security. Some of them have been threatened, physically attacked, arbitrarily arrested, detained or imprisoned. Others have even been assassinated. As a result, the space for human rights defenders’ action is becoming more and more restricted and less safe.
The Assembly condemns these developments and reaffirms its support for the work of human rights defenders, who often put at risk their security and life for the promotion and protection of the rights of others, including the most vulnerable and oppressed groups (migrants, refugees and members of minorities – national, religious or sexual), or in order to combat impunity of State officials and corruption. ....
The Assembly therefore calls on member States to:
1.  respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of human rights defenders, including their right to liberty and security, a fair trial and their freedoms of expression and assembly and association;
2.  refrain from any acts of intimidation or reprisal against human rights defenders and protect them against attacks or harassment by non-State actors;
...
6.  ensure an enabling environment for the work of human rights defenders, in particular by reviewing legislation and bringing it into line with international human rights standards, refraining from organising smear campaigns against defenders and other civil society activists and firmly condemning such campaigns where organised by non-State actors;
7. encourage human rights defenders to participate in public life and ensure that they are consulted on draft legislation concerning human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as that concerning the regulation of their activities;
8. refrain from arbitrary surveillance of human rights defenders online and other communications;
...
10. fully co-operate with the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights in addressing individual cases of persecution and reprisals against human rights defenders;
11. evaluate the sufficiency, as measured by concrete results, of their efforts taken to protect human rights defenders since the adoption of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the Committee of Ministers’ Declaration on Council of Europe action to improve the protection of human rights defenders and promote their activities. ...”
In Recommendation CM/Rec(2007)14 on the legal status of non-governmental organisations in Europe, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 10 October 2007, at the 1006th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies, the Committee of Ministers underlined the importance of NGOs in the following terms:
“Aware of the essential contribution made by non-governmental organisations (NGOs) to the development and realisation of democracy and human rights, in particular through the promotion of public awareness, participation in public life and securing the transparency and accountability of public authorities, and of the equally important contribution of NGOs to the cultural life and social well-being of democratic societies; ...
Noting that the contributions of NGOs are made through an extremely diverse body of activities which can range from acting as a vehicle for communication between different segments of society and public authorities, through the advocacy of changes in law and public policy, the provision of assistance to those in need, the elaboration of technical and professional standards, the monitoring of compliance with existing obligations under national and international law, and on to the provision of a means of personal fulfilment and of pursuing, promoting and defending interests shared with others;
Bearing in mind that the existence of many NGOs is a manifestation of the right of their members to freedom of association under Article 11 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and of their host country’s adherence to principles of democratic pluralism ...”
For the procedure before the Working Group, see Peraldi v. France ((dec.), no. 2096/05, 7 April 2009).
The Working Group has developed an “urgent action” procedure for cases in which there are sufficiently reliable allegations that a person may be detained arbitrarily and that the continuation of the detention may entail a serious threat for his or her health, physical or mental integrity or life. In such cases, the Working Group sends to the government of the State concerned, through diplomatic channels, an urgent appeal requesting that it take appropriate measures to ensure that the detained person’s right not to be deprived arbitrarily of his or her liberty, the right to fair proceedings before an independent and impartial tribunal, and the right to life and to physical and mental integrity are respected.
The “special procedures” are mechanisms (“mandates”) introduced by the UN Human Rights Council to address the specific situation in a country, or a particular issue giving rise to serious human-rights violations in all regions of the world. The role of these mandate-holders is thus to examine, oversee, advise and report on human-rights situations in specific countries or territories (country-specific mandates), or on serious occurrences of human-rights violations anywhere in the world (thematic mandates). In particular, they can respond to individual complaints, conduct studies, provide advice on technical cooperation to the State concerned, or engage in general advocacy work. In the context of these activities, they generally receive information about specific allegations of human-rights violations and send urgent appeals or letters of allegation to governments, requesting clarification.
On 21 July 2016 the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the Council of Europe sent the Secretary General of the Council of Europe the notice of derogation. The text of the notice is set out in the Mehmet Hasan Altan judgment (cited above, § 81).