The case originated in an application (no. 7923/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Mikhail Sergeyevich Butusov (“the applicant”), on 29 January 2004.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms L.M. Churkina, a lawyer practising in Yekaterinburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev and Mrs V. Milinchuk, former Representatives of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 12 October 2006 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to give notice of the complaint under Article 5 § 4 to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility. On 27 September 2007 the President of the Chamber invited the Government to provide further written observations on the admissibility and merits of the applicant's complaint under Article 5 § 4.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. The Court examined their objection and dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Snezhinsk,  region. He is currently serving a prison sentence in the  region.
On 16 July 2003 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of robbery.
On 18 July 2003 the Snezhinsk Town Court of the  region (“the ”) released the applicant on an undertaking not to leave the town.
On 23 July 2003 the  remanded the applicant in custody. It held that his detention was justified on the ground of his previous convictions, the gravity of the offence, and the risk that he would abscond, obstruct investigation of the case, commit another crime or hinder the execution of the sentence.
On 25 July 2003 the applicant's counsel Ye. appealed against the detention order of 23 July 2003. He contested the grounds on which the applicant had been placed in detention. On the same date the  registered the appeal as no. 132.
It follows from the Government's submissions, confirmed by a copy of the record of the outgoing mail of the , that on 28 July 2003 the  sent copies of the grounds of appeal to the applicant, the investigating authorities and the prosecutor's office. On 4 August 2003 the  sent a notification about the examination of the appeal by the  on 14 August 2003 to the detention facility in which the applicant was detained and to his counsel. However, the Government did not submit any document confirming that the applicant or his lawyer had received that notification. On 7 August 2003 the appeal materials reached the  (“the ”).
According to the applicant, neither he nor his lawyer received the notification of the appeal hearing.
On 14 August 2003 the  examined the appeal in the absence of the applicant and his counsel. The Prosecutor, who was present at the hearing, considered that the appeal should be dismissed. The  upheld the detention order of 23 July 2003, finding it lawful and duly reasoned.
Subsequently the  extended the applicant's detention on 17 and 26 September 2003. The applicant did not appeal against those extension orders.
On 4 November 2003 the  found the applicant guilty of aggravated robbery and sentenced him to ten years' imprisonment. On 15 January 2004 the  upheld the applicant's conviction and reduced the term of imprisonment to eight years.
On 13 April 2005 the Deputy President of the Supreme Court of the  granted the applicant's request for supervisory review of the judgment of 4 November 2003, as upheld on 15 January 2004, and remitted the case for examination on the merits to the Presidium of the . On 1 June 2005 the Presidium of the  upheld the applicant's conviction.
Since 1 July 2002 criminal-law matters have been governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  of 18 December 2001 (“the CCrP”).
Article 108 of the CCrP provides that detention may be ordered by a court if the charge carries a sentence of at least two years' imprisonment, provided that a less restrictive preventive measure cannot be applied. An appeal may be lodged with a higher court within three days against a judicial decision ordering or extending detention. The appeal court must decide on the appeal within three days of its receipt.
Article 376 of the CCrP provides that the parties must be notified about the date, time and venue of the appeal hearing no later than fourteen days before it. The court shall decide whether the detainee should be summoned to the hearing.
On 22 January 2004 the  delivered decision no. 66-O on a complaint about the Supreme Court's refusal to permit a detainee to attend the appeal hearings on the issue of detention. It held:
“Article 376 of the Code of Criminal Procedure regulating the presence of a defendant remanded in custody before the appeal court ... cannot be read as depriving the defendant held in custody ... of the right to express his opinion to the appeal court, by way of his personal attendance at the hearing or by other lawful means, on matters relating to the examination of his complaint about a judicial decision affecting his constitutional rights and freedoms ...”