The case originated in an application (no. 57722/12) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Maksymilian Grabowski (“the applicant”), on 31 August 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Burda, a lawyer practising in Cracow. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained under Article 5 § 1 of the Convention that his continued detention in a shelter for juveniles had been unlawful and that he had not had a remedy to challenge the lawfulness of his detention.
On 30 January 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
Written submissions were received from the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights in Warsaw, which had been granted leave by the President to intervene as a third party (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2).
.  By letter of 18 September 2013, the Government requested the Court to strike the application out of its list in accordance with Article 37 of the Convention and enclosed the text of a unilateral declaration with a view to resolving the issues raised by the applicant. The applicant objected to the Government’s proposal in his observations of 27 November 2013. On 1 April 2014 the Chamber decided to reject the Government’s request to strike the application out of the list on the basis of the unilateral declaration made by the Government and to pursue its examination of the merits of the case.
The applicant was born in 1995 and lives in Cracow.
On 7 May 2012 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of having committed three armed robberies and one attempted armed robbery with the use of a machete on 4 May 2012. He was initially detained in a police establishment for children (policyjna izba dziecka) in Cracow.
On 7 May 2012 the Cracow-Krowodrze District Court (Family and Juvenile Section) instituted inquiry (postępowanie wyjaśniające) with a view to determining whether the applicant had committed the offences at issue.
On the same day the Cracow-Krowodrze District Court decided to place the applicant in a shelter for juveniles (schronisko dla nieletnich) for a period of three months. It found that, in view of the available evidence, there existed a reasonable suspicion that the applicant had committed three armed robberies and one attempted armed robbery and some other offences. The court also noted that the applicant was lacking in moral character and that the nature of the offences with which he had been charged militated in favour of placing him in a correctional facility (zakład poprawczy). It also noted that there was a risk that he might go into hiding or put pressure on witnesses.
The applicant appealed. He argued, inter alia, that there had been no risk of fleeing or interfering with witnesses. He also objected to his placement in the shelter on the grounds that he had a history of mental difficulties and had been schooled in a specialised institution.
On 10 July 2012 the Cracow Regional Court upheld the decision of the lower court. It had regard to the gravity of the offences which the applicant had allegedly committed and the fact that they could not be treated as an isolated incident. The court also noted that in the past a family court had handed down a warning and that on 29 May 2012 he had been put under the supervision of a court guardian. In view of those circumstances, it was considered likely that the applicant would be placed in a correctional facility. His placement in the shelter was further justified by the fact that he had threatened one of the victims of the robbery. Responding to the arguments related to the applicant’s mental health, the court noted that the placement in the shelter, in addition to the applicant’s isolation, placed him under educational supervision which could not be seen as incompatible with his well-being.
On 27 July 2012 the CracowKrowodrze District Court ordered that the applicant’s case should be examined in correctional proceedings (postępowanie poprawcze).
On 9 August 2012 the applicant’s counsel requested the CracowKrowodrze District Court to order the applicant’s immediate release. He submitted that the three-month period for which the measure was applied had expired on 7 August 2012 and that no decision on prolongation of the measure had been given. He argued that in accordance with section 27 §§ 4 and 5 of the Juvenile Act the decision on prolongation of the placement in a shelter for juveniles could be taken only by a court after summonses had been sent to the parties and counsel. The applicant’s counsel obtained information from the court’s registry that in practice such decisions were not given, and that it sufficed for the court to issue an order for the case to be examined in correctional proceedings. The applicant’s counsel objected to such a practice and considered it to be unlawful.
On 9 August 2012 the Cracow-Krowodrze District Court dismissed the applicant’s request for release. It provided the following reasons:
“The juvenile Maksymilian Grabowski is accused of having committed criminal acts with the use of a dangerous object.
These circumstances exclude the possibility of altering the security measure in respect of the juvenile.
At present the state of health of the juvenile is normal.
In the absence of reasons justifying the quashing of the security measure in respect of the juvenile, it has been decided as above in accordance with sections 20 and 27 of the Juvenile Act”.
On 9 August 2012 the applicant’s counsel wrote to the director of the Gacki Shelter for Juveniles urging him to release the applicant.
By a letter of 16 August 2012 the Cracow-Krowodrze District Court informed the applicant’s counsel that after the court had ordered the examination of the case in the correctional proceedings on 27 July 2012, it did not prolong the applicant’s placement in the shelter for juveniles pursuant to section 27 § 3 of the Juvenile Act.
The Cracow-Krowodrze District Court held hearings in the applicant’s case on 21 November 2012 and 9 January 2013. On the latter date the court delivered a judgment and held that the applicant had committed the offences which had been imputed to him. The court ordered the applicant’s placement in correctional facility but suspended the application of this measure for a two-year probationary period. It further ruled to place the applicant under the supervision of a court guardian during the probationary period.
Having regard to the judgment, on 9 January 2013 the CracowKrowodrze District Court quashed the applicant’s placement in a shelter for juveniles. The applicant was released on the same day.
The judgment of 9 January 2013 was not appealed against and became final on 14 February 2013.
Article 41 §§ 1 and 2 of the Constitution provide in its relevant part:
“1. Personal inviolability and security shall be ensured to everyone. Any deprivation or limitation of liberty may be imposed only in accordance with principles and under procedures specified by statute.
Anyone deprived of liberty, except by sentence of a court, shall have the right to appeal to a court for immediate decision upon the lawfulness of such deprivation. (...).”
The Act on the Procedure in Juvenile Cases of 26 October 1982 (ustawa o postępowaniu w sprawach nieletnich; “the Juvenile Act”) regulates, inter alia, the procedure applicable to juveniles who committed criminal offences aged between thirteen and seventeen. The proceedings are normally conducted by a family court.
The principal features of the Juvenile Act were set out in the Court’s judgment in the case of Adamkiewicz v. Poland (no. 54729/00, §§ 51-62, 2 March 2010).
Section 27 of the Juvenile Act regulates the placement of a juvenile in a shelter for juveniles. It provides, in so far as relevant:
“§ 1.  A juvenile may be placed in a shelter for juveniles (schronisko dla nieletnich) when the circumstances militating in favour of his placement in a correctional facility (zakład poprawczy) are shown, and if there is a reasonable risk that a juvenile will go into hiding or that he will destroy evidence of an offence, or if his identity cannot be established.
...
§ 3.  The period of the stay of a juvenile in a shelter for juveniles prior to the case being referred for a hearing may not exceed three months; the length of the stay shall be specified in a decision on the placement of a juvenile in a shelter for juveniles.
§ 4.  If due to the particular circumstances of the case it is necessary to prolong the stay of a juvenile in a shelter for juveniles his stay may be prolonged for a period not exceeding a further three months.
§ 5.  A family court shall rule on prolongation of the stay of a juvenile in a shelter for juveniles at a hearing. The parties and the counsel of a juvenile shall be notified about the date of the hearing.
§ 6.  Until the delivery of a judgment by the first-instance court the total length of the stay of a juvenile in a shelter for juveniles may not exceed one year. The period of an unauthorised absence of a juvenile in a shelter for juveniles exceeding three days and the period of psychiatric observation do not count towards the above period.
§ 7.  In particularly justified cases, on an application from the court before which the case is pending, a regional court, in whose jurisdiction the proceedings are conducted, may prolong the period of the stay of a juvenile in a shelter for juveniles, referred to in § 6, for a further specified period.”
The procedure under the Juvenile Act consisted of two stages: inquiry (postępowanie wyjaśniające) and court proceedings (postępowanie rozpoznawcze). The court proceedings can be conducted either as educational proceedings (postępowanie opiekuńczo-wychowawcze) in which the family court may apply educational or medical measures or as correctional proceedings (postępowanie poprawcze) in which the family court may order the placement in a correctional facility.
Pursuant to section 42 § 2 of the Juvenile Act a family judge shall issue an order for the examination of a case in correctional proceedings when he is satisfied that the conditions for the placement of a juvenile in a correctional facility were met. In accordance with section 43 § 4 of the Juvenile Act an order for examination of the case in correctional proceedings replaces the bill of indictment.
The Juvenile Act was amended by the Law of 30 August 2013 amending the Juvenile Act and some other laws (Journal of Laws of 2013, item 1165). These amendments entered into force on 2 January 2014. The amendments introduced uniform procedure in juvenile cases to be conducted by the family court. As a consequence, the court is no longer required to issue an order for the examination of a case either in educational or correctional procedure. Section 42 of the Juvenile Act was repealed.
In her letter of 24 June 2013 to the Minister of Justice, the Ombudsman raised the issue of divergent interpretations of section 27 of the Juvenile Act. On the basis of the complaints submitted to her, the Ombudsman informed the Minister that the family courts, relying on section 27 § 3 or section 27 § 6 in conjunction with section 27 § 3 of the Juvenile Act, accepted that a referral of the case for examination in the correctional proceedings constituted of itself a basis for extending the stay of a juvenile in a shelter for juveniles.
The Ombudsman requested presidents of the regional courts in Warsaw, Cracow and Gdansk to inform her about the judicial practice in this respect. The information received indicated that the prevailing interpretation of section 27 of the Juvenile Act was not to require an issuing of a separate decision on the extension of the stay in a detention facility. The Ombudsman considered that this practice entailed far-reaching consequences for the juveniles concerned. In particular, the lack of a decision prolonging the placement in a detention facility after the case had been referred for a hearing in correctional proceedings implied that such extension could not be appealed against. Furthermore, the court order referring the case for a hearing did not specify the length of the placement in a shelter for juveniles.
The Ombudsman underlined that the placement of a juvenile in the shelter entailed a deprivation of liberty. She noted that the lack of precise provisions in the Juvenile Act which led to divergent interpretation by the courts could not deprive juveniles of the protection of their rights enshrined in the Constitution. The Ombudsman requested the Minister to consider the possibility of legislative amendment of section 27 of the Juvenile Act which could resolve the issue.
In his reply of 22 July 2013 the Minister of Justice shared the Ombudsman’s view that section 27 of the Juvenile Act in its current version did not sufficiently protect the rights of a juvenile against an arbitrary action of the court in the case of his case being referred for examination in correctional proceedings. The placement in a shelter for juveniles constituted a deprivation of liberty. Each extension of the period of such stay beyond the period fixed in an original decision ordering the stay in a shelter should be subject to a relevant judicial decision of the family court. The Minister informed the Ombudsman that he would undertake legislative work with a view to resolving the issue raised.
Article 37 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“States Parties shall ensure that:
(b) No child shall be deprived of his or her liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily. The arrest, detention or imprisonment of a child shall be in conformity with the law and shall be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time;
...
(d) Every child deprived of his or her liberty shall have the right to prompt access to legal and other appropriate assistance, as well as the right to challenge the legality of the deprivation of his or her liberty before a court or other competent, independent and impartial authority, and to a prompt decision on any such action.”