The case originated in an application (no. 27791/09) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Stoyan Dimitrov Didov (“the applicant”), on 26 March 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Karov, a lawyer practising in Burgas. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Radkova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that his six-and-a-half-hour detention by the police on 11 July 2007 had breached his right to liberty.
On 19 January 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Burgas.
At about 6 a.m. on 11 July 2007 several police officers visited the applicant’s home with a summons for him to report to the police station in the neighbouring town of Pomorie “as a witness” in relation to an investigation. The applicant alleged that he was not at home at the time and that he was alerted by phone by his wife. On the summons, on the other hand, it is noted that he refused to accept receipt.
At about 7 a.m. the applicant arrived at the Pomorie police station. He was notified that he was being detained under section 63(1)(1) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs Act (“the MIAA”, see paragraph 15 below). The detention order stated that he was being detained on the basis of section 63(1)(1) “in connection with an offence under Article 195 of the Criminal Code”, which refers to theft.
During his detention, the applicant was transported to a police station in Burgas and then back to the police station in Pomorie, where his fingerprints were taken. He was not interviewed, and no further investigative steps involving his participation were taken.
At about 12 a.m. the applicant was allowed to meet with a lawyer retained by his wife, who insisted that the police release him. The applicant was released shortly after that, at 1.30 p.m. on 11 July 2007.
Immediately after his release the applicant applied for judicial review of the detention order. In the framework of the ensuing proceedings the police presented an order dated 10 July 2007 and signed by a police investigator in Pomorie. They stated that the case file concerning the applicant contained no further documents. The order stated that a theft had been committed by an unknown person in a hotel in Pomorie and instructed the police to take the appropriate measures to search for the perpetrator.
The Burgas Administrative Court heard the case on 28 November 2007. It accepted the order mentioned in the preceding paragraph as evidence.
In a judgment of 21 December 2007 it upheld the detention order, holding that the applicant’s detention had been in accordance with the law. It found, in particular, that for the lawful application of section 63(1)(1) of the MIAA it was not necessary that the police should hold evidence showing “in an unqualified manner” that the detainee had committed an offence; data “justifying a suspicion that there was a probability that the person had committed an offence” was sufficient. The domestic court noted further that the police had operational freedom as to the application of section 63(1)(1) of the MIAA.
On appeal by the applicant, on 17 November 2008 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the judgment of the Burgas Administrative Court, reiterating its reasoning.
The relevant domestic law and practice have been summarised in the Court’s judgment in Petkov and Profirov v. Bulgaria (nos. 50027/08 and 50781/09, §§ 25-29, 24 June 2014), which concerned circumstances similar to the ones in the present case.
In particular, section 63(1)(1) of the MIAA, in force at the time, authorised the arrest by the police of an individual suspected of having committed a criminal offence. Any detention thus ordered could not exceed twenty-four hours.
The State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act, 1988 (“the SMRDA”) provided in section 1(1) that the State and the municipalities were liable for damage caused to private individuals and legal entities as a result of unlawful decisions, acts or omissions on the part of their authorities or officials while discharging their administrative duties. The national courts have systematically accepted that detention orders under section 63(1) of the MIAA are administrative decisions within the meaning of section 1(1) of the SMRDA and that their setting aside gives rise to an entitlement for the persons affected by them to seek damages from the State.