.  The case originated in an application (no. 69929/12) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Kazakhstani national, Mr Arman Batyrkhairov (“the applicant”), on 10 September 2012.
.  The applicant was represented by Mr A. Yılmaz, Ms S.N. Yılmaz and Mr Buhari Çetinkaya, lawyers practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
.  On 12 December 2016 the complaints concerning the applicant’s deportation to Kazakhstan and the allegedly poor conditions of the applicant’s detention at the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre, the lack of effective remedies in respect of the above-mentioned complaints, the alleged unlawfulness of the applicant’s detention at the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre, and the lack of communication of information to the applicant regarding the reasons for his detention – as well as the complaints concerning the lack of an effective remedy to challenge the lawfulness of his detention and to request compensation – were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
.  The applicant was born in 1980 and is detained in Atyrau, Kazakhstan.
.  According to the applicant’s submissions, he left Kazakhstan in 2008 and lived in Saudi Arabia and Syria as a student until June 2011. He did not wish to return to his country as a number of people had been detained on charges of religious extremism in Kazakhstan and some of his friends had left the country after coming under pressure from the Kazakhstan government because of their political and religious identity.
.  In June 2011 the applicant arrived in Turkey. The Government submitted that subsequent to his arrival in Turkey, two entry bans were issued against him on the grounds that he was suspected of having provided logistical support to foreign nationals who were engaged in international terrorism.
.  On an unspecified date the applicant was taken into police custody and thereafter transferred to the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre with a view to his removal to Kazakhstan. As the applicant applied for asylum while in detention, on 28 October 2011 he was released pending the determination of his asylum application. On the same day he was notified that he should go and reside in Denizli province.
On 4 November 2011 the applicant lodged his asylum application again – this time with the Denizli Governor’s Office. On the same day a police officer from Denizli Security Headquarters held a preliminary interview with the applicant. The applicant stated that he had learned that he was being sought for by the Kazakhstan authorities on terrorism charges and asked to be granted leave to stay in Turkey. He submitted that his removal to Kazakhstan would expose him to a risk of death. According to a report dated 22 November 2011 concerning the applicant’s interview of 4 November 2011, the interpreter who was appointed by the police authorities noted that the applicant spoke Turkish.
.  On 28 November 2011 the applicant was notified that his asylum application had been rejected. According to the report of 22 November 2011, the police officer who had interviewed the applicant found that the latter had failed to submit any concrete evidence concerning his nationality, identity and the problems he had experienced in Kazakhstan. The officer, however, found it established that the applicant feared to be returned to his country and that it was known to the Turkish authorities that he would be prosecuted if returned to Kazakhstan.
.  On 29 November 2011 the applicant objected to the rejection of his asylum application. He once again submitted that he would be exposed to a real risk of death if he were to be removed to Kazakhstan.
.  According to the Government’s submissions, on 26 December 2011 his objection was dismissed.
.  On 12 January 2012 the applicant lodged an application to be allowed to leave Turkey with the Denizli Security Headquarters and informed the police that he had been offered a visa to enter and live in Egypt.
.  On 18 January 2012 the police authorised the applicant to leave the country.
.  According to a document dated 6 January 2012 sent by the Deputy Director of the General Police Headquarters to a number of police authorities, during a meeting held on 4 January 2012 the ambassador of Kazakhstan in Ankara requested the Turkish Interior Minister to extradite Kazakhstan nationals who had been involved in terrorist acts and in respect of whom Kazakhstan had issued wanted notices (“Red Notices”) via Interpol. A formal extradition request in respect of such persons was submitted by the Kazakhstan embassy in Ankara to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 31 December 2011. According to the document prepared by the embassy, the applicant and four other persons were members of the “Islamic Jihad Union”, a terrorist organisation which carried out terrorist attacks in the western region of Kazakhstan. They had been detained by the Turkish authorities upon receipt of a Red Notice via Interpol by Kazakhstan. The embassy pointed out that subsequent to their asylum claims, four of those persons, including the applicant, had been released from detention in Turkey. The Kazakhstan authorities considered that these five persons had been in the process of preparing a new terrorist attack in their country and that following their release four of them had organised a terrorist attack in the Atyrau province of Kazakhstan, in co-operation with another terrorist organisation, Jund al-Khilafa (“Soldiers of the Caliphate”). The embassy accordingly requested the Turkish authorities not to grant asylum to them and to extradite them to Kazakhstan.
.  On 19 January 2012, while he was waiting at Istanbul Atatürk Airport to board a flight to Egypt, the applicant was taken into police custody on the basis of the extradition request submitted to the Turkish authorities by the Kazakhstan embassy.
.  On 23 January 2012 the Interpol-Europol department attached to the General Police Headquarters informed the Ministry of Justice and a number of security departments that a Red Notice had been issued by Kazakhstan via Interpol in respect of the applicant on the basis of terrorism-related offences.
.  On 24 January 2012 the Bakırköy Magistrates Court ordered the applicant’s detention within the context of the extradition proceedings for a period of forty days. The applicant was then placed in detention in Maltepe Prison, in Istanbul.
.  On 25 January 2012 the applicant lodged a petition with the Bakırköy Assize Court and challenged his detention. In his petition, he stated, inter alia, that a person who would be subjected to torture or other forms of ill-treatment in his country of origin should not be extradited to that country.
.  On 27 January 2012 the Bakırköy Assize Court dismissed the applicant’s petition challenging his detention.
On 28 February 2012 the Bakırköy Assize Court rejected the extradition request submitted by the Kazakhstan authorities. During the hearing held on the same day the assize court did not find it necessary to appoint an interpreter for the applicant as he spoke Turkish. According to the reasoning contained in the court’s decision, in his defence submissions the applicant had contended that he had been wrongly accused of being a member of alQaeda or Islamic Jihad and had asked the court not to extradite him to Kazakhstan. The Bakırköy Assize Court held that the applicant could not be extradited to Kazakhstan because the charge against him in Kazakhstan fell within the scope of one of the offence categories, precluding extradition, listed in Article 18 § 1 (b) of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time (see paragraph 30 below). The court also ordered the applicant’s release from detention. The decision of 28 February 2012 became final as no appeal was lodged against it.
On 28 February 2012 the applicant was released from prison but was immediately transferred to the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre in Istanbul. According to a document dated 29 February 2012, the applicant was informed that he was being held pending the outcome of the deportation procedure conducted in this respect.
.  On 7 March 2012 the Deputy Director of General Security ordered the Istanbul Police Headquarters to deport the applicant.
.  On 12 March 2012, while in detention, the applicant appointed his representatives to undertake the necessary legal and procedural actions on his behalf before the domestic authorities and the Court by way of a issuing a power of attorney before a notary public.
.  According to the applicant’s submissions, on 21 March 2012, when Mr Yılmaz, one of his representatives, went to the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre to meet him, he was orally informed by officers at the centre that the applicant had been deported to Kazakhstan on 12 March 2012.
.  Upon a request by the applicant’s lawyer, on 31 May 2012 the Istanbul Police Headquarters sent a letter to the applicant’s lawyer informing him that the applicant had been deported to Kazakhstan on 12 March 2012.
.  In a letter dated 10 May 2014, Mr Yılmaz submitted that the applicant had been remanded in custody and placed in Atyrau Prison upon his return to Kazakhstan. The lawyer stated that he did not have information as to whether the applicant had been subjected to ill-treatment in Kazakhstan given that the applicant’s family members had refrained from answering his questions regarding that matter during their telephone conversations with him.
Between 28 February and 12 March 2012 the applicant was detained at the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre. The applicant claimed that the centre had been overcrowded at the time of his detention. He had not been allowed exercise outdoors or any other type of social activity throughout his detention. The applicant further alleged that there had been hygiene problems at the centre and that the quantity of the food provided had also been poor.
.  The Government submitted that the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre, where the applicant had been held, had a capacity of 300 persons and that a total of between 100 and 140 persons had been held during the period between 28 February and 12 March 2012. Detainees were accommodated on three floors: the first two floors were reserved for male detainees, and the third floor for females. There were four dormitory rooms on the first floor, respectively measuring 50, 58, 76 and 84 sq. m. On the second floor there were five dormitories measuring 50, 58, 69, 76 and 84 sq. m. There was a total of 120 bunk beds in the ten rooms reserved for male detainees and all rooms received natural light. There were also five showers and six toilets per floor, as well as a cafeteria measuring 69 sq. m, where breakfast, lunch and dinner were served daily on each floor. The detainees had the right to outdoor exercise if the physical conditions and the number of staff available allowed. A doctor was present on the premises every week and the detainees also had access to medical care in cases of emergency. As for the hygiene in the facility, there were six cleaning staff working full time.
.  A description of the relevant domestic law and practice, as in force at the material time, regarding the expulsion of foreign nationals can be found in Abdolkhani and Karimnia v. Turkey (no. 30471/08, §§ 29-43, 22 September 2009).
The relevant parts of Article 18 § 1 of the Criminal Code, which was still in force at the material time, read as follows:
“A foreign national accused ... of a criminal offence allegedly committed in a foreign country may be returned upon request to that country for prosecution ... However, an extradition request shall be rejected ...
...
b)  If the act [in question] is in the nature of a speech offence, a political offence or a military offence ...”
In its Concluding Observations of 12 December 2008 on Kazakhstan (CAT/C/KAZ/CO/2) the UN Committee against Torture made the following observations:
“...7.  The Committee is concerned about consistent allegations concerning the frequent use of torture and ill-treatment, including threat of sexual abuse and rape, committed by law-enforcement officers, often to extract “voluntary confessions” or information to be used as evidence in criminal proceedings, so as to meet the success criterion determined by the number of crimes solved (arts. 2, 11 and 12) ...
The Committee is particularly concerned about allegations of torture or other ill-treatment in temporary detention isolation facilities (IVSs) and in investigation isolation facilities (SIZOs) under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Internal Affairs or National Security Committee (NSC), especially in the context of national and regional security and anti-terrorism operations conducted by the NSC. The Committee notes with particular concern reports that the NSC has used counter-terrorism operations to target vulnerable groups or groups perceived as a threat to national and regional security, such as asylum-seekers and members or suspected members of banned Islamic groups or Islamist parties (art. 2) ...”
.  A document entitled “List of issues prior to the submission to the third periodic report of Kazakhstan” (CAT/C/KAZ/3), examined by the UN Committee Against Torture at its forty-fifth session in November 2010 and published in February 2011, states, in so far as relevant:
“ ...Article 2
According to information before the Committee since the consideration of the previous periodic report in 2008, torture and ill-treatment, including the threat of sexual abuse and rape, committed by law-enforcement officials, remain an issue of serious concern in the State party, and do not occur in isolated or infrequent instances.”
.  In its Concluding Observations of 12 December 2014 on Kazakhstan (CAT/C/KAZ/CO/3), the UN Committee against Torture made the following observations:
“...7.  While welcoming the measures taken by the State party aimed at strengthening laws and policies concerning its protection of human rights and prevention of torture and ill-treatment, described above, the Committee remains concerned at reports that those laws and policies are inconsistently implemented in practice. The Committee is particularly concerned about persistent allegations of torture and ill-treatment committed by law-enforcement officials, including the threat of sexual abuse and rape, in temporary detention isolation facilities (IVSs) and remand centres (SIZOs) under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the National Security Committee for the purpose of extracting “voluntary confessions” or information to be used as evidence in criminal proceedings (art. 2)....”
.  From 5 until 13 May 2009 the former United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Mr Manfred Nowak, undertook a visit to Kazakhstan. In his report of 16 December 2009, submitted to the Human Rights Council, Mr Nowak observed, inter alia, the following:
“...Whereas the physical conditions and food supply in the prison colonies seem to have been brought into line with international minimum standards in recent years, one of the key requirements of international human rights law — that penitentiary systems put rehabilitation and reintegration rather than the punishment of the individual offender at their core — has not been achieved; the restrictions on contact with the outside world provided by law contradict that very principle. Another major issue of concern is the fact that the hierarchy among prisoners appears to lead to discriminatory practices and, in some cases, to violence.
The same is true for pre-trial detention and custody facilities. The pre-trial facilities of the Ministry of the Interior, the Committee of National Security and the Ministry of Justice seem to have undergone improvements in terms of physical conditions and food supply; however the almost total denial of contacts with the outside world, often for prolonged periods, clearly contradicts the principle of the presumption of innocence and puts disproportional psychological pressure on suspects.
On the basis of discussions with public officials, judges, lawyers and representatives of civil society, interviews with victims of violence and with persons deprived of their liberty, the Special Rapporteur concludes that the use of torture and ill-treatment certainly goes beyond isolated instances. He received many credible allegations of beatings with hands and fists, plastic bottles filled with sand, police truncheons, and of kicking, asphyxiation with plastic bags and gas masks used to obtain confessions from suspects. In several cases, these allegations were supported by forensic medical evidence ...”
.  The UN Human Rights Committee’s thirty-fifth annual report adopted on 28 July 2011 (A/66/40 (Vol.I)), in so far as relevant to Kazakhstan, reads as follows:
“...(8) While the Committee appreciates the State party’s need to adopt measures to combat acts of terrorism, including the formulation of appropriate legislation to punish such acts, it regrets reports that law enforcement officials target vulnerable groups such as asylum-seekers and members of Islamic groups in their activities to combat terrorism (arts. 2 and 26).
The State party should adopt measures to ensure that the activities of its law enforcement officials in the fight against terrorism do not target individuals solely on the basis of their status or religious belief and manifestation. Furthermore, the State party should ensure that any measures to combat terrorism are compatible with the Covenant and international human rights law. In this regard, the State party should compile comprehensive data, to be included in its next periodic report, on the implementation of anti-terrorism legislation and how it affects the enjoyment of rights under the Covenant.
...
(14)  While noting the adoption of an action plan for 2010–2012 on the implementation of recommendations of the Committee against Torture, the Committee expresses concern at increased reports of torture and the low rate of investigation of allegations of torture by the Special Procurators. The Committee is also concerned that the maximum penalty (10 years’ imprisonment) for torture resulting in death under article 347-1 of the Criminal Code is too low (art. 7).
The State party should take appropriate measures to put an end to torture by, inter alia, strengthening the mandate of the Special Procurators to carry out independent investigations of alleged misconduct by law enforcement officials. In this connection, the State party should ensure that law enforcement personnel continue to receive training on the prevention of torture and ill-treatment by integrating the Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the Istanbul Protocol) of 1999 in all training programmes for law enforcement officials. The State party should thus ensure that allegations of torture and ill-treatment are effectively investigated, that perpetrators are prosecuted and punished with appropriate sanctions, and that the victims receive adequate reparation. In this regard, the State party is encouraged to review its Criminal Code to ensure that penalties on torture are commensurate with the nature and gravity of such crimes. ...”
.  In its 2011 Report on Human Rights Practices in Kazakhstan, the United States Department of State noted, inter alia, the following:
“The law prohibits torture; nevertheless, the police and prison officials regularly beat and abused detainees, often to obtain confessions ...
Human rights activists asserted that the legal definition of torture was too vague and did not meet UN standards and that the penalties for the crime were too lenient. The PGO, the Presidential Human Rights Commission, and the human rights ombudsman acknowledged that some law enforcement officers used torture and other illegal methods of investigation. Human rights and international legal observers noted investigative and prosecutorial practices that overemphasized a defendant’s confession of guilt over collecting other types of evidence in building a criminal case against a defendant. Courts generally ignored allegations by defendants that officials had obtained confessions by torture or duress.
At an October 2010 event hosted by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and several NGOs, Manfred Nowak, the UN special rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, stated that according to his assessment, torture in Kazakhstan was not widespread, although a culture of impunity allowed police to use extreme methods, such as heavy beating and asphyxiation, to obtain confessions. Nowak stated that police rarely investigated complaints of torture.
...Local NGOs reported that the government acknowledged publicly that torture was a problem.”
.  In its 2012 Report on Human Rights Practices in Kazakhstan, the United States Department of State noted, inter alia, the following:
“...The law prohibits torture; nevertheless, police and prison officials allegedly tortured and abused detainees, often in an effort to obtain or force confessions. For example, a representative from the Kazakhstan International Bureau for Human Rights reported seeing physical signs of torture, including scabbed skin, open wounds, bruises, and evidence of exposure to extreme cold on prisoners. The representative also asserted that authorities generally did not allow human rights observers to observe conditions in penal colonies. Members of the Public Monitoring Commission, a group comprised of NGO representatives, interviewed prisoners in a Kostanai penal colony. After the interview, authorities confiscated the group’s notes and reportedly punished prisoners who had submitted complaints to the commission by beating them and placing them in punitive cells.
According to local NGOs, torture most often occurred in pretrial detention centers in order to obtain confessions.
Authorities charged two police officers from the Saragash District in South Kazakhstan with torture while trying to obtain confessions from three detainees accused of theft. The police officers allegedly placed plastic bags over the detainees’ heads and subjected them to electric shocks.
...The Kazakhstani Commission on Human Rights, which advises the president on human rights issues, reported in 2011 that some law enforcement officers used torture and other illegal methods of investigation. The commission stated that there were no independent institutions to effectively investigate complaints of torture. ...
The human rights ombudsman reviewed prisoner and detainee complaints and concluded that law enforcement officers used abuse or torture to gain confessions ...”
.  The chapter on Kazakhstan of the Amnesty International report “The State of The World’s Human Rights in 2010”, released on 27 May 2010, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“...Confessions extracted under torture continued to be admitted as evidence in trials. Criminal proceedings failed to comply with international standards of fair trial. Torture and other ill-treatment by members of the security forces remained widespread, in particular by officers of the National Security Service in the context of operations in the name of national security, and the fight against terrorism and corruption.
...Torture and other ill-treatment
In November the European Court of Human Rights ruled in the case of Kaboulov v. Ukraine that the extradition to Kazakhstan of any criminal suspect, including Amir Damirovich Kaboulov, would be in violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, as they would run a serious risk of being subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment.
Despite amendments to the criminal and criminal procedural codes to clamp down on abusive practices, torture and other ill-treatment remained widespread. Confessions reportedly extracted under torture continued to be admitted as evidence in criminal trials, and individuals continued to be held in unregistered detention for longer than the three hours allowed for in national law. The lack of a clear definition of detention remained unaddressed despite recommendations of the UN Committee against Torture in November 2008.
Following his visit to Kazakhstan in May 2009, the UN Special Rapporteur on torture concluded that he “received many credible allegations of beatings with hands and fists, plastic bottles filled with sand and police truncheons and of kicking, asphyxiation through plastic bags and gas masks used to obtain confessions from suspects. In several cases, these allegations were supported by forensic medical evidence. ...”
”
The chapter on Kazakhstan in the Amnesty International report entitled “The State of The World’s Human Rights in 2011”, released on 13 May 2011, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“...The authorities introduced a number of measures intended to prevent torture, including widening access to places of detention to independent public monitors and committing publicly to a policy of zero tolerance on torture.
Kazakhstan’s human rights record was assessed under the UN Universal Periodic Review in February. In its presentation, the government delegation reiterated that the Kazakhstani authorities were committed to a policy of zero tolerance on torture, and that they ‘would not rest until all vestiges of torture had been fully and totally eliminated’.
In February, the government postponed the creation of an independent detention monitoring mechanism, the National Preventive Mechanism (NPM), for up to three years. However, in line with their obligations under the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention against Torture, the authorities continued to develop a legal framework for the NPM in close co-operation with domestic and international NGOs and intergovernmental organizations.
In April, the Prosecutor General’s Office told Amnesty International that members of Independent Public Monitoring Commissions had been given unprecedented access to pre-trial detention centres of the National Security Service (NSS); four visits had been carried out in 2009 and eight in 2010.
Despite these measures, people in police custody reported that they were frequently subjected to torture and other ill-treatment, both before and after the formal registration of their detention at a police station. Law enforcement officials often failed to respect the existing law on detention, which requires that they register detainees within three hours of their arrest.
In October, the UN Special Rapporteur on torture criticized Kazakhstan for continuing to conceal the full extent of torture and other ill-treatment in its detention and prison system ...”