The case originated in an application (no. 50264/08) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Anatoliy Petrovych Rudenko (“the applicant”), on 2 October 2008.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr M. A. Tarakhkalo, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their then Agent, Mr N. Kulchytskyy.
The applicant complained, in particular, under Article 5 §§ 1, 3 and 4 of the Convention in respect of his pre-trial detention and Article 5 § 1 (e), as well as Article 8, in respect of his psychiatric internment.
On 4 February 2013 those complaints were communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Kryvyy Rig.
In 2005-2006 the applicant created a local non-governmental organisation, as well as several newspapers.
On 16 November 2006 the Kryvyy Rig Transport Prosecutor’s Office instituted criminal proceedings against him on suspicion of interfering with gas pipeline repairs in July 2006.
On 17 May 2007 the Kryvyy Rig City Prosecutor’s Office opened another criminal case in respect of the applicant, on suspicion of extortion from a local politician, Ms B. As noted in the ruling, on 4 January 2006 the applicant had sent a letter to Ms B., demanding 20,000 Ukrainian hryvnias (the equivalent of about 3,000 euros) under the threat of dissemination of some discrediting information about her. He had also threatened her with physical violence in the presence of several witnesses.
The two aforementioned criminal cases were joined.
On 4 June 2007 the applicant was detained.
On 6 June 2007 the Dzerzhynskyy District Court of Kryvyy Rig (“the Dzerzhynskyy Court”) ordered that he remain in pre-trial detention. It referred to complaints by the victim, as well as her representative, about numerous telephone calls from the applicant during which he had made threats of violence. The court also noted that the applicant had refused to comply with the investigator’s summonses and had stated that he was considering absconding.
On 11 June 2007 an outpatient forensic psychiatric expert examination of the applicant was carried out in the Kryvyy Rig Psychoneurological Dispensary. The expert discerned indications of a paranoid personality disorder with a tendency towards “forming fixed ideas”. An inpatient examination was recommended for a more precise diagnosis.
On 14 June 2007 the Dzerzhynskyy Court ordered an inpatient forensic psychiatric examination of the applicant at Dnipropetrovsk Psychoneurological Centre with a view to establishing his ability to stand trial in the extortion case. The court referred to the expert’s recommendation of 11 June 2007. It also noted that the applicant had been showing “inadequate behaviour”. Furthermore, the case file contained copies of threats and clearly slanderous statements he had made to the victim and certain third parties.
On 15 June 2007 the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the detention order of 6 June 2007.
On 20 June 2007 another case was opened against him on suspicion of extortion. This time the applicant was suspected of having threatened Mr S. and his family and of having extorted 3,000 US dollars from Mr S. in May 2007.
On 27 June 2007 the applicant was taken to the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Psychiatric Hospital for an inpatient forensic psychiatric examination in the framework of the criminal case regarding the charge of extortion from Ms B.
On 25 July 2007 the investigator in charge applied to the Dzerzhynskyy Court for an extension of the applicant’s pre-trial detention (which was to expire on 4 August 2007) till 17 August 2007, because more time was required to complete the investigation. In particular, the following investigative measures were still to be carried out: completion of the applicant’s forensic psychiatric examination, a confrontation between the applicant and Mr S., and the questioning of a number of witnesses.
On the same date the Dzerzhynskyy Court granted the aforementioned application and endorsed its reasoning.
On 26 July 2007 the inpatient forensic psychiatric examination of the applicant (see paragraph 16 above) was completed. The experts examined, in particular, the applicant’s personal history and the case-file materials, including the wording of his alleged threats to Ms B. They also carried out a psychological and psychiatric evaluation. The commission worded its conclusions as follows:
“Mr Rudenko has never suffered, and is not suffering now, from any chronic psychiatric illness. He has showed in the past, and presently shows, a paranoid personality disorder.
This conclusion is confirmed by his medical history, the materials of the criminal case file, and the results of the present clinical psychiatric examination which discloses that throughout his life the applicant has manifested such personality traits as egocentrism, extremely high self-esteem, tendency to make categorical and subjective judgments, susceptibility and extreme sensitivity to failure and situations infringing on his personal interests, a tendency towards a distorted perception of reality and the attitudes of those around him, militant and persistent assertion of his rightness and importance, subjectivism, rigidity of opinions and emotions, a tendency to be tendentious and contrived in forming judgments, and tenacity in the defence and implementation of his ideas.
The aforementioned personality characteristics are not manifested to a large degree, are not accompanied by serious abnormalities of memory, thinking, critical abilities or psychotic symptoms and would not have undermined his ability to be aware of and to control his actions at the time of the offence he has been charged with. [...]
The present psychiatric condition of [the applicant] is such that he is aware of and can control his actions (or inactivity).
He does not require involuntary medical treatment.”
On 9 August 2007 the investigator declared the pre-trial investigation complete and provided the applicant with access to the case file.
On 14 August 2007 the case was referred to the court for trial.
On 9 September 2007 the applicant requested the Dzerzhynskyy Court to replace his detention with release on bail in the amount of 20,000 Ukrainian hryvnias (at the time, equivalent to about 2,900 euros). He submitted that he had no criminal record, was well integrated socially and that remanding him in custody had been an unjustified preventive measure.
On 17 September 2007 the court held a preparatory hearing for the trial. It rejected the aforementioned request and decided to keep the preventive measure in respect of the applicant unchanged. The court noted that the considerations advanced by him had already been duly examined prior to his remand in custody. Furthermore, given the fact that the victim, Ms B., was a well-known local politician, the court decided to conduct the hearings in camera.
On 25 December 2008 the Dzerzhynskyy Court ordered another in-patient forensic psychiatric examination of the applicant, with a view to establishing his ability to stand trial in the criminal cases regarding the charges of extortion from Mr S. and the interference with the gas pipeline repairs (see paragraphs 7 and 15 above).
From 30 January to 26 February 2009 the applicant underwent an examination in the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Psychiatric Hospital.
On 26 February 2009 a commission of six experts (with the involvement of the three experts who had prepared the previous report of 26 July 2007) delivered its report on the basis of a psychological and psychiatric evaluation of the applicant and the case-file materials. The experts also heard several witnesses. In particular, they questioned a person who had worked with the applicant in the 1990s and who described him as an intelligent but impulsive person who had some strange ideas and liked to be the centre of attention. The applicant’s former wife gave a similar description, having also noted that he was a kind person despite his difficult character. The applicant’s current wife refused to be questioned. A general practitioner who had treated the applicant for some unspecified condition in 2007 submitted that he remembered the applicant for his emotionally-expressed nationalist ideas. A lawyer who had often encountered the applicant in court when acting as a representative described him as a bold and provocative person with a tendency to insult others. A circuit police officer, who had inspected the gas pipeline repairs site, submitted that he remembered the applicant on account of certain “hysterical outbursts” and that he had had the impression that the applicant had some mental issues. The general conclusions of the commission were worded as follows:
“At the time of the events [...] Mr Rudenko was suffering, and is suffering presently, from a chronic psychiatric illness in the form of a paranoid personality disorder with delusional inclusions (“параноидное расстройство личности с бредовыми включениями”).
This conclusion is confirmed by the anamnestic data, the materials of the criminal case file, the results of the present clinical psychiatric and experimental-psychological evaluation, which has disclosed that throughout his life the applicant has manifested such personality characteristics as egocentrism, rigidity in his attitudes, extremely high self-esteem, arrogance and extreme self-confidence, irrational feelings of injustice, a tendency to make categorical and subjective judgments, susceptibility and extreme sensitivity to failure and situations infringing on his personal interests, a tendency towards a distorted perception of reality and the attitudes of those around him, militant and persistent assertion of his rightness and importance, rigidity of opinions and emotions, bluntness, a tendency to be tendentious and contrived in forming judgments, tenacity in the defence and implementation of his ideas coupled with a tendency towards inertia and philosophising, and, as a result of all the aforementioned and against the background of what he perceives as the difficult and unfavourable development of the criminal investigation and trial, he has formed some fixed and delusional ideas about being persecuted.
The aforementioned personality characteristics of [the applicant] manifest themselves to such a high degree that they can be considered to have undermined his ability to be aware of and to control his actions at the time of the offences he has been charged with. [...]
The present psychiatric condition of [the applicant] does not enable him to be aware of his actions (or inactivity) or to control them.
He requires involuntary medical treatment by way of admission to a psychiatric hospital with ordinary supervision.
As to the [similar] questions regarding [the charge of extortion from Ms B.], they were already resolved in the report of 26 July 2007.”
On 3 June 2009 the Dzerzhynskyy Court found the applicant guilty of extortion from Ms B. As to the charge of extortion from Mr S., the court held that there was insufficient evidence of the applicant’s guilt. It also established that the applicant had impeded the gas pipeline repairs. The court noted that the applicant could not be held accountable for the criminal offences in question and required involuntary medical treatment in a mental facility. It stated, in particular:
“It has been established that, at the time the offences were committed, Mr Rudenko behaved in a bold manner and without respect for the victims and others involved, that he made threats to the health and lives of the victims, and that he took deliberate steps to impede the gas pipeline repairs, thus endangering the health and lives of the public. Although Mr Rudenko has not made a direct attempt on anybody’s life, his present mental condition warrants his involuntary admission to a psychiatric hospital, because he is a dangerous person ...”
On 23 December 2009 the Court of Appeal quashed the decision of the first-instance court of 3 June 2009 as it had been delivered in the applicant’s absence. It stated that his presence had been obligatory unless he had expressly refused to attend or had been prevented from attending by the nature of his illness. The appellate court also noted that although the Dzerzhynskyy Court had found that the applicant’s guilt had not been proven in respect of the charge of extortion from Mr S., no decision had been taken as regards the termination of that part of the proceedings. The case was therefore remitted to the first-instance court for fresh examination. The appellate court also decided to keep the preventive measure in respect of the applicant (detention) unchanged, without explanation.
On 29 June 2010 the Dzerzhynskyy Court allowed the applicant’s waiver of the services of several lawyers who had been representing him. Instead, it appointed a lawyer from the local bar association to represent his interests in the proceedings.
On 11 October 2010 the Dzerzhynskyy Court, at a hearing attended by the applicant and his appointed lawyer, ordered another forensic psychiatric examination of the applicant, with a view to answering the following questions: (1) whether the applicant was suffering from any mental illnesses at the time; (2) whether he was aware of and able to control his actions; and (3) whether the nature of his illness could be regarded as an impediment to his participation in court hearings. The applicant did not object in principle to such an examination, as long as it was carried out by an independent expert.
From 19 November to 16 December 2010 an examination was carried out at the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Psychiatric Hospital. According to the ensuing report, the applicant was suffering, at the time of the examination, from a “chronic paranoid personality disorder with delusional inclusions”. His psychiatric condition was deemed to prevent him from participating effectively in court hearings. As noted in the part of the report entitled “Psychological examination”, the applicant behaved in a free and friendly manner, demonstrating an advanced intellect and good memory and analytical skills, but also demonstrating a certain superiority and rigidity in his opinions. The overall findings of the report were practically identical to those of 26 February 2009.
On 5 April 2011 the prosecutor dropped the charges against the applicant as regards the interference with the gas pipeline repairs and the extortion from Mr S.
On 8 April 2011 the Dzerzhynskyy Court discontinued the proceedings against the applicant in so far as the aforementioned charges were concerned.
On the same date the court, following a hearing at which the lawyer earlier appointed for the applicant, but not the applicant himself, had been present, found the applicant guilty of extortion from Ms B. Relying on the medical reports concerning the applicant’s mental health, the Dzerzhynskyy Court held that, although the applicant had been aware of his actions when he had committed the offence in question, his mental health had subsequently deteriorated to an extent warranting involuntary medical treatment. The court therefore ordered that the applicant be admitted to a psychiatric hospital for treatment under ordinary supervision. The proceedings were stayed until the applicant’s recovery.
The applicant’s son (who had joined the proceedings as his representative) appealed. He complained, in particular, that the applicant had wrongly been denied his right to participate in the hearing. He also complained that the applicant’s right to be presumed to be of sound mind had been violated. He noted in this regard that the experts had reached opposite conclusions about the applicant’s mental health, without any explanation for such a change in their position. Furthermore, the applicant’s son submitted that neither the applicant nor his family had agreed to the appointed lawyer representing the applicant and that the lawyer had been acting contrary to the applicant’s interests.
On 16 August 2011 the Court of Appeal upheld the decision on the involuntary medical treatment of the applicant. It noted that, as the medical experts had found, the nature of his illness had been an impediment to his participation in the court hearings. The appellate court also held that the application of the chosen measures in respect of the applicant was justified by the fact that he had committed a “socially dangerous” crime and that he was suffering from a mental illness.
On 14 September 2011 the applicant was transferred from the SIZO to the Geykivska Psychoneurological Hospital in the Dnipropetrovsk region (“the Geykivska Hospital”).
On 4 October 2011 the applicant was examined by a panel of three doctors from the Geykivska hospital who concluded that his condition had stabilised and that he was not in need of any involuntary inpatient treatment. More specifically, the doctors observed that despite his chronic paranoid personality disorder with “delusional inclusions”, the applicant had been demonstrating orderly behaviour and a stable mood, with no aggressive tendencies. He regretted his earlier behaviour and had submitted that he understood that it had been wrong. The panel therefore sought the lifting of the involuntary medical treatment order imposed by the court, and an order for outpatient psychiatric treatment to replace it.
On 14 October 2011 the Kryvyy Rig Court allowed the application of the Geykivska Hospital specialists.
On 19 October 2011 the same panel of the Geykivska Hospital specialists issued another report, in which they noted a drastic deterioration in the applicant’s mood and behaviour: he had become irritated, angry and aggressive and had conflicts with other patients. Accordingly, the doctors retracted their earlier conclusion of 4 October 2011 as premature and asked the court to order that the applicant continue to be treated on an involuntary basis.
On 29 November 2011 the Court of Appeal quashed the decision of the Kryvyy Rig Court of 14 October 2011, with reference to the medical report of 19 October 2011.
On 20 December 2011 the Kryvyy Rig Court decided that the involuntary medical treatment of the applicant ordered on 8 April 2011 should be continued.
On 22 March 2012 the Higher Specialised Court for Civil and Criminal Matters rejected the applicant’s cassation appeal (submitted via his son) against the lower courts’ decisions of 8 April and 16 August 2011.
On 26 April 2012 the applicant was examined again by a panel of three specialists from the Geykivska Hospital (one member had been replaced). They noted that he was well oriented and gave adequate replies to questions, was brief and monotonic, expressed some delusional ideas about being persecuted by criminals, and remained self-confident and categorical in his judgments. As a result, they considered that the applicant’s involuntary medical treatment should be continued.
On 11 May 2012 the Kryvyy Rig Court ruled accordingly. Although the applicant, who was present at the court hearing, objected to that decision and submitted that he was in perfect health, the court considered, on the basis of the aforementioned medical report, that he was not able to critically assess his condition.
On 14 September 2012 the panel of doctors from Geykivska Hospital (in the same composition as on 26 April 2012) examined the applicant again. Their conclusions were similar to those set out in the report of 4 October 2011 (see paragraph 38 above).
On 8 October 2012 the Kryvyy Rig Court granted the specialists’ request and lifted the order for involuntary medical treatment in respect of the applicant.
On 26 October 2012 the applicant was discharged from the hospital. There is no information in the case file on the resumption of or any developments in the proceedings that had been stayed earlier (see paragraph 34 above).
On 25 April 2013 he was examined by the Kharkiv Regional Bureau of Forensic Medical Examinations at his own request.
On 20 May 2013 the Bureau issued its report. It noted that the only condition the applicant had been diagnosed with in the course of his previous forensic psychiatric examinations was a paranoid personality disorder. Such a diagnosis could not be regarded as fully grounded as it did not comply with the diagnostics criteria of the international statistical classification of illnesses. In particular, while that diagnosis implied a lack of social integration, the applicant had always been well adapted socially and had run a successful business. The wording “delusional inclusions” also raised questions as to its clinical accuracy. The applicant’s excessive personal involvement in various situations, as well as the fact that he had been overly emotional and made peculiar statements, did not imply delusion.
Generally, it was concluded that there was nothing in the case file to show that the applicant had suffered from any serious psychiatric disorder rendering him unaccountable for his actions. Even if, presumably, the applicant’s behaviour in the stressful situation of his criminal prosecution and detention had disclosed some peculiarities, the report concluded that, given his sufficient social adaptation prior to the criminal proceedings and the absence of a record of any psychiatric issues in the past, the applicant had not suffered from a psychiatric disorder between January 2006 and July 2007 and between August 2007 and November 2012 which would have warranted his involuntary treatment and prevented him from participating in court hearings.
Furthermore, the Bureau expert criticised the report of 19 October 2011 as having reversed the earlier conclusion of 4 October 2011 that the applicant had not been in need of involuntary psychiatric treatment without any persuasive grounds. This reversal had been made even though the description of the applicant’s psychiatric condition had remained the same.
On 13 June 2013, following a request by the applicant’s lawyer, an independent forensic psychiatric expert with thirteen years of work experience issued a report regarding the applicant’s examinations of 26 July 2007, 26 February 2009 and 16 December 2010 (see paragraphs 19, 26 and 31 above). The expert considered only the first-mentioned report to be scientifically grounded. He criticised the other two for their incompliance with the rules of diagnostics and the absence of any explanation as to why the same behaviour of the applicant, which had earlier been regarded as normal, had later been considered as disclosing a psychiatric disorder. The expert also concluded that the applicant’s right to attend court hearings in person had been restricted without any valid medical reason.
The relevant provisions read as follows:
“1. A person shall be considered mentally fit to stand trial if at the time of the committal of the crime he was aware of and able to control his actions (or inactivity).
A person shall not be held criminally liable if, at the time of the committal of a socially dangerous act as laid down by this Code, he was in a state of insanity, meaning that he was not able to understand or control his actions as a result of a chronic psychiatric illness, temporary psychiatric disorder, dementia or other psychiatric condition. Involuntary medical treatment can be ordered in such cases by a court ...”
“Involuntary medical treatment includes: outpatient psychiatric treatment; placement of a person who has committed a socially dangerous act falling under the Special Part of this Code in a special medical establishment with a view to his involuntary treatment; and measures taken to prevent a person committing a socially dangerous act.”
“A court may order involuntary medical treatment in respect of persons who have
1) committed a socially dangerous act while being mentally unfit to stand trial (у стані неосудності);
2) committed a crime while having partial mental capacity to stand trial (у стані обмеженої неосудності);
3) committed a crime while being mentally fit to stand trial, but who have become mentally ill prior to the pronouncement of the verdict or during the enforcement of the sentence.”
“1. Depending on the nature and seriousness of the mentally ill person’s condition and the seriousness of the offence committed, and having regard to his dangerousness to himself and others, the court may order the following types of involuntary medical treatment:
(1) involuntary outpatient psychiatric treatment;
(2) admission to a psychiatric hospital with ordinary supervision;
(3) admission to a psychiatric hospital with reinforced supervision; and
(4) admission to a psychiatric hospital with strict supervision.
The court may order involuntary outpatient psychiatric treatment in respect of a person suffering from a psychiatric disorder who has committed a socially dangerous act if the mental health of that person does not warrant his placement in a psychiatric hospital.
The court may order a person’s admission to a psychiatric hospital with ordinary supervision if his mental health and the nature of the socially dangerous act he has committed warrant his placement and involuntary treatment in a psychiatric hospital.
The court may order admission to a psychiatric hospital with reinforced supervision in respect of a person who has committed a socially dangerous act which did not involve an attempt on the life of another and who does not present a danger to society given his mental condition, but who is in need of psychiatric confinement and treatment under reinforced supervision.
The court may order admission to a psychiatric hospital with strict supervision in respect of a person who has committed a socially dangerous act which involved an attempt on the life of another and who presents a particular danger to society given his mental condition, and who is in need of psychiatric confinement and treatment in conditions of strict supervision.
If the application of [such] measures in respect of a mentally ill person is not considered necessary, or after the termination of the application of such measures, the court may entrust his guardianship to his relatives or guardians with mandatory medical monitoring.”
Article 156 limits the initial pre-trial detention term to two months and provides for the possibility of its extension up to eighteen months. It also stipulates that the term of a person’s inpatient psychiatric examination is to be included in his or her pre-trial detention.
Article 416 provides that enforced medical treatment shall be ordered only in respect of persons who are considered socially dangerous.
Under Article 419, the participation of a person in the judicial proceedings regarding his or her case must be ensured if it is not precluded by the nature of his or her illness.
Article 3 of the Act provides that every person must be considered as being of sound mind unless the existence of a psychiatric disorder is established on the grounds laid down by law and in compliance with the established procedures.
Pursuant to Article 7 a diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder must be established in compliance with the generally recognised international standards of diagnostics and the international statistical classification of illnesses. This provision further states that a psychiatric disorder diagnosis cannot be based on a person’s disagreement with the political, moral, legal, religious or cultural values existing in the society or on any other grounds directly unrelated to his or her psychiatric health.
Article 19 stipulates that involuntary medical treatment may be ordered by a court in compliance with the legally established procedure. The measures applied may be continued, changed or lifted by a court upon an application by the mental health facility in which the person is being treated, based on the conclusion of a panel of psychiatrists. Persons to whom such measures have been applied must undergo periodic examinations by a commission of psychiatrists at least every six months with a view to verifying whether the measures remain justified.
Under Article 25, persons receiving psychiatric assistance retain all the rights and freedoms enshrined in the Constitution and laws of Ukraine. Their rights and freedoms may be restricted only in cases provided for by the Constitution of Ukraine in compliance with the applicable legislation.
The relevant parts read as follows:
“In order to ensure correct and uniform application by the courts of the legislation on involuntary medical treatment and to eliminate shortcomings in the judicial practice, the Plenary Supreme Court resolves as follows:
... 3. ... involuntary medical treatment may be ordered only if the case file contains a reasoned conclusion by psychiatric experts that the person in question is suffering from a mental illness or disorder rendering him or her mentally unfit, or partially unfit, to stand trial, and which warrants the application of such measures ...
Courts must be critical in their assessment of the above-mentioned conclusions as to whether they are scientifically grounded, convincing and well-reasoned. ... Those conclusions may be used as evidence in a case without any pre-established validity and are not binding for the court. However, any disagreement with them shall be reasoned in the ruling, verdict or resolution of the court.
Where expert conclusions are incomplete or insufficiently clear, or where there is a need to clarify additional issues, the court must summon the [expert] to the hearing ... or order an additional or repeated expert assessment.
... 10. Having regard to the provisions of Article 419 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Articles 3 and 25 of the [Psychiatric Assistance Act], as well as paragraph 5 of Principle 18 of the Annex to Resolution of the UN General Assembly no. 46/119 of 18 February 1992 ‘The protection of persons with mental illness and the improvement of mental health care’..., which provide that the patient and his representative shall be entitled to attend, participate in and be heard in person at any hearing, the courts must ensure that the person in respect of whom involuntary medical treatment is being considered (except when the nature of his condition prevents it) and his representative participate in the hearings, [if it has not received] a written waiver from that person of his right to attend ...”
The relevant extracts of the UN Principles for the Protection of Persons with Mental Illness and for the Improvement of Mental Health Care adopted by General Assembly resolution 46/119 of 17 December 1991 read as follows:
“1. A determination that a person has a mental illness shall be made in accordance with internationally accepted medical standards.
A determination of mental illness shall never be made on the basis of political, economic or social status, or membership in a cultural, racial or religious group, or for any other reason not directly relevant to mental health status.
Family or professional conflict, or non-conformity with moral, social, cultural or political values or religious beliefs prevailing in a person’s community, shall never be a determining factor in the diagnosis of mental illness.
A background of past treatment or hospitalization as a patient shall not of itself justify any present or future determination of mental illness.
No person or authority shall classify a person as having, or otherwise indicate that a person has, a mental illness except for purposes directly relating to mental illness or the consequences of mental illness.”
“1. Where a person needs treatment in a mental health facility, every effort shall be made to avoid involuntary admission. ...”
“1. A person may be admitted involuntarily to a mental health facility as a patient or, having already been admitted voluntarily as a patient, be retained as an involuntary patient in the mental health facility if, and only if, a qualified mental health practitioner authorized by law for that purpose determines, in accordance with principle 4 above, that that person has a mental illness and considers:
(a) That, because of that mental illness, there is a serious likelihood of immediate or imminent harm to that person or to other persons; or
(b) That, in the case of a person whose mental illness is severe and whose judgment is impaired, failure to admit or retain that person is likely to lead to a serious deterioration in his or her condition or will prevent the giving of appropriate treatment that can only be given by admission to a mental health facility in accordance with the principle of the least restrictive alternative.
In the case referred to in subparagraph (b), a second such mental health practitioner, independent of the first, should be consulted where possible. If such consultation takes place, the involuntary admission or retention may not take place unless the second mental health practitioner concurs.
Involuntary admission or retention shall initially be for a short period as specified by domestic law for observation and preliminary treatment pending review of the admission or retention by the review body. The grounds of the admission shall be communicated to the patient without delay and the fact of the admission and the grounds for it shall also be communicated promptly and in detail to the review body, to the patient’s personal representative, if any, and, unless the patient objects, to the patient’s family. ...”
“1. The review body shall be a judicial or other independent and impartial body established by domestic law and functioning in accordance with procedures laid down by domestic law. It shall, in formulating its decisions, have the assistance of one or more qualified and independent mental health practitioners and take their advice into account.
The initial review of the review body, as required by paragraph 2 of principle 16 above, of a decision to admit or retain a person as an involuntary patient shall take place as soon as possible after that decision and shall be conducted in accordance with simple and expeditious procedures as specified by domestic law.
The review body shall periodically review the cases of involuntary patients at reasonable intervals as specified by domestic law.
An involuntary patient may apply to the review body for release or voluntary status, at reasonable intervals as specified by domestic law.
At each review, the review body shall consider whether the criteria for involuntary admission set out in paragraph 1 of principle 16 above are still satisfied, and, if not, the patient shall be discharged as an involuntary patient.
If at any time the mental health practitioner responsible for the case is satisfied that the conditions for the retention of a person as an involuntary patient are no longer satisfied, he or she shall order the discharge of that person as such a patient.
A patient or his personal representative or any interested person shall have the right to appeal to a higher court against a decision that the patient be admitted to, or be retained in, a mental health facility. ...”
“... 5. the patient and the patient’s personal representative and counsel shall be entitled to attend, participate and be heard personally in any hearing. ...”