The case originated in an application (no. 47152/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Ivan Borisovich Blokhin (“the applicant”), on 1 November 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr I.V. Novikov, a lawyer practising in Novosibirsk. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his detention in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders had been unlawful, that the conditions of his detention there had been inhuman, and that the proceedings against him had been unfair.
On 29 September 2010 notice of the application was given to the Government.
On 14 November 2013 a Chamber of the First Section, composed of Isabelle Berro-Lefèvre, Khanlar Hajiyev, Mirjana Lazarova Trajkovska, Julia Laffranque, Erik Møse, Ksenija Turković and Dmitry Dedov, judges, and Søren Nielsen, Section Registrar, delivered a judgment in which it unanimously declared the application partly admissible and found that there had been a violation of Article 3, Article 5 § 1 and Article 6 §§ 1, 3 (c) and (d) of the Convention.
On 13 February 2014 the Government requested the referral of the case to the Grand Chamber in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention and Rule 73 of the Rules of Court. The panel of the Grand Chamber granted the request on 24 March 2014.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations. On 9 October 2014, after consulting the parties, the President of the Grand Chamber decided not to hold a hearing but invited the parties to submit further written observations, which they did. In addition, comments were received from the Mental Disability Advocacy Center and the League of Human Rights of the Czech Republic, which had been given leave by the President of the Grand Chamber to take part in the proceedings (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1992 and lives in Novosibirsk.
.  At some point before September 2004, the applicant’s parents were deprived of their parental responsibility; the applicant was placed in a local orphanage until his grandfather was assigned as his guardian in October 2004 and the applicant was placed with him. On 28 February 2005 the grandfather’s guardianship was revoked, but he was reinstated as guardian at the beginning of 2006.
.  From 2002 to 2005, the applicant allegedly committed offences prohibited by the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, including disorderly acts, aggravated robbery and extortion, alone or in a group of minors. Since he was under the age of criminal responsibility, no criminal proceedings were instituted against him but he was the subject of five pre-investigation inquiries and placed under the supervision of the Juveniles Inspectorate within the Department of the Interior of the Sovetskiy district of Novosibirsk (“the Juveniles Inspectorate”). Moreover, following the fourth inquiry, he was placed in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders on 21 September 2004 for thirty days.
According to the applicant’s medical records, he suffered from an attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (a mental and neurobehavioural disorder characterised by either substantial attention difficulties or hyperactivity and impulsiveness, or a combination of the two – ADHD) and a neurogenic bladder causing enuresis (a disorder involving urinary incontinence).
On 27 December 2004 and 19 January 2005 he was examined by a neurologist and a psychiatrist. He was prescribed medication, regular supervision by a neurologist and a psychiatrist and regular psychological counselling.
.  On 3 January 2005 the applicant, who at that time was 12 years old, was at the home of his nine-year old neighbour S. when the latter’s mother, Ms S., called the police, who came and took the applicant to the police station of the Sovetskiy district of Novosibirsk. He was not informed of the reasons for his arrest.
According to the applicant, he was put in a cell that had no windows and the lights in the cell were turned off. After he had spent around an hour in the dark, he was questioned by a police officer. The police officer told him that S. had accused him of extortion. He urged the applicant to confess, saying that, if he did so, he would be released immediately, whereas if he refused, he would be placed in custody. The applicant signed a confession statement. The police officer then immediately telephoned the applicant’s grandfather to tell him that the applicant was at the police station and could be taken home. When his grandfather arrived at the police station, the applicant retracted his confession and protested his innocence.
.  The Government disputed the applicant’s account of the events at the police station. They submitted that the applicant had been asked to give an “explanation” rather than being formally questioned, that he had been interviewed by a police officer who had pedagogical training, and that he had been apprised of his right to remain silent. He had not been subjected to any pressure or intimidation. His grandfather had been present during the interview.
On the same day, the applicant’s grandfather signed a written statement describing the applicant’s character and way of life. He stated that, two days earlier, he had seen the applicant in possession of some money. When asked where the money had come from, the applicant had said that his father had given it to him.
.  S. and his mother were also heard by the police regarding the incident; they claimed that on two occasions, on 27 December 2004 and 3 January 2005, the applicant had extorted 1,000 roubles (RUB) from S., threatening him with violence if he did not hand over the money.
On 12 January 2005 the Juveniles Inspectorate refused to institute criminal proceedings against the applicant. Relying on the applicant’s confession and the statements of S. and S.’s mother, it found it to be established that on 27 December 2004 and 3 January 2005 the applicant had extorted money from S. His actions therefore contained elements of the criminal offence of extortion, punishable under Article 163 of the Criminal Code. However, given that the applicant was below the statutory age of criminal responsibility, he could not be prosecuted for his actions.
.  On 3 February 2005 the applicant’s grandfather complained to the prosecutor’s office of the Sovetskiy district of Novosibirsk that the applicant, a minor suffering from a psychological disorder, had been intimidated and then questioned in the absence of his guardian and that his confession had been obtained under duress. The grandfather requested that the confession statement be declared inadmissible as evidence, and that the pre-investigation inquiry be closed on account of lack of evidence of an offence, rather than the applicant’s age.
.  On 8 June 2005 the prosecutor’s office of the Sovetskiy district of Novosibirsk quashed the decision of 12 January 2005, finding that the preinvestigation inquiry had been incomplete. It ordered a further pre-investigation inquiry.
.  On 6 July 2005 the Juveniles Inspectorate again refused to institute criminal proceedings against the applicant, for the same reasons as before.
.  During the following months, the applicant’s grandfather lodged several complaints with prosecutors’ offices of various levels, asking for a fresh examination of the case against the applicant. He complained that the applicant’s confession had been obtained as a result of intimidation by the police; in particular, he had been placed in a dark cell for an hour and he had then been questioned by a police officer in the absence of a guardian, psychologist or teacher. The police officer had coerced the applicant into signing the confession statement without the benefit of legal advice. He had then issued a decision refusing to institute criminal proceedings on the ground that the applicant had not reached the statutory age of criminal responsibility, while stating at the same time that the applicant’s involvement in extortion had been established.
.  By letters of 4 August, 9 November and 16 December 2005, the prosecutor’s office of the Sovetskiy district of Novosibirsk and the prosecutor’s office of the Novosibirsk region replied that no criminal proceedings had been instituted against the applicant on the ground of his age. He therefore did not have the status of a suspect or a defendant. On 3 January 2005 he had been asked to give an “explanation” rather than been questioned by the police. In those circumstances the participation of a lawyer, psychologist or teacher had not been mandatory. There was no evidence that the applicant had been held in a dark cell before the interview, and he had had to wait no more than ten minutes for an officer from the Juveniles Inspectorate to arrive and interview him. That the applicant had committed extortion had been established on the basis of the statements of S. and S.’s mother and the applicant’s admission of guilt during the interview of 3 January 2005.
On 10 February 2005 the head of the Sovetskiy district Police Department of Novosibirsk asked the Sovetskiy District Court of Novosibirsk to order the applicant’s placement in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders.
On 21 February 2005 the Sovetskiy District Court held a hearing which the applicant and his grandfather attended and at which they submitted medical certificates confirming that the applicant suffered from a psychological disorder and enuresis.
.  On the same day, the court delivered its judgment in which it ordered the applicant’s placement in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders for thirty days. It held as follows.
“The head of the Sovetskiy district Police Department of Novosibirsk has applied to the court with a request to place [the applicant], who has been registered with the [Juveniles] Inspectorate as a delinquent minor since 4 January 2002, in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders for thirty days.
On 14 May 2003 [the applicant] committed an offence proscribed by Article 161 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation. A criminal case was not opened because he had not reached the age of criminal responsibility.
On 24 July 2003 [the applicant] again committed an offence proscribed by Article 213 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation. A criminal case was not opened because he had not reached the age of criminal responsibility.
On 27 August 2004 [the applicant] again committed a criminal offence under Article 161 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation. A criminal case was not opened because he had not reached the age of criminal responsibility. [The applicant] was placed in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders for thirty days.
The minor lives in unfavourable family conditions in which his grandfather is responsible for his upbringing in so far as possible; [the applicant’s] parents are alcoholics and have a negative influence on their son. Before [the grandfather] was given guardianship status, [the applicant] had lived in an orphanage and studied in school no. 61. At the material time he studied in school no. 163, often played truant from school, and stopped attending school entirely from December onwards. Given that the requisite control over him is absent, the minor spends the major part of his day on the streets, committing socially dangerous offences.
On 27 December 2004 [the applicant] committed another offence proscribed by Article 163 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation; a criminal case was not opened because he had not reached the age of criminal responsibility.
Taking the above-mentioned circumstances into account, [the head of the Police Department] considers it necessary to place [the applicant] in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders for a period of thirty days to prevent his further unlawful actions.
The representative of the Juveniles Inspectorate supported the request made by the head of the Police Department and explained that [the applicant’s] guardian had requested in writing that his guardianship rights be lifted and the [Inspectorate] had accepted that request.
[The applicant] refused to provide any explanations.
The [applicant’s] representative [the grandfather] objected to [the applicant’s] placement in the temporary detention centre, having noted that [the applicant] had not committed a criminal offence on 27 December 2004 as he had been with [the grandfather] at a doctor’s surgery for an examination at that time.
The lawyer, Ms [R.], asked the court to dismiss the request of the head of the Police Department.
The prosecutor asked the court to accept the request and to place [the applicant] in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders, taking into account that the documents presented by [the applicant’s] guardian did not confirm that [the applicant] had been at a doctor’s surgery on 27 December 2004 at 1 p.m. or that he had been unable to commit the criminal offence, particularly taking into account the [applicant’s] personality and the fact that he had already committed a number of offences.
Having heard the parties to the proceedings and examined the materials submitted by them, the court considers that the request must be allowed for the following reasons: [the applicant] is registered in the database of [the Juvenile Department of the police]; he was previously placed in the [temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders] for behaviour correction but did not draw the proper conclusions and committed further delinquent acts; the preventive measures put in place by the [Juveniles] Inspectorate and by the guardian have not produced results, which shows that [the applicant] has not learnt his lesson. [The applicant] must be placed in the [temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders] for thirty days for behaviour correction.
The case-file materials examined by the court confirm that [the applicant] committed a socially dangerous offence: a complaint by Ms [S.] shows that on 27 December 2004, at approximately 1 p.m., [the applicant] extorted 1,000 roubles from her son [S.] in a yard; he accompanied those actions with threats of violence. On 3 January 2005 [the applicant] again came to their house and again extorted 1,000 roubles from her son, having again threatened the son with violence. Explanations by [S.] indicate that on 27 December 2004, at approximately 1 p.m., [the applicant] told [S.] to give him 1,000 roubles in a yard; he accompanied those actions with threats of violence and [S.] gave him the money. On 3 January 2005 [the applicant] again came to their house and requested 1,000 roubles from [S.], having again threatened him with violence. [S.] complained to his mother, who called the police.
The court takes into account that those circumstances are corroborated by the statement made by [the applicant], who did not deny that he had received money from [S.] on 27 December 2004, as the latter had been afraid of the applicant. [The applicant] also did not deny that he had come to [S.’s] house on 3 January 2005. A criminal case in respect of the events on 27 December 2004 and 3 January 2005 was not opened as the applicant had not reached the age of criminal responsibility.
Having taken these circumstances into account, the court finds unsubstantiated and far-fetched the explanations by the applicant’s guardian that [the applicant] did not commit the offences on 27 December 2004 and 3 January 2005.
Having regard to the above-mentioned facts and ruling under section 22(2)(4) of the Minors Act, the court grants the request of the head of the Police Department and decides to place the applicant in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders for thirty days.”
.  On 21 February 2005 the applicant was placed in the Novosibirsk temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders, where he remained until 23 March 2005.
.  According to the applicant, he had shared his bedroom in the centre with seven other inmates. The lights were kept on all night.
.  During the day inmates were forbidden to lie on their beds or to enter the bedroom. They had to spend the whole day in a large empty room which contained no furniture or sports equipment. On a few occasions they were given a chess set and other board games. They were allowed to go out into the yard only twice during the applicant’s thirty-day stay in the centre.
.  Inmates had classes twice a week for around three hours. They had mathematics and Russian grammar classes only. They were not taught any other courses from the officially-approved secondary-school curriculum. Around twenty children of different ages and school levels were taught together in one class.
.  The supervisors applied collective punishment to the inmates. If one of them committed a breach of the centre’s strict regime, all inmates were forced to stand in a line against the wall without moving, talking or being allowed to sit down. Given that many inmates were psychologically unstable and unruly, because of their socially disadvantaged background, such punishment was applied every day and often lasted for hours.
.  Inmates were not allowed to leave the room where they were assembled. They had to ask for the supervisor’s permission to go to the toilet, and were accompanied there in groups of three. They therefore had to wait until such a group was formed before being able to go to the toilet. Given that the applicant suffered from enuresis, the fact that he could not go to the toilet as often as he needed caused him bladder pain and psychological suffering. If his requests for permission to go to the toilet became too frequent, the supervisors punished him by making him do particularly arduous cleaning work.
.  Although the applicant’s grandfather had informed the staff of the centre of the applicant’s enuresis and his ADHD, the applicant did not receive any treatment.
.  According to the Government, each bedroom in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders measured seventeen square metres and was equipped with four beds. Access to the bathrooms and toilets situated on each floor was not limited.
.  The centre had a dining room where meals were served five times a day. There was also a games room and a sports room. Audio and video equipment, educational games and works of fiction were available.
.  The supervisors carried out “preventive work” with each inmate of the centre and could apply incentive measures or punitive measures in the form of oral reprimands. Corporal punishment was not used; nor were juvenile inmates ever required to do hard or dirty work.
The centre’s medical unit had all the necessary equipment and medicine. It could be seen from the staff list of the centre submitted by the Government that the medical unit was staffed by a paediatrician, two nurses and a psychologist. According to the Government, each child was examined by the paediatrician on his admission and every day thereafter. Treatment was prescribed when necessary. It could be seen from the temporary detention centre’s “accounting and statistical record” concerning the applicant that he had not informed the doctor of his enuresis.
.  The applicant’s personal file, containing, in particular, the information on his medical condition on admission, the preventive work carried out and the punishments applied to him, had been destroyed on 17 January 2008 after the expiry of the statutory time-limit on storage, in accordance with Order no. 215 of the Ministry of the Interior of 2 April 2004 (see paragraph 73 below). However, the Government stated that the applicant’s “accounting and statistical record”, referred to above, had been retained since its storage period was unlimited in accordance with Order no. 215 (see paragraph 74 below).
.  According to the Government, the applicant’s other medical records and logbooks at the temporary detention centre had been destroyed as soon as they were no longer needed, without any records being compiled in this respect. This had been possible because there had been no regulations on storing such documents until Order no. 340 of the Ministry of the Interior had come into force on 12 May 2006 (which provided that medical records were to be stored for three years).
.  However, the Government submitted a written statement by a supervisor at the detention centre dated 23 December 2010. She confirmed the Government’s description of the conditions of detention in the centre. She also stated that one of the supervisors was always present in the room with the inmates, which ensured continuity of the educational process. Teachers from the neighbouring school regularly came to the centre so that the inmates could follow the secondary-school curriculum. After their release from the centre, they received an education progress record. She stated that she did not remember the applicant but asserted that she had not received any requests or complaints from him or from any other inmate.
.  The Government also submitted a copy of an agreement of 1 September 2004 between the detention centre and secondary school no. 15 whereby the school undertook to organise secondary-school courses in the centre in accordance with a curriculum developed by the centre. A copy of an undated two-week curriculum was produced by the Government. It included four classes per day on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays.
.  On 23 March 2005 the applicant was released from the detention centre. On the following day he was taken to hospital, where he received treatment for neurosis and ADHD. He remained at the hospital until at least 21 April 2005.
.  On 31 August 2005 the applicant was placed in an orphanage and, according to an extract from the applicant’s medical record drawn up at the orphanage, he was on the run between 14 September and 11 October 2005 and again between 13 and 23 October 2005.
.  On 1 November 2005 he was transferred to a children’s psychiatric hospital, where he remained until 27 December 2005. At some point after that, he was returned to his grandfather who had been reinstated as his guardian.
On 4 October 2005 the applicant’s grandfather complained to the Prosecutor General’s Office that the applicant, who suffered from a mental disorder, had not received any medical treatment in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders, which had caused a deterioration in his condition; nor had he been provided with any educational courses. He reiterated his complaints to the prosecution authorities in a letter dated 30 November 2005. The prosecutor’s office of the Sovetskiy district of Novosibirsk sent a reply to the applicant’s grandfather on 9 November 2005 and the prosecutor’s office of the Novosibirsk region sent a reply on 16 December 2005, however, both of these dealt exclusively with the procedural issues related to the applicant’s case (see paragraph 24 above) and did not contain any answer to the grandfather’s complaints in so far as they related to the applicant’s health and the conditions of detention.
Meanwhile, on 2 March 2005, the applicant’s grandfather appealed against the detention order of 21 February 2005. He submitted, firstly, that the detention was unlawful because the Minors Act did not permit detention for “behaviour correction”. Secondly, he complained that he had not been informed of the decision of 12 January 2005 refusing to institute criminal proceedings against the applicant and had therefore been deprived of an opportunity to appeal against it. He further submitted that the court’s finding that the applicant had committed an offence had been based on the statements of S. and his mother and the applicant’s confession statement. However, the applicant had made his confession statement in the absence of his guardian. Nor had a teacher been present. No teacher had been present during the questioning of S. either. Their statements were therefore inadmissible as evidence. Moreover, S. and his mother had not attended the court hearing and had not been heard by the court. Nor had the court verified the applicant’s alibi. Lastly, the applicant’s grandfather complained that the court had not taken into account the applicant’s frail health and had not verified whether his medical condition was compatible with detention.
.  On 21 March 2005 the Novosibirsk Regional Court quashed the detention order of 21 February 2005 on appeal. It found that behaviour correction was not among the grounds listed in section 22(2)(4) of the Minors Act for placing a minor in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders. Detention for behaviour correction therefore had no basis in domestic law. Moreover, the District Court had not stated reasons why it considered it necessary to detain the applicant. The mere fact that the applicant had committed an offence for which he was not liable to prosecution because of his age could not justify his detention. Such detention would be permissible only if one of the additional conditions listed in section 22(2)(4) of the Minors Act (see paragraph 66 below) was met. The Regional Court remitted the case to the District Court for fresh examination.
.  On 11 April 2005 the Sovetskiy District Court discontinued the proceedings because the head of the Sovetskiy district Police Department of Novosibirsk had withdrawn his request for the placement of the applicant in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders. The applicant and his grandfather were not informed of the date of the hearing.
.  On 22 March 2006 the applicant’s grandfather lodged an application for supervisory review of the decision of 11 April 2005. He complained that, as a result of the discontinuation of the proceedings, the applicant had been deprived of an opportunity to prove his innocence in respect of the offence for which he had already unlawfully served a term of detention in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders.
On 3 April 2006 the President of the Novosibirsk Regional Court quashed the decision of 11 April 2005. He found, firstly, that, in accordance with section 31.2(3) of the Minors Act, a judge examining a request for the placement of a minor in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders had the power either to grant or to reject the request. He had no power to discontinue the proceedings. Secondly, the applicant and his guardian had not been informed of the date of the hearing and had therefore been deprived of an opportunity to make submissions on the issue of the discontinuation of the proceedings.
.  On 17 April 2006 the Prosecutor of the Novosibirsk region lodged an application for supervisory review of the Regional Court’s decision of 21 March 2005.
.  On 12 May 2006 the Presidium of the Novosibirsk Regional Court quashed the decision of 21 March 2005, finding that it had been adopted by an unlawful composition of judges. It remitted the case for a fresh examination on appeal.
.  On 29 May 2006 the President of the Novosibirsk Regional Court held a fresh appeal hearing and upheld the decision of 21 February 2005 ordering the applicant’s placement in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders. He found that the applicant had committed a delinquent act punishable under Article 163 of the Criminal Code but that no criminal proceedings had been instituted against him because he had not reached the statutory age of criminal responsibility. He belonged to a “problem family”; his parents had been deprived of parental responsibility and he was cared for by his grandfather. He played truant from school and spent most of the time on the streets or in a computer club. In those circumstances, it had been necessary, in accordance with section 22(2)(4) of the Minors Act, to place him in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders for thirty days to prevent him from committing further delinquent acts. The fact that the District Court had referred to “behaviour correction” as a ground for detention had not made the detention order of 21 February 2005 unlawful. The applicant’s detention had been justified by other grounds. Nor could the detention order of 21 February 2005 be quashed on account of the applicant’s frail health, given that it had already been enforced in March 2005.
An arrested or detained person or a person accused of a criminal offence is entitled to legal assistance from the time of his or her arrest, placement in custody, or when charges are brought (Article 48 § 2).
.  The Criminal Code fixes the age of criminal responsibility at 16 years of age. For certain offences, including extortion, the age of criminal responsibility is fixed at 14 years of age (Article 20).
.  Under Article 43 § 2 of the Code, the purposes of criminal punishment are restoration of social justice, reformation of the offender and the prevention of further crimes.
.  Article 87 § 1 of the Criminal Code regulates the criminal liability of minors, defining them as persons between 14 and 18 years of age, and states that mandatory measures of an educational nature or punishment may be applied to minors who have committed a criminal offence. Article 87 § 2 provides that, where a court relieves a minor of punishment, the minor may still be placed in a special closed educational facility run by a body of the Ministry of Education.
A suspect or an accused is entitled to legal assistance from the time of arrest (Articles 46 § 4 (3), 47 § 4 (8) and 49 § 3).
.  The presence of a defence lawyer is mandatory if the suspect or the accused is a minor. If neither the minor nor his guardian has retained a defence lawyer, one must be appointed by the police officer, the investigator, the prosecutor or the judge in charge of the case (Article 51 §§ 1 and 3).
.  A defence lawyer must be present during each questioning of the minor suspect. The presence of a psychologist or a teacher is also mandatory if the suspect is under the age of 16. The police officer, investigator or prosecutor in charge of the questioning must ensure that a psychologist or a teacher is present during each questioning (Article 425 §§ 2-4).
.  The guardian of a juvenile suspect is entitled to participate in all investigative actions starting from the first questioning (Article 426 §§ 1 and 2 (3)).
Witnesses are to be examined directly by the trial court (Article 278). Statements given by the victim or a witness during the pretrial investigation can be read out with the consent of the parties in two cases: (i) if there is a substantial discrepancy between those statements and the testimony before the court; or (ii) if the victim or witness has failed to appear in court (Article 281).
.  The Federal Law no. 120-FZ on the basic measures for preventing child neglect and delinquency of minors of 24 June 1999 (“the Minors Act”) defines a minor as a person under the age of 18 (section 1).
A minor with special educational needs who has committed a delinquent act before reaching the statutory age of criminal responsibility may be placed in a “closed educational institution” for up to three years (section 15(4-7)). The main aims of closed educational institutions are as follows:
(i)  the accommodation, upbringing and education of minors between eight and 18 years old requiring a special educational approach;
(ii)  the psychological, medical and pedagogical rehabilitation of minors, as well as individual preventive work;
(iii)  the protection of the rights and legitimate interests of minors, and the provision of medical care and of secondary and professional education;
(iv)  the provision of social, psychological and pedagogical assistance to minors with health, behavioural or educational difficulties;
(v)  the organisation of sports, science or other clubs or sections and encouragement of participation by minors in such clubs or sections;
(vi)  the implementation of programmes and policies aimed at developing law-abiding behaviour in minors (section 15(2)).
A minor may only be placed in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders for the shortest possible time necessary for appropriate accommodation to be found, and for a maximum of thirty days (section 22(6)), in the following cases:
(i)  a minor whose placement in a closed educational institution has been ordered by a court may be placed in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders for the time necessary to prepare his transfer to the closed educational institution (section 22(1)(3) and 22(2)(1) and section 31(1));
(ii)  a minor in respect of whom a request for placement in a closed educational institution is pending before a court may be placed in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders for a period of up to thirty days if it is necessary in order to protect his life or health or to prevent him from committing a further delinquent act, or if he has no fixed residence, has absconded or has failed to appear at court hearings or medical examinations more than twice without a valid reason (sections 22(2)(2) and 26(6));
(iii)  a minor who has escaped from a closed educational institution may be placed in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders for the time necessary for appropriate accommodation to be found for him (section 22(2)(3));
(iv)  a minor who has committed a delinquent act before reaching the statutory age of criminal responsibility may be placed in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders if it is necessary in order to protect his life or health or to prevent him from committing a further delinquent act, or if his identity is unknown, he has no fixed place of residence, resides in a region other than the one where the delinquent act was committed, or if he cannot be immediately placed in the charge of his parents or guardians owing to the remoteness of their place of residence (section 22(2)(4-6)).
The main aims of temporary detention centres for juvenile offenders are as follows:
(i)  the temporary detention of juvenile offenders with the aim of protecting their life and health and preventing them from committing further delinquent acts;
(ii)  individual preventive work with minors with the aim of discovering whether they are involved in the commission of delinquent acts, establishing the circumstances, reasons and conditions conducive to such acts, and informing the competent law-enforcement authorities;
(iii)  the transfer of minors to closed educational institutions and other measures aimed at finding accommodation for minors temporarily placed in the centre’s care (section 22(1)).
Placement in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders is to be ordered by a judge (section 22(3)(2)) at the request of the local department of the interior, which must submit the following materials in support of the request: evidence confirming that the minor has committed a delinquent act; materials indicating the aims of, and reasons for, the placement of the minor in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders; and materials confirming that such placement is necessary to protect the life or health of the minor or to prevent him from committing a further delinquent act (section 31.1). The minor and his parents or guardian are entitled to study these materials. The materials are then examined by a single judge at a hearing with the participation of the minor concerned, his parents or guardian, defence lawyer, a prosecutor, and representatives of the local department of the interior and of the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders. The judge issues a reasoned decision either granting or rejecting the request for the placement of the minor in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders (section 31.2). The minor or his parents, guardian, or defence lawyer may, within ten days, appeal against the decision to a higher court (section 31.3).
.  The Instruction on the organisation of the activities of temporary detention centres for juvenile offenders, adopted by Order no. 215 of the Ministry of the Interior on 2 April 2004 (in force at the material time), provided that temporary detention centres for juvenile offenders were to be managed by the local departments of the interior (§ 4).
On admission to a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders, the minor and his belongings had to be searched. Prohibited belongings had to be confiscated, while money, valuables and other belongings had to be deposited with the centre’s accountant (§§ 14-15).
Temporary detention centres had to be enclosed and the enclosures equipped with an alarm system and an entry checkpoint (§ 19). The disciplinary regime was maintained by a duty squad (§ 22).
The director of the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders was responsible for security arrangements, which had to ensure the twentyfour-hour surveillance of inmates, including while asleep, and had to exclude any possibility of unauthorised leaving of the premises by inmates (§ 39).
A personal file had to be opened in respect of each minor and contain the following information: the documents which served as the basis for the minor’s admission to the centre, the search report, the record of preventive work carried out and of rewards and punishment applied, the medical certificates documenting the minor’s condition on admission, and any others (§ 18). Personal files had to be stored for two years and be destroyed after the expiry of that time-limit (Appendix no. 5).
.  The temporary detention centre’s “accounting and statistical records” for each minor had to be kept indefinitely in the centre (Appendix 4, endnote 2).
If appropriate, individual preventive work might be carried out with the minors, taking into account their age, conduct, the gravity of the delinquent acts committed and other circumstances (§ 24). In order to make the preventive work more efficient, incentives and punishment might be applied to minors (§ 25).
With the aim of preventing delinquency, the staff of temporary detention centres for juvenile offenders might take the following measures in the context of preventive work:
(i)  establishing the living and educational conditions of the minor’s family, the minor’s personal qualities and interests, his or her reasons for running away from home or for abandoning school, and the facts of the minor’s participation in the commission of any delinquent acts and the circumstances in which they were committed, including information on any accomplices and how any stolen property was disposed of;
(ii)  passing to the law-enforcement authorities any information concerning those involved in delinquent acts, or any other information that may contribute to the investigation of such delinquent acts;
(iii)  taking individual educational measures, with particular emphasis on developing positive qualities and interests, to combat any defects of character and to motivate the minors in studying and working (§ 26).
The relevant parts of Recommendation No. R (87) 20 on social reactions to juvenile delinquency, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 17 September 1987, state as follows.
“... Considering that young people are developing beings and in consequence all measures taken in their respect should have an educational character;
Considering that social reactions to juvenile delinquency should take account of the personality and specific needs of minors and that the latter need specialised interventions and, where appropriate, specialised treatment based in particular on the principles embodied in the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child;
...
Convinced that minors must be afforded the same procedural guarantees as adults; ...
Recommends the governments of member states to review, if necessary, their legislation and practice with a view:
...
Proceedings against minors
to ensuring that minors are tried more rapidly, avoiding undue delay, so as to ensure effective educational action;
...
to reinforcing the legal position of minors throughout the proceedings, including the police investigation, by recognising, inter alia:
–  the presumption of innocence;
–  the right to the assistance of a counsel who may, if necessary, be officially appointed and paid by the state;
–  the right to the presence of parents or of another legal representative who should be informed from the beginning of the proceedings;
–  the right of minors to call, interrogate and confront witnesses;
...
–  the right to appeal;
–  the right to apply for a review of the measures ordered;
...”
.  Recommendation Rec(2003)20 of the Committee of Ministers to member states concerning new ways of dealing with juvenile delinquency and the role of juvenile justice, adopted on 24 September 2003, in so far as relevant, reads as follows.
“15.  Where juveniles are detained in police custody, account should be taken of their status as a minor, their age and their vulnerability and level of maturity. They should be promptly informed of their rights and safeguards in a manner that ensures their full understanding. While being questioned by the police they should, in principle, be accompanied by their parent/legal guardian or other appropriate adult. They should also have the right of access to a lawyer and a doctor. ...”
Recommendation CM/Rec(2008)11 on the European Rules for juvenile offenders subject to sanctions or measures, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 5 November 2008, provides, inter alia, as follows.
“Part I – Basic principles, scope and definitions
...
The sanctions or measures that may be imposed on juveniles, as well as the manner of their implementation, shall be specified by law and based on the principles of social integration and education and of the prevention of re-offending.
...
The imposition and implementation of sanctions or measures shall be based on the best interests of the juvenile offenders, limited by the gravity of the offences committed (principle of proportionality) and take account of their age, physical and mental well-being, development, capacities and personal circumstances (principle of individualisation) as ascertained when necessary by psychological, psychiatric or social inquiry reports.
...
Sanctions or measures shall not humiliate or degrade the juveniles subject to them.
Sanctions or measures shall not be implemented in a manner that aggravates their afflictive character or poses an undue risk of physical or mental harm.
...
Deprivation of liberty of a juvenile shall be a measure of last resort and imposed and implemented for the shortest period possible. Special efforts must be undertaken to avoid pre-trial detention.
...
Any justice system dealing with juveniles shall ensure their effective participation in the proceedings concerning the imposition as well as the implementation of sanctions or measures. Juveniles shall not have fewer legal rights and safeguards than those provided to adult offenders by the general rules of criminal procedure.
Any justice system dealing with juveniles shall take due account of the rights and responsibilities of the parents and legal guardians and shall as far as possible involve them in the proceedings and the execution of sanctions or measures, except if this is not in the best interests of the juvenile. ...
...
For the purpose of these rules:
...
5.  ’deprivation of liberty’ means any form of placement in an institution by decision of a judicial or administrative authority, from which the juvenile is not permitted to leave at will;
...
Part III – Deprivation of liberty
...
1.  Deprivation of liberty shall be implemented only for the purpose for which it is imposed and in a manner that does not aggravate the suffering inherent to it.
...
1.  Juveniles deprived of their liberty shall be guaranteed a variety of meaningful activities and interventions according to an individual overall plan that aims at progression through less restrictive regimes and preparation for release and reintegration into society. These activities and interventions shall foster their physical and mental health, self-respect and sense of responsibility and develop attitudes and skills that will prevent them from re-offending.
...
Juveniles deprived of liberty shall be sent to institutions with the least restrictive level of security to hold them safely.
Juveniles who are suffering from mental illness and who are to be deprived of their liberty shall be held in mental health institutions.
 ...
2.  At admission, the following details shall be recorded immediately concerning each juvenile:
...
subject to the requirements of medical confidentiality, any information about the juvenile’s risk of self-harm or a health condition that is relevant to the physical and mental well-being of the juvenile or to that of others.
...
5.  As soon as possible after admission, the juvenile shall be medically examined, a medical record shall be opened and treatment of any illness or injury shall be initiated.
...
2.  Juveniles shall have ready access to sanitary facilities that are hygienic and respect privacy.
...
2.  The health of juveniles deprived of their liberty shall be safeguarded according to recognised medical standards applicable to juveniles in the wider community.
 ...
Particular attention shall be paid to the needs of:
...
juveniles with physical and mental health problems;
...
Regime activities shall aim at education, personal and social development, vocational training, rehabilitation and preparation for release ...
...
3.  Where it is not possible for juveniles to attend local schools or training centres outside the institution, education and training shall take place within the institution, but under the auspices of external educational and vocational training agencies.
...
5.  Juveniles in detention shall be integrated into the educational and vocational training system of the country so that after their release they may continue their education and vocational training without difficulty.
...
All juveniles deprived of their liberty shall be allowed to exercise regularly for at least two hours every day, of which at least one hour shall be in the open air, if the weather permits.
...
1.  Disciplinary procedures shall be mechanisms of last resort. Restorative conflict resolution and educational interaction with the aim of norm validation shall be given priority over formal disciplinary hearings and punishments.
...
1.  Disciplinary punishments shall be selected, as far as possible, for their educational impact. They shall not be heavier than justified by the seriousness of the offence.
2.  Collective punishment, corporal punishment, punishment by placing in a dark cell, and all other forms of inhuman and degrading punishment shall be prohibited.
...
Part IV – Legal advice and assistance
1.  Juveniles and their parents or legal guardians are entitled to legal advice and assistance in all matters related to the imposition and implementation of sanctions or measures.
2.  The competent authorities shall provide juveniles with reasonable facilities for gaining effective and confidential access to such advice and assistance, including unrestricted and unsupervised visits by legal advisors.
3.  The state shall provide free legal aid to juveniles, their parents or legal guardians when the interests of justice so require.
...”
The Guidelines of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on child friendly justice, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 17 November 2010, state, in so far as relevant, the following.
“II.  Definitions
For the purposes of these guidelines on child friendly justice (hereafter “the guidelines”):
...
’child-friendly justice’ refers to justice systems which guarantee the respect and the effective implementation of all children’s rights at the highest attainable level, bearing in mind the principles listed below and giving due consideration to the child’s level of maturity and understanding and the circumstances of the case. It is, in particular, justice that is accessible, age appropriate, speedy, diligent, adapted to and focused on the needs and rights of the child, respecting the rights of the child including the rights to due process, to participate in and to understand the proceedings, to respect for private and family life and to integrity and dignity.
Fundamental principles
...
Rule of law
The rule of law principle should apply fully to children as it does to adults.
Elements of due process such as the principles of legality and proportionality, the presumption of innocence, the right to a fair trial, the right to legal advice, the right to access to courts and the right to appeal, should be guaranteed for children as they are for adults and should not be minimised or denied under the pretext of the child’s best interests. This applies to all judicial and non-judicial and administrative proceedings. ...
Child-friendly justice before, during and after judicial proceedings
...
Any form of deprivation of liberty of children should be a measure of last resort and be for the shortest appropriate period of time.
...
Given the vulnerability of children deprived of liberty, the importance of family ties and promoting the reintegration into society, competent authorities should ensure respect and actively support the fulfilment of the rights of the child as set out in universal and European instruments. In addition to other rights, children in particular should have the right to:
...
receive appropriate education, vocational guidance and training, medical care, and enjoy freedom of thought, conscience and religion and access to leisure, including physical education and sport;
...
Child-friendly justice before judicial proceedings
...
Alternatives to court proceedings should guarantee an equivalent level of legal safeguards. Respect for children’s rights as described in these guidelines and in all relevant legal instruments on the rights of the child should be guaranteed to the same extent in both in-court and out-of-court proceedings.
Children and the police
Police should respect the personal rights and dignity of all children and have regard to their vulnerability, i.e. take account of their age and maturity and any special needs of those who may be under a physical or mental disability or have communication difficulties.
Whenever a child is apprehended by the police, the child should be informed in a manner and in language that is appropriate to his or her age and level of understanding of the reason for which he or she has been taken into custody. Children should be provided with access to a lawyer and be given the opportunity to contact their parents or a person whom they trust.
Save in exceptional circumstances, the parent(s) should be informed of the child’s presence in the police station, given details of the reason why the child has been taken into custody and be asked to come to the station.
A child who has been taken into custody should not be questioned in respect of criminal behaviour, or asked to make or sign a statement concerning such involvement, except in the presence of a lawyer or one of the child’s parents or, if no parent is available, another person whom the child trusts. ...”
.  The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child ( adopted on 20 November 1989, 1577 UNTS 3 – “the CRC”) sets out the fundamental principle of the best interests of the child in Article 3, which reads as follows.
“1.  In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.
States Parties undertake to ensure the child such protection and care as is necessary for his or her well-being, taking into account the rights and duties of his or her parents, legal guardians, or other individuals legally responsible for him or her, and, to this end, shall take all appropriate legislative and administrative measures.
States Parties shall ensure that the institutions, services and facilities responsible for the care or protection of children shall conform with the standards established by competent authorities, particularly in the areas of safety, health, in the number and suitability of their staff, as well as competent supervision.”
.  In so far as relevant to the present case, the CRC further states as follows.
“1.  States Parties recognize that a mentally or physically disabled child should enjoy a full and decent life, in conditions which ensure dignity, promote self-reliance and facilitate the child’s active participation in the community.
States Parties recognize the right of the disabled child to special care ...
...”
“States Parties shall ensure that:
(a)  No child shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. ...
(b)  No child shall be deprived of his or her liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily. The arrest, detention or imprisonment of a child shall be in conformity with the law and shall be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time;
(c)  Every child deprived of liberty shall be treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a manner which takes into account the needs of persons of his or her age. ...
(d)  Every child deprived of his or her liberty shall have the right to prompt access to legal and other appropriate assistance, as well as the right to challenge the legality of the deprivation of his or her liberty before a court or other competent, independent and impartial authority, and to a prompt decision on any such action.”
“1.  States Parties recognize the right of every child alleged as, accused of, or recognized as having infringed the penal law to be treated in a manner consistent with the promotion of the child’s sense of dignity and worth, which reinforces the child’s respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of others and which takes into account the child’s age and the desirability of promoting the child’s reintegration and the child’s assuming a constructive role in society.
To this end, and having regard to the relevant provisions of international instruments, States Parties shall, in particular, ensure that:
...
(b)  Every child alleged as or accused of having infringed the penal law has at least the following guarantees:
(i)  To be presumed innocent until proven guilty according to law;
(ii)  To be informed promptly and directly of the charges against him or her, and, if appropriate, through his or her parents or legal guardians, and to have legal or other appropriate assistance in the preparation and presentation of his or her defence;
(iii)  To have the matter determined without delay by a competent, independent and impartial authority or judicial body in a fair hearing according to law, in the presence of legal or other appropriate assistance and, unless it is considered not to be in the best interest of the child, in particular, taking into account his or her age or situation, his or her parents or legal guardians;
(iv)  Not to be compelled to give testimony or to confess guilt; to examine or have examined adverse witnesses and to obtain the participation and examination of witnesses on his or her behalf under conditions of equality;
(v)  If considered to have infringed the penal law, to have this decision and any measures imposed in consequence thereof reviewed by a higher competent, independent and impartial authority or judicial body according to law;
...”
.  General Comment No. 9 (2006) of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (27 February 2007, UN Doc. CRC/C/GC/9), contains, inter alia, the following recommendations.
“73.  In the light of article 2 States parties have the obligation to ensure that children with disabilities who are in conflict with the law (as described in article 40, paragraph 1) will be protected not only by the provisions of the Convention which specifically relate to juvenile justice (arts. 40, 37 and 39) but by all other relevant provisions and guarantees contained in the Convention, for example in the area of health care and education. In addition, States parties should take where necessary specific measures to ensure that children with disabilities de facto are protected by and do benefit from the rights mentioned above.
With reference to the rights enshrined in article 23 and given the high level of vulnerability of children with disabilities, the Committee recommends – in addition to the general recommendation made in paragraph 73 above – that the following elements of the treatment of children with disabilities (allegedly) in conflict with the law be taken into account:
a)  A child with disability who comes in conflict with the law should be interviewed using appropriate languages and otherwise dealt with by professionals such as police officers, attorneys/advocates/social workers, prosecutors and/or judges, who have received proper training in this regard;
b)  Governments should develop and implement alternative measures with a variety and a flexibility that allow for an adjustment of the measure to the individual capacities and abilities of the child in order to avoid the use of judicial proceedings. Children with disabilities in conflict with the law should be dealt with as much as possible without resorting to formal/legal procedures. Such procedures should only be considered when necessary in the interest of public order. In those cases special efforts have to be made to inform the child about the juvenile justice procedure and his or her rights therein;
c)  Children with disabilities in conflict with the law should not be placed in a regular juvenile detention centre by way of pre-trial detention nor by way of a punishment. Deprivation of liberty should only be applied if necessary with a view to providing the child with adequate treatment for addressing his or her problems which have resulted in the commission of a crime and the child should be placed in an institution that has the specially trained staff and other facilities to provide this specific treatment. In making such decisions the competent authority should make sure that the human rights and legal safeguards are fully respected.”
.  General Comment No. 10 (2007) of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (25 April 2007, UN Doc. CRC/C/GC/10), includes the following recommendations.
“33.  ... In this regard, State parties should inform the Committee in their reports in specific detail how children below the [minimum age of criminal responsibility] set in their laws are treated when they are recognized as having infringed the penal law, or are alleged as or accused of having done so, and what kinds of legal safeguards are in place to ensure that their treatment is as fair and just as that of children at or above [the minimum age of criminal responsibility].
...
The child must be guaranteed legal or other appropriate assistance in the preparation and presentation of his/her defence. CRC does require that the child be provided with assistance, which is not necessarily under all circumstances legal but it must be appropriate. It is left to the discretion of the States parties to determine how this assistance is provided but it should be free of charge. ...
...
... decisions without delay should be the result of a process in which the human rights of the child and legal safeguards are fully respected. In this decision-making process without delay, the legal or other appropriate assistance must be present. This presence should not be limited to the trial before the court or other judicial body, but also applies to all other stages of the process, beginning with the interviewing (interrogation) of the child by the police.
...
In line with article 14 (3) (g) of ICCPR, CRC requires that a child be not compelled to give testimony or to confess or acknowledge guilt ...
... The term ‘compelled’ should be interpreted in a broad manner and not be limited to physical force or other clear violations of human rights. The age of the child, the child’s development, the length of the interrogation, the child’s lack of understanding, the fear of unknown consequences or of a suggested possibility of imprisonment may lead him/her to a confession that is not true. That may become even more likely if rewards are promised such as: ‘You can go home as soon as you have given us the true story’, or lighter sanctions or release are promised.
The child being questioned must have access to a legal or other appropriate representative, and must be able to request the presence of his/her parent(s) during questioning. There must be independent scrutiny of the methods of interrogation to ensure that the evidence is voluntary and not coerced, given the totality of the circumstances, and is reliable. The court or other judicial body, when considering the voluntary nature and reliability of an admission or confession by a child, must take into account the age of the child, the length of custody and interrogation, and the presence of legal or other counsel, parent(s), or independent representatives of the child. ...”
.  General Comment No. 35 of the Human Rights Committee (16 December 2014, UN Doc. CCPR/C/GC/35), comprises the following remarks concerning Article 9 (Liberty and security of person) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
“28.  For some categories of vulnerable persons, directly informing the person arrested is required but not sufficient. When children are arrested, notice of the arrest and the reasons for it should also be provided directly to their parents, guardians, or legal representatives. ...
...
Article 24, paragraph 1, of the Covenant entitles every child ‘to such measures of protection as are required by his status as a minor, on the part of his family, society and the State’. That article entails the adoption of special measures to protect the personal liberty and security of every child, in addition to the measures generally required by article 9 for everyone. A child may be deprived of liberty only as a last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time. In addition to the other requirements applicable to each category of deprivation of liberty, the best interests of the child must be a primary consideration in every decision to initiate or continue the deprivation. ... The child has a right to be heard, directly or through legal or other appropriate assistance, in relation to any decision regarding a deprivation of liberty, and the procedures employed should be child-appropriate. ...”
.  The relevant parts of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (“the Beijing Rules”), adopted by the General Assembly on 29 November 1985 (UN Doc. A/RES/40/33), state the following.
“5.  Aims of juvenile justice
1  The juvenile justice system shall emphasize the well-being of the juvenile and shall ensure that any reaction to juvenile offenders shall always be in proportion to the circumstances of both the offenders and the offence.
...
Rights of juveniles
1  Basic procedural safeguards such as the presumption of innocence, the right to be notified of the charges, the right to remain silent, the right to counsel, the right to the presence of a parent or guardian, the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses and the right to appeal to a higher authority shall be guaranteed at all stages of proceedings.
...
Initial contact
1  Upon the apprehension of a juvenile, her or his parents or guardian shall be immediately notified of such apprehension, and, where such immediate notification is not possible, the parents or guardian shall be notified within the shortest possible time thereafter.
...
3  Contacts between the law enforcement agencies and a juvenile offender shall be managed in such a way as to respect the legal status of the juvenile, promote the well-being of the juvenile and avoid harm to her or him, with due regard to the circumstances of the case.
...
Guiding principles in adjudication and disposition
1  The disposition of the competent authority shall be guided by the following principles:
...
(b)  Restrictions on the personal liberty of the juvenile shall be imposed only after careful consideration and shall be limited to the possible minimum;
(c)  Deprivation of personal liberty shall not be imposed unless the juvenile is adjudicated of a serious act involving violence against another person or of persistence in committing other serious offences and unless there is no other appropriate response;
...
Commentary
...
Rule 17.1 (b) implies that strictly punitive approaches are not appropriate. Whereas in adult cases, and possibly also in cases of severe offences by juveniles, just desert and retributive sanctions might be considered to have some merit, in juvenile cases such considerations should always be outweighed by the interest of safeguarding the well-being and the future of the young person.
...
Least possible use of institutionalization
1  The placement of a juvenile in an institution shall always be a disposition of last resort and for the minimum necessary period.
Commentary
...
Rule 19 aims at restricting institutionalization in two regards: in quantity (‘last resort’) and in time (‘minimum necessary period’). Rule 19 reflects one of the basic guiding principles of resolution 4 of the Sixth United Nations Congress: a juvenile offender should not be incarcerated unless there is no other appropriate response. ... In fact, priority should be given to ‘open’ over ‘closed’ institutions. Furthermore, any facility should be of a correctional or educational rather than of a prison type.
...
Objectives of institutional treatment
...
2  Juveniles in institutions shall receive care, protection and all necessary assistance – social, educational, vocational, psychological, medical and physical – that they may require because of their age, sex and personality and in the interest of their wholesome development.
...”
.  The United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (“the Havana Rules”), adopted by General Assembly Resolution 45/113 of 14 December 1990, include the following provisions.
“I.  Fundamental perspectives
...
Juveniles should only be deprived of their liberty in accordance with the principles and procedures set forth in these Rules and in the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (The Beijing Rules). Deprivation of the liberty of a juvenile should be a disposition of last resort and for the minimum necessary period and should be limited to exceptional cases. The length of the sanction should be determined by the judicial authority, without precluding the possibility of his or her early release.
...
Scope and application of the rules
For the purposes of the Rules, the following definitions should apply:
...
(b)  The deprivation of liberty means any form of detention or imprisonment or the placement of a person in a public or private custodial setting, from which this person is not permitted to leave at will, by order of any judicial, administrative or other public authority.
...
The management of juvenile facilities
...
Admission, registration, movement and transfer
In every place where juveniles are detained, a complete and secure record of the following information should be kept concerning each juvenile received:
...
(e)  Details of known physical and mental health problems, including drug and alcohol abuse.
...
Classification and placement
As soon as possible after the moment of admission, each juvenile should be interviewed, and a psychological and social report identifying any factors relevant to the specific type and level of care and programme required by the juvenile should be prepared. This report, together with the report prepared by a medical officer who has examined the juvenile upon admission, should be forwarded to the director for purposes of determining the most appropriate placement for the juvenile within the facility and the specific type and level of care and programme required and to be pursued. ...
The detention of juveniles should only take place under conditions that take full account of their particular needs, status and special requirements according to their age, personality, sex and type of offence, as well as mental and physical health, and which ensure their protection from harmful influences and risk situations. The principal criterion for the separation of different categories of juveniles deprived of their liberty should be the provision of the type of care best suited to the particular needs of the individuals concerned and the protection of their physical, mental and moral integrity and well-being.
...
Physical environment and accommodation
Juveniles deprived of their liberty have the right to facilities and services that meet all the requirements of health and human dignity.
The design of detention facilities for juveniles and the physical environment should be in keeping with the rehabilitative aim of residential treatment, with due regard to the need of the juvenile for privacy, sensory stimuli, opportunities for association with peers and participation in sports, physical exercise and leisure-time activities. ...
...
Sanitary installations should be so located and of a sufficient standard to enable every juvenile to comply, as required, with their physical needs in privacy and in a clean and decent manner.
...
Education, vocational training and work
Every juvenile of compulsory school age has the right to education suited to his or her needs and abilities and designed to prepare him or her for return to society. Such education should be provided outside the detention facility in community schools wherever possible and, in any case, by qualified teachers through programmes integrated with the education system of the country so that, after release, juveniles may continue their education without difficulty. ...
...
Medical care
Every juvenile shall receive adequate medical care, both preventive and remedial, including dental, ophthalmological and mental health care, as well as pharmaceutical products and special diets as medically indicated. ...
Every juvenile has a right to be examined by a physician immediately upon admission to a detention facility, for the purpose of recording any evidence of prior ill-treatment and identifying any physical or mental condition requiring medical attention.
The medical services provided to juveniles should seek to detect and should treat any physical or mental illness, substance abuse or other condition that may hinder the integration of the juvenile into society. Every detention facility for juveniles should have immediate access to adequate medical facilities and equipment appropriate to the number and requirements of its residents and staff trained in preventive health care and the handling of medical emergencies. Every juvenile who is ill, who complains of illness or who demonstrates symptoms of physical or mental difficulties, should be examined promptly by a medical officer.
Any medical officer who has reason to believe that the physical or mental health of a juvenile has been or will be injuriously affected by continued detention, a hunger strike or any condition of detention should report this fact immediately to the director of the detention facility in question and to the independent authority responsible for safeguarding the well-being of the juvenile.
A juvenile who is suffering from mental illness should be treated in a specialized institution under independent medical management. Steps should be taken, by arrangement with appropriate agencies, to ensure any necessary continuation of mental health care after release.
...
Disciplinary procedures
Any disciplinary measures and procedures should maintain the interest of safety and an ordered community life and should be consistent with the upholding of the inherent dignity of the juvenile and the fundamental objective of institutional care, namely, instilling a sense of justice, self-respect and respect for the basic rights of every person.
All disciplinary measures constituting cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment shall be strictly prohibited, including corporal punishment, placement in a dark cell, closed or solitary confinement or any other punishment that may compromise the physical or mental health of the juvenile concerned. The reduction of diet and the restriction or denial of contact with family members should be prohibited for any purpose. Labour should always be viewed as an educational tool and a means of promoting the self-respect of the juvenile in preparing him or her for return to the community and should not be imposed as a disciplinary sanction. No juvenile should be sanctioned more than once for the same disciplinary infraction. Collective sanctions should be prohibited.
...”
.  The United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (“the Riyadh Guidelines”), adopted by General Assembly Resolution 45/112 of 14 December 1990, include the following provision.
“46.  The institutionalization of young persons should be a measure of last resort and for the minimum necessary period, and the best interests of the young person should be of paramount importance. Criteria authorizing formal intervention of this type should be strictly defined and limited to the following situations: (a) where the child or young person has suffered harm that has been inflicted by the parents or guardians; (b) where the child or young person has been sexually, physically or emotionally abused by the parents or guardians; (c) where the child or young person has been neglected, abandoned or exploited by the parents or guardians; (d) where the child or young person is threatened by physical or moral danger due to the behaviour of the parents or guardians; and (e) where a serious physical or psychological danger to the child or young person has manifested itself in his or her own behaviour and neither the parents, the guardians, the juvenile himself or herself nor non-residential community services can meet the danger by means other than institutionalization.”
In its Concluding Observations on the combined fourth and fifth periodic reports of the Russian Federation of 25 February 2014 (UN Doc. CRC/C/RUS/CO/4-5), the Committee on the Rights of the Child “urged the State party to establish a juvenile justice system in full compliance with the Convention, in particular Articles 37, 39 and 40, and with other relevant standards”. It further recommended that the Russian Federation “prevent the unlawful detention of children and ensure that legal safeguards are guaranteed for children detained”. Articles 37 and 40 of the CRC relates to children in conflict with the law (see paragraph 82 above) while Article 39 concerns the rights of children who are victims of crimes.