The case originated in an application (no. 11871/05) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Mircea Hadade (“the applicant”), on 18 February 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr R.V. Doseanu, a lawyer practicing in Oradea. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by their Co-Agent, Ms I. Cambrea and subsequently by their Agent Ms C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that his rights guaranteed by, inter alia, Articles 3 and 5 of the Convention had been breached. Relying on Article 3, he complained, in particular, that the material conditions of his detention in Oradea Prison had been inadequate, and that on numerous occasions before being convicted he had been brought before the domestic courts wearing a prison uniform and handcuffs. Relying on Article 5, he complained that his initial detention, and continued detention thereafter, had been without justification and excessively lengthy, and that the Oradea Court of Appeal had failed to examine speedily appeals on points of law lodged by him after 18 August 2004 against interlocutory judgments delivered by the Bihor County Court extending his pre-trial detention.
On 1 December 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Oradea.
On 11 April 2003 the Bihor Police Border Guard Department informed the Bihor Prosecutor’s Office that the applicant, inter alia, was investigated in relation to commission of two offences: organising a criminal group and unlawfully trafficking migrants.
On the same date the Bihor Prosecutor’s Office issued an order to appear on the applicant’s name in order for him to be questioned as a suspect in relation to commission of the offences.
By a decision of 12 April 2003, the Bihor Prosecutor’s Office authorised the Bihor Police Border Guard Department to initiate a criminal investigation in respect of the applicant.
On 7 May 2003, in the presence of his chosen legal representative, the applicant was informed of his procedural rights and signed a written statement acknowledging that he had been informed by the authorities that he had been charged with both offences of which he was suspected. On the same date, the applicant was questioned by the Bihor Prosecutor’s Office in respect of the charges brought against him. He was detained for thirty days pending trial under Article 148 (c), (e), (f) and (h) of the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure on the grounds that he had absconded, that there was sufficient evidence to suspect that he might commit other offences or that he would obstruct the investigation, that he was a repeat offender, that the prison sentence prescribed by law for the offences with which he had been charged was in excess of two years, and that his release would pose a danger to public order.
On 30 May 2003 the Bihor Prosecutor’s Office indicted the applicant for organising a criminal group and for unlawfully trafficking migrants and sent his case for trial.
On 4 June 2003 at the first hearing before the Bihor County Court, the applicant contested the lawfulness of his pre-trial detention and asked the court to release him. By an interlocutory judgment delivered the same day, the Bihor County Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention on the grounds that it was lawful and the reasons justifying his initial detention remained valid. The court held that the applicant’s release would constitute a danger to public order, that the offences attracted a severe punishment and that it had been proven that the applicant had absconded, because immediately after he had found out about the investigation initiated into his actions he had left his home and was later found at a different address. In addition, he was a repeat offender and there was evidence in the file suggesting that he had committed the offences. The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law (recurs) against the interlocutory judgment.
By an unappealable interlocutory judgment of 12 June 2003, the Oradea Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law against the interlocutory judgment of 4 June 2003 as inadmissible. It held that, in accordance with the applicable rules of criminal procedure, the interlocutory judgment in question was not amenable to an appeal on points of law.
By interlocutory judgments of 23 June, 21 July, 18 and 25 August, 15 September, 13 October, 30 October, 10 November and 15 December 2003; 26 January, 23 March, 18 May, 24 June, 12 August, 9 September, 7 and 29 October, 11 November and 9 December 2004; and 6 January, 9 February and 11 March 2005, the Bihor County Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention on the grounds that his arrest had been lawful, the reasons justifying his initial detention remained valid, there was evidence in the file suggesting that he had committed the offences, the length of his pre-trial detention was not unreasonable, and that there was evidence suggesting that he was a danger to public order and might reoffend, given the danger he had posed to society shortly after having served a previous prison sentence. The court also dismissed, without providing any additional details, the applicant’s request for his pre-trial detention to be replaced with alternative measures, such as a prohibition on leaving town. The applicant lodged appeals on points of law against all the interlocutory judgments of the Bihor County Court, except for those delivered on 18 May 2004 and 6 January, 9 February and 11 March 2005.
By unappealable interlocutory judgments of 1 and 25 July, 21 and 28 August, 17 September, 20 October, 10 and 13 November, and 18 December 2003; 23 and 25 March, 6 July, 19 August, 21 September, 12 October, 9 and 18 November, and 21 December 2004, the Oradea Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeals on points of law as inadmissible or as ill-founded. The Court of Appeal relied on the same reasons as the Bihor County Court to dismiss the applicant’s appeals on points of law.
On 20 April 2004 the applicant sought withdrawal of all the judges attached to the Bihor County Court and the Oradea Court of Appeal.
By an interlocutory judgment of 21 April 2004, the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s request for withdrawal of the judges attached to the Oradea Court of Appeal as inadmissible on the grounds that the applicant had not provided any reasons for his request. It referred the case back to the Oradea Court of Appeal to examine the request for withdrawal of the judges attached to the Bihor County Court. By an unappealable interlocutory judgment of 6 May 2005, the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the decision as ill-founded.
By an interlocutory judgment of 21 April 2004, the Oradea Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s request of 20 April 2004 for withdrawal of all the judges of the Bihor County Court on the grounds that the applicant had not provided reasons for his request in accordance with the applicable rules of criminal procedure. At the same time, the court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention on the grounds that his arrest had been lawful and the reasons justifying his initial detention remained valid. By an unappealable interlocutory judgment of 23 April 2004 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law against the interlocutory judgment as ill-founded.
By unappealable interlocutory judgments of 31 March and 27 April 2005, the Bihor County Court dismissed several pleas of unconstitutionality made by the applicant in respect of various provisions of the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure on the grounds that either the applicant had not provided reasons for his pleas as required by the applicable rules of criminal procedure, or that they had no relevance to the case. The court refused his request to refer them to the Constitutional Court.
By an unappealable interlocutory judgment of 15 April 2005, the Bihor County Court allowed a plea by the applicant as to the unconstitutionality of Article 140 § 2 of the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure concerning the length of his pre-trial detention, and referred the case to the Constitutional Court.
By an interlocutory judgment of 27 May 2005, the Bihor County Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint concerning the length of his pretrial detention on the grounds that his conduct, including repeated pleas of unconstitutionality and requests for withdrawal of the judges, had contributed to the length of the proceedings. The court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention on the grounds that the reasons justifying his initial detention remained valid, that he had been charged with serious offences, and that his release would constitute a danger to public order on account of the seriousness of his actions and his attitude during the proceedings. The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the interlocutory judgment.
By an unappealable interlocutory judgment of 1 June 2005, the Oradea Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of 27 May 2005. It held that the applicant’s pre-trial detention was lawful and that the reasons justifying his initial detention remained valid, that he was charged with serious offences, and that there were no reasons to justify his release. It further held that the dangerousness of the offences, the particular circumstances of the case, the applicant’s personal circumstances, the international efforts made to stop similar offences from occurring, the negative impact on society of a decision to release a person charged with serious offences, and the potential impression it would give that the law had not been enforced if he was to be released, justified his pre-trial detention.
By interlocutory judgments of 23 June and 11 July 2005, the Bihor County Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention on the grounds that the reasons justifying his initial detention remained valid. It reiterated its previous findings that the applicant’s detention had been lawful, that it was not unreasonably lengthy, that his conduct contributed to the length of the proceedings, and that the pleas of unconstitutionality made by the applicant were irrelevant to the case. The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against both interlocutory judgments.
By unappealable interlocutory judgments of 8 and 15 July 2005 respectively, the Oradea Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeals on points of law against the interlocutory judgments of 23 June and 11 July 2005 respectively, as ill-founded. It held that the reasons justifying the applicant’s initial detention remained valid and that an alternative measure was not justified considering that the circumstances that had led to his detention had not changed.
By unappealable interlocutory judgments of 3 and 29 August and 13 September 2005, the Oradea Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeals on points of law against the Bihor County Court’s interlocutory judgments of 1 and 19 August and 5 September 2005. It extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention on the grounds that the reasons justifying his initial detention remained valid and that he continued to be a danger to public order. In addition, it held that the length of his pre-trial detention was not unreasonable, considering that neither the domestic law nor the European Convention on Human Rights imposed any time-limits on the length of such detention. Moreover, alternative measures were not justified given the above-mentioned considerations.
By a judgment of 30 September 2005, the Bihor County Court convicted the applicant of organising a criminal group and of unlawfully trafficking migrants on the basis of documentary and testimonial evidence and sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment. At the same time, the court extended the applicant’s detention. The applicant appealed against the judgment, arguing that the first-instance court had incorrectly assessed the evidence, had misinterpreted the applicable legal provisions and had unlawfully seized his car.
By a final judgment of 13 October 2005, the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s plea of unconstitutionality made on 15 April 2005 on the grounds that no provision of the Constitution could be interpreted to limit the length of pre-trial detention during the trial stage of the proceedings to a specific number of days.
By a judgment of 17 January 2006, the Oradea Court of Appeal allowed the applicant’s appeal in part, acknowledged that the seizure of the applicant’s car had been unlawful and ordered the authorities to return it to him. It upheld the remainder of the judgment of 30 September 2005. The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the judgment. He argued that the lower court had incorrectly assessed the evidence justifying the applicant’s sentence.
By a final judgment of 27 March 2006 the Court of Cassation allowed the applicant’s appeal on points of law in part and reduced his sentence from five to four years’ imprisonment. It dismissed the remainder of the applicant’s appeal on points of law and upheld the judgments of the lower court.
On 10 March 2005 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Oradea District Court, relying, inter alia, on Emergency Ordinance no. 56/2003 on the serving of prison sentences. He claimed that his right to be presumed innocent had been breached, in so far as the authorities of Oradea Prison had brought him before the domestic courts dressed in a prison uniform and handcuffs, usually worn by convicted individuals. He also claimed that he had been forced to share a cell with such detainees and had been chained to them when he had been brought before the courts. Furthermore, the applicant complained of inhuman and degrading treatment, as he had been detained in a damp and small cell without natural light or fresh air, which had affected his breathing.
On 26 May 2005 the applicant set out details of his complaints to the domestic court. He argued that his right to be presumed innocent had been breached, as he had been forced to wear the same prison uniform as persons already convicted by the courts, and had been detained in the same section of the prison as dangerous detainees. In addition, he claimed compensation for non-pecuniary damage of 1,000,000 euros (EUR) on the grounds that his life had been endangered as a result of his human rights having been breached during his detention.
On 16 June 2005 the applicant set out details of his complaints for a second time, arguing that the actions of the prison authorities amounted to an abuse of power and inhuman and degrading treatment and motioned the court to have a criminal investigation initiated against them for the said offences.
On the same date the Bihor District Court referred the case to the Bihor Prosecutor’s Office in order for an investigation to be conducted into the applicant’s allegations of abuse of power and inhuman and degrading treatment.
By a decision of 18 August 2005, the Bihor Prosecutor’s Office referred the case back to the Bihor District Court on the grounds that the applicant specified his action arguing that he did not lodge criminal proceeding against the employees of the prison, but he asked the court to examine and decide on the lawfulness of the rules concerning detainees.
By a judgment of 13 October 2005, the Oradea District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint on the grounds that it was inadmissible. It noted that the complaint had in fact concerned the lawfulness of the rules concerning the internal organisation of the prison system, in so far as he had alleged that his right to be presumed innocent had been breached during his presence in the said detention facility as a pre-trial detainee as a result of him being forced to wear the same prison uniforms as convicted individuals and by being incarcerated in the prison section reserved for dangerous detainees without him lodging a criminal complaint against any of the prison employees allegedly responsible for such actions. Consequently, the court was not competent to examine his claims.
On 25 April 2012 the Government informed the Court that the applicant had been detained in Oradea Prison from 3 June 2003 to 16 January 2007. Between 2 February and 16 March 2004 and 27 February and 11 April 2006, he had been detained in Jilava Prison in order to be brought before the courts that had summoned him. During his detention in Oradea Prison the applicant had been held in dormitories 87, 88, 99, 143, 144, 145, 146 and 148. Dormitories 87 and 88 were located in Section 6 of the prison, which was fully refurbished in 2000. Both of the dormitories had twenty beds and measured 38.24 and 41.47 sq. m. respectively. They were also fitted with two windows each: one facing the hallway of the section (measuring 0.49 and 0.51 sq. m. respectively), and a second facing outside (measuring 0.99 and 0.94 sq. m. respectively). Dormitory 99 was located in Section 7 of the prison, which was also fully refurbished in 2000. It had twenty beds, measured 29.29 sq. m. and was fitted with two windows, one facing the hallway of the section (measuring 0.46 sq. m.), and a second facing outside (measuring 0.94 sq. m.). Dormitories 143, 144, 145, 146 and 148 were located in Section 9 of the prison, which had been newly built in 2004. Each of the dormitories had eight beds, measured 16.60 sq. m. and were fitted with a window measuring 1.21 sq. m. that ensured natural light and ventilation.
On the same date the Government informed the Court that all the dormitories were also equipped with adequate electric lighting and were heated by radiators. Furthermore, during the applicant’s detention the number of detainees living in those particular dormitories had never exceeded the number of available beds.
On 26 April 2012 the Government informed the Court that between 21 May 2003 and 23 June 2004, the national legislation concerning the outfits of detainees when brought before courts had changed repeatedly. That legislation was complemented by the rules adopted by the National Administration of Prisons. They also submitted documents confirming that on 10 November 2003, 15 May, 21 and 30 November, 15 October and 8 December 2005, and 24 February and 16 May 2006, the applicant had been allowed to receive clothes from his relatives. In respect of the applicant’s alleged handcuffing, they informed the Court that the authorities of Oradea Prison had obeyed the applicable legal provisions concerning restraint when they had brought the applicant before the domestic courts.
On the same date the Government informed the Court that the applicant’s appeal on points of law against the judgment of 13 October 2005 of the Oradea District Court had been dismissed as ill-founded by the Bihor County Court on 17 May 2006. They provided documentary evidence but did not provide a full copy of the judgment of 13 October 2005.
Articles 998 and 999 of the former Civil Code provide that any person who has suffered damage can seek redress by bringing a civil action against the person who has intentionally or negligently caused that damage.
The relevant provisions of Law no. 23/1969 concerning the serving of prison sentences, in so far as they concern the material conditions of detention, are described in Năstase-Silivestru v. Romania, (no. 74785/01, §§ 23-25, 4 October 2007).
Article 40 § 4 of Law no. 23/1969 provided that detainees under criminal investigation or undergoing trial were to wear their own clothes, unless there were valid reasons for them to wear the outfit provided by the detention facility.
The Constitutional Court, in Decision no. 99 of 1 November 1994 (published in Official Gazette no. 348 of 15 December 1994), provided that Article 40 § 4 of Law no. 23/1969 was constitutional only in so far as the expression “valid reasons” was understood to mean that the clothes of the detainees under criminal investigation or undergoing trial were dirty or unusable and that the outfit provided by the detention centre was different from the outfit provided to convicted individuals.
On 9 July 2001 the General Directorate for Prisons attached to the Ministry of Justice issued Order no. 113 prohibiting the prison authorities, with immediate effect, from dressing detainees in prison uniforms with a stripy pattern. The order was not published in the Official Gazette, but was distributed through hierarchical channels to the national prison authorities.
On 21 May 2003 the General Directorate for Prisons issued Order no. 3151 concerning measures to be taken in respect of the dress codes of detainees. The order was not published in the Official Gazette, but was distributed through hierarchical channels to the national prison authorities.
According to the order:
“In order to observe the national legislation concerning the serving of prison sentences, the recommendations of non-governmental organisations ... and the current international practice in the field, individuals in custody shall wear, as a rule, their own clothes ... Detainees belonging to that category, who do not possess the required clothing, shall wear the outfit provided by the prison administration...
...
Detainees shall be informed of the provisions of the present Order...”
Article 1 of Government Emergency Ordinance no. 56 of 25 June 2003 concerning the rights of detainees prohibited, as a general rule, the subjection of any person serving a prison sentence to torture, inhuman and degrading treatment or any other type of ill-treatment. Article 3 provided prisoners with the right to bring legal proceedings concerning measures taken by prison authorities in connection with their rights. That ordinance was repealed and replaced by Law no. 275 of 20 July 2006 concerning the execution of sentences, which in its Article 38 provides for a similar remedy as the above-mentioned Article 3, in that a judge would have jurisdiction over complaints by prisoners against measures taken by prison authorities (see also Petrea v. Romania, no. 4792/03, §§ 21-23, 29 April 2008; Gagiu v. Romania, no. 63258/00, § 42, 24 February 2009; and Măciucă v. Romania, no. 25763/03, § 14, 26 May 2009).
The relevant provisions regulating the transportation of detainees in force at the time are described in Ali v. Romania, (no. 20307/02, § 46, 9 November 2010). In particular, the Ministry of the Interior’s Instruction no. 901/1999 on the organisation and functioning of preventive detention facilities under the control of the Ministry of the Interior provided that handcuffs were to be used on all detainees during transportation. The instruction was not published in the Official Gazette.
On 22 July 2003 the General Directorate for Prisons issued Order no. 3996 concerning the way detainees were brought before the courts. The order was not published in the Official Gazette, but was distributed through hierarchical channels to the national prison authorities.
According to the order, as a general rule:
“Detainees escorted to courts or to other public places (State buildings, hospitals, clinics, forensic medical laboratories etc.) shall be dressed in special civilian clothing, specifically designed (for use in court), which shall not bear any distinctive branding. Detainees and persons detained pending trial who the State or courts have expressly asked to be brought before them in their own civilian clothes are exempted from this rule ...
Methods of restraint shall be used when the detainee is transferred from the vehicle in which he is transported to the holding room and from the holding room to the witness-box in the courtroom. The methods of restraint shall be removed for the hearings ...”
On 19 April 2004 the General Directorate for Prisons issued Order no. 2846 concerning the outfits to be provided to detainees in order to be brought before the courts. The order was not published in the Official Gazette, but was distributed through hierarchical channels to the national prison authorities.
According to the order, as a general rule:
“...
The “blue-jeans” outfit shall be used exclusively for dressing detainees still under criminal investigation or undergoing trial, if they are to be brought before the courts ...”
On 23 June 2004 the General Directorate for Prisons issued Order no. 3609 concerning, inter alia, rules for dressing detainees in order to be brought before the courts. The order was not published in the Official Gazette, but was distributed through hierarchical channels to the national prison authorities.
According to the order, as a general rule:
“...Detainees not yet convicted shall be brought before the courts or other public authorities wearing their own clothes if they are decent, appropriate, clean and adequate for that time of year.
Detainees not yet convicted by the courts and who do not have their own clothes, or whose clothes are not decent, appropriate, clean or adequate for that time of year, shall be brought before the courts or other public authorities in a “blue-jeans” outfit.
...
The provisions of the present Order enter force on 19 July 2004...”
The relevant findings and recommendations of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) are described in Bragadireanu v. Romania (no. 22088/04, §§ 73-76, 6 December 2007) and Artimenco v. Romania (no. 12535/04, §§ 22-23, 30 June 2009).
Article 141 § 1 and 2 of the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure provide that interlocutory judgments extending pre-trial detention are amenable to an appeal on points of law. The time-limit for the appeal on points of law is twenty-four hours from the moment the interlocutory judgment was delivered to those present, or from the moment of communication to those absent. The file shall be referred to the appellate court within twenty-four hours, and the appeal on points of law shall be examined within three days.