The case originated in an application (no. 39804/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Adam Baisuev and Mr Rustam Anzorov (“the applicants”), on 6 August 2004.
The applicants were represented before the Court by lawyers from “Article 42 of the Constitution”, a human-rights NGO based in . The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their former Agent, Ms. Irine Bartaia of the Ministry of Justice.
On 25 May 2005 the Court decided to communicate the complaints under Article 5 §§ 1, 2 and 4 of the Convention concerning the circumstances of the allegedly unlawful detention of the applicants by police (Rule 54 § 2 (b) of the Rules of Court). It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The Government and the applicants each submitted observations on the admissibility and merits of the communicated complaints (Rule 54 (a) of the Rules of Court). The Russian Government did not make use of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicants are Mr Adam Baisuev (“the first applicant”) and Mr Rustam Anzorov (“the second applicant”), two Russian citizens of Chechen origin who were born in 1980 and 1979 respectively. At the material time they were residing in , where they had refugee status.
According to the applicants, early in the morning of 7 December 2002 police officers arrived at their homes to question them. The police proceeded to search their premises without producing a warrant. Their identity papers were taken from them and the applicants were asked to follow the officers to police station no. 3 in the Vake-Saburtalo district of Tbilisi (“the police station”). There the applicants were photographed and questioned about the armed conflict in the Chechen Republic of the Russian Federation and asked if they and their family members had been involved. They also had their fingerprints taken. Three hours later they were released and their identity papers were handed back to them.
The Government disagreed with the version of events presented by the applicants. They maintained that on 7 December 2002 the police officers had gone to the applicants’ home to conduct a regular identity check of people living in  without registration. The applicants were asked to follow the police officers to Vake-Saburtalo police station, where their ID and refugee cards were checked. The Government rejected the applicants’ contention that their homes had been searched and other investigative measures taken.
According to the Government, the applicants were kept at the police station for thirty minutes. They were released immediately upon completion of the identity check.
According to the applicants, on 20 January 2003 they lodged complaints with the Office of the Prosecutor General of Georgia (“the PGO”), criticising the way the police had acted. They sought explanations regarding the legal basis for the search of their homes, for them being taken to the police station and for the criminal procedural measures to which they had been subjected. The Government maintained that they were unable to find those complaints lodged with the PGO.
On 7 February 2003 the second applicant reiterated his request to the PGO for information concerning his detention. In its reply of 31 March 2003 the investigator from the Vake-Saburtalo District prosecutor’s office explained that the second applicant had not been detained, but had been taken to the police station along with other temporary residents of different nationalities to have his identity and legal status in Georgia checked. The investigator claimed that not a single investigative act had been carried out and that the applicant had been released immediately after the identity check.
On 2 April 2003 the applicants applied to the Tbilisi Public Prosecutor’s office to have criminal proceedings initiated against the police officers who had carried out their detention. According to the applicants, their application was forwarded to the Vake-Saburtalo District prosecutor’s office, which did not reply. The Government again maintained that they were unable to find the applicants’ letter of 2 April 2003, either with the Tbilisi Public or Vake-Saburtalo District prosecutor’s office.
On 17 November 2003 the applicants requested a written reply to their application dated 2 April 2003.
On 19 November 2003 the Vake-Saburtalo District prosecutor’s office replied that on 7 December 2002 the applicants, along with several other Chechen refugees, had not been “arrested”, but had been taken to the police station to have their identity and their legal situation in Georgia checked. Once the check was complete they were released immediately. The prosecutor’s office did not indicate on what legal basis the applicants had been taken to and kept in the police station. No information was provided about the applicants’ request for criminal proceedings to be initiated.
On 18 December 2003 the applicants reiterated their request to the VakeSaburtalo District prosecutor’s office and again on 16 January 2004 they received a reply to the effect that they had not been detained but rather taken to the police station for identity check purposes.
On 27 February 2004 the applicants made yet another application to the VakeSaburtalo District prosecutor’s office, requesting that the police reports concerning their stay at the police station and the criminal investigative measures to which they had been made subject be made available to them, in accordance with Article 150 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of Georgia (“the CCP”).
In its response, dated 10 March 2004, the prosecutor’s office pointed out that the detention complained of had lasted only thirty minutes. Without indicating the legal basis for holding the applicants, it claimed that bringing them to the police station had not been unlawful. It did inform them, however, that no record had been kept of their presence at the police station.
On 29 August 2005, following communication of the application to the Government, a preliminary investigation was initiated under Article 333 of the Criminal Code of Georgia (abuse of power) concerning unlawful taking of Chechen Russian citizens to various police stations on 7 December 2002. The criminal proceedings covered the case of the second applicant. In addition, on 11 October 2005 similar proceedings were initiated with respect to the first applicant’s incident. The relevant documents submitted by the Government to the Court included only the copies of the decisions to open preliminary investigation. The Government committed to informing the Court about the progress of the relevant proceedings; however, no information has been submitted since then.
The relevant Articles of the CCP read as follows:
Article 24 § 4 – Public criminal prosecution
“In all cases disclosing signs of an offence, an investigative body, investigator or a prosecutor are responsible, within the limits of their powers, to initiate public criminal proceedings ...”
Article 55 § 5 – Prosecutor’s office
“A superior prosecutor is authorised to quash a decision issued by a subordinate prosecutor, amend it or replace with a new one.”
Article 146 § 1 – Procedure and review of the lawfulness and legitimacy of placement in police custody
“As soon as an individual is taken to a police station ..., a report on his or her placement in police custody must immediately be drawn up. ...”
Article 235 §§ 1 and 2 – Lodging a complaint
“The complaint is to be lodged with the body responsible for criminal proceedings or the state employee who, in accordance with the law, has jurisdiction to examine it and to reach a decision...
A complaint against an action or decision of an investigator, investigating body, investigating office or head of an investigating body is to be submitted to the relevant prosecutor. A complaint against an action or decision of a prosecutor shall be submitted to the prosecutor with hierarchical superiority...”
Article 261 – Obligation to initiate a preliminary investigation
“Upon receipt of information concerning the commission of a crime, the investigator and the public prosecutor, within the limits of their powers, shall open an investigation. ...”
Article 265 §§ 1 and 4 – Consideration of information concerning the commission of an offence
“Information that a criminal offence has been committed may be submitted in writing or orally. ...
Information thus submitted shall be examined promptly. Where the suspected perpetrator of an offence has already been arrested, verification of the information that a criminal offence has been committed and institution of a prosecution must be carried out within twelve hours of the person’s being apprehended by the police or other investigating body. In other cases, institution of proceedings may also be preceded by verification of the information received, but this must not last more than twenty days.”
Article 279 §§ 1 and 2 – Appeal against an act or decision of an investigator or prosecutor
“An appeal lies against an action or decision of an investigator with the relevant prosecutor.
An action or decision of a prosecutor can be appealed against to a superior prosecutor or in court, in cases and according to the procedure provided for in this Code.”
The relevant parts of the Police Act read as follows:
Section 8 § 1 (c) and (r) – Police duties
“In accordance with their functions, the police shall ...
restrict the rights of individuals only as provided for by law. When enforcing a restriction of those rights, all police officers must make themselves known to the person, produce their official identification, explain the basis for the restriction and inform the person of his or her rights....
Ensure the observance of the registration and movement rules by aliens ... on the .”
Section 9 (b), (c), (5) and (11) – Police Rights
“In order to fulfil their official duties, police officers may...
inspect a person’s identity papers if there is sufficient cause to believe that he or she has committed a crime or an administrative offence;
in the context of proceedings relating to a criminal or administrative offence, summon the person concerned to a police station and request an explanation as well as the necessary information and documents. If the person fails to appear without a valid reason, he or she may be brought to the police station compulsorily in accordance with the statutory provisions ...
bring an offender to a police station and keep him or her for up to eight hours in order to establish his or her identity and check any relevant items. A report of the detention must be drawn up immediately in accordance with the statutory provisions ...
in order to prevent a crime, arrest a suspect or an accused or where human life is in danger, enter a private residence ... without the permission of the occupants ... and inform the prosecutor in writing within twenty-four hours.”
Section 33 – Remedies against police actions
“All citizens shall have the right to challenge police actions before a competent senior official, the prosecutor or a court.”
According to the above Decree, the Ministry of the Interior is among the State agencies overlooking the lawfulness of entry, stay and departure of aliens to and from the . Article 3 provides that the Ministry of the Interior shall, with other law-enforcement bodies, within the limits of its powers and according to the relevant legislation, react to violations of the rules concerning the entry, stay and departure of aliens. According to Article 5 (b) of the same Decree, the Ministry of the Interior is responsible for monitoring compliance by aliens with the permissible dates of their stay in the country.
Under Articles 24 and 32 of the Code, administrative detention is one of the penalties for administrative offences. It is decided on by a firstinstance judge and cannot exceed thirty days.
According to Article 173 of the Code, persistent refusal to comply with orders or requests issued by a police officer in the exercise of his or her public order duties constitutes an administrative offence, punishable by a fine or by administrative detention for up to thirty days. Proceedings relating to such an offence fall within the jurisdiction of the courts of first instance (Article 208 of the Code).
In accordance with Articles 244, 245 and 246 of the Code, for the purposes of identifying a person in the context of proceedings relating to an administrative offence, that person may be subject to administrative detention and to a strip-search, and may have objects and documents confiscated. Detention where the offence is one defined under Article 173 of the Code, falls within the competence of the Ministry of the Interior and must not exceed three hours. The time-limit begins running when the individual is brought to the police station to have a police report drawn up. The report on the person’s administrative detention must include the date and time, the duties and name of the officer, information about the detainee, the time of detention and the reasons for it.
The report, in its relevant part, states the following:
“E. Consequences of the conflict in the 
When the current stage of the conflict in the Chechen Republic started in 1999, the authorities of the Russian Federation accused Georgia of sheltering Chechen fighters and asked the Georgian authorities to authorise the Russian army to operate in  to fight Chechen “terrorists.”
Georgia denied these accusations and called upon the OSCE to observe and report movements across the border between Georgia and the Chechen Republic of the . ...
The most serious concerns have been expressed about the presence of Chechens in the Pankisi Valley, situated around 35 kilometres north of . This valley is generally considered as a largely lawless area, mostly controlled by criminals and fighters. The  authorities maintain that the Chechens, who live in the valley (possibly around 8.000 people), are refugees. The Russian authorities claim that the valley is used by Chechen fighters as a safe haven and a base for their operations in .
Last year, the Georgian authorities accused  of bombarding its territory on the pretext of fighting Chechen terrorists.  strongly denied the accusations.
In the spring of 2002, the US government declared that AlQaida terrorists were hiding in the . The Georgian government accepted the presence of some 200  instructors to help train the Georgian anti-terrorist units. ...
In these circumstances, it does not seem likely that the Pankisi valley serves in any meaningful manner as an active base for the Chechen fighters. It is, nevertheless, impossible to claim that there has not been a presence of Chechen fighters there. The lawless situation in Pankisi undoubtedly represents a security threat both to Georgia and to . Both countries have an interest in collaborating in order to solve this situation, while fully respecting the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity. I welcome the declared willingness of the Georgian government to restore the rule of law in the .
However, the situation has been severely aggravated by the declaration of the President of the Russian Federation of 11 September 2002, which contained the threat of using unilateral military action based on Article 51 of the UN Charter against suspected terrorists on Georgian territory, but also expected Georgian agreement on joint efforts during the next CIS Summit on 7 October 2002. In response hereto, the Georgian President invited on 13 September a monitoring mission to the  by the OSCE including Russian participation. ...”
The relevant part of the report reads as follows:
“1. Chechen Refugees
Since the Commissioner’s first report numerous, and occasionally worrying, developments have taken place in respect of the Chechen refugees in . ...
As of September 2002, troops from Georgian Ministry of Interior have conducted several checks in the [Pankisi] valley. Similar operations have also been conducted in , notably on 7th December 2002, when 100 Chechens were detained and questioned. In a separate incident, on the same day, 5 Chechens were allegedly killed. The extradition of 5 Chechens to Russia on 4th October 2002, and a further 8 afterwards following the obtaining of procedural guarantees from Russia by the European Court of Human Rights has increased the feeling of insecurity amongst the Chechen refugee population in .
For so long as the situation in the Chechen Republic is such that the refugee population in  cannot freely return, it is incumbent on the Georgian authorities to provide all the protection afforded by the Geneva Convention. Whilst the restoration of order in the Pankisi Gorge must remain a priority for Georgian authorities and a concern of their Russian counterparts, it is essential that the necessary measures be conducted by the Georgian authorities, in an even-handed manner and in full respect of the rule of law....”
In its Global Report 2002 the UNHCR noted with respect to :
“Chechen refugees and asylum seekers
In April, the Ministry for Refugees and Accommodation carried out a registration exercise, with UNCHR’s financial and technical assistance. The number of prima facie registered refugees was reduced from about 8,000 to some 4,000, mainly because of previous double and triple registration or refugees, as well as the erroneous registration of local people. ...
The context
The refugee caseload in the Pankisi valley has proven to be a politically sensitive issue. There were frequent security incidents during the year, the most important being the bombing and shelling of areas close to the refugee settlements by an unidentified aircraft in August. ... In August 2002,  law enforcement units were deployed in the valley but the security situation remained very difficult and dangerous. ...”
The relevant part of the report reads as follows:
“
S.-supported anti-terror measures in Georgia have focused on the Pankisi Gorge and on ’s Chechen population. In implementing these measures the government has committed serious human rights violations, which it refuses to address. President Eduard Shevardnadze indicated the government’s attitude toward observing human rights in its counter-terrorism campaign on October 5, 2002, one day after Georgia had extradited five Chechens to Russia without due process, when he said: “International human rights commitments might become pale in comparison with the importance of the anti-terrorist campaign.” ...
Human Rights Watch has documented four “disappearances,” one extrajudicial execution, and cases of incommunicado detention, attributable to Georgian security forces engaged in counter-terrorism. ...
In a massive passport check in  on December 7, 2002, police briefly detained nearly one hundred ethnic Chechens, including some minors. Given the context, many in  believed this operation to be connected with counter-terrorism efforts, though no official publicly linked the two.” (Footnotes omitted)