The case originated in an application (no. 24340/08) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Algerian national, Mr Khaled Louled Massoud (“the applicant”), on 6 March 2008.
The applicant was represented by Dr Michael Camilleri, a lawyer practising in . The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr Silvio Camilleri.
The applicant alleged that his detention had been unlawful in terms of Article 5 § 1, that he had not been provided with the legal and factual grounds for his detention as required by Article 5 § 2 and that he had not had a remedy by which to challenge the lawfulness of his detention in accordance with Article 5 § 4 of the Convention.
On 21 September 2009 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the complaints under Article 5 §§ 1, 2 and 4 to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant is an Algerian national who was born in 1960 and was, at the time of the introduction of the application being detained in Safi Military Barracks, .
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant arrived in Malta on 24 June 2006 without documents, having travelled by boat from  in an irregular manner. Upon his arrival he was served with a removal order in accordance with Article 14 of the Immigration Act (“the Act”). The reason for his detention was given as being that under Article 5 of the Act, he was in  without leave. He was consequently detained at the police headquarters.
On 26 June the applicant was questioned by the police and he gave a statement. On 28 June 2006 he was arraigned in court charged with aiding, assisting, counselling or procuring other persons to enter or to attempt to enter  or having conspired to that effect. He was remanded in custody.
On 1 October 2006, pending proceedings, the applicant made a late preliminary application for refugee status, which was considered by the Refugee Commissioner as expressing his desire for recognition of refugee status.
On 25 October 2006 the Court of Magistrates found the applicant guilty and sentenced him to eighteen months' imprisonment.
While in prison, on 17 April 2007, the applicant made a formal application for asylum and was interviewed on the same day.
After serving his sentence, the applicant was released from prison on 27 June 2007 and was placed in a detention centre pending the determination of his asylum claim.
The applicant's asylum application was rejected on 24 April 2007 and subsequently on appeal on 18 July 2007 as he had failed to provide convincing evidence that he would face a real risk or had a well-founded fear of persecution.
The applicant remained in detention awaiting removal under the Government's immigration policy until 6 January 2009 when his removal order was lifted in view of the lack of prospects of his eventual deportation. The applicant claimed that the conditions of detention in Blocks C and B had been inappropriate. Both facilities had been overcrowded, particularly in the summer months, with inadequate sanitary and other facilities, limited medical care, no possibility of constructive activities and limited recreational opportunities. The applicant made reference to reports of the CPT, the Council of Europe Human Rights Commissioner and the LIBE Committee of the European Parliament documenting such conditions.
Asylum procedures are regulated by the Immigration Act (“the Act”), Chapter 217 of the Laws of Malta. Article 5 of the Act in so far as relevant reads as follows:
“Any person, other than one having the right of entry, or of entry and residence, or of movement or transit ..., may be refused entry, and if he lands or is in  without leave from the Principal Immigration Officer, he shall be a prohibited immigrant.”
In practice, upon being apprehended, a prohibited immigrant is issued with a removal order, in accordance with Article 14 (2) of the Act, which, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“If any person is considered by the Principal Immigration Officer to be liable to removal as a prohibited immigrant under any of the provisions of article 5, the said Officer may issue a removal order against such person who shall have a right to appeal against such order in accordance with the provisions of article 25A: ...
(2) Upon such order being made, such person against whom such order is made, shall be detained in custody until he is removed from .”
An “irregular” immigrant is entitled to apply for recognition of refugee status by means of an application (in the form of a Preliminary Questionnaire) to the Commissioner for refugees within two months of arrival. While the application is being processed, in accordance with a Maltese policy document of 2005 entitled “Irregular Immigrants, Refugees and Integration”, the immigrant will remain in detention, but no immigrant shall be kept in detention for longer than eighteen months. Length of detention may depend on the immigrant's will to cooperate in respect of his or her repatriation. However, the Immigration Act does not define a limit to the period of detention. Article 10 of Legal Notice 320 of 2005, transposing into national legislation Directive 2003/9 EC of 27 January 2003 of the European Union on laying down minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers, which came into force by means of Legal Notice 383 of 2005 on 22 November 2005, provides as follows:
 (2) If a decision at first instance has not been taken within one year of the presentation of an application for asylum and this delay cannot be attributed to the applicant or his legal representative, the Ministry responsible for issuing employment licences shall decide the conditions for granting access to the labour market for the applicant.
(3) Where an appeal is lodged against a negative decision, access to the labour market shall not be withdrawn during the appeal stage.
In accordance with the Maltese authorities' reply to the CPT report 2005 (cf. CPT/Inf (2005) 16, p. 24), and the United Nations General Assembly Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention of 8 January 2010, this provision introduced a twelve month time-limit on detention. Thus, if within that time the asylum application has not yet been examined, the asylum seeker will be given access to the labour market and will have the right to an appropriate document from the Refugee Commissioner or the Refugee Appeals Board. An asylum seeker may remain in  until a final decision on the application is taken, unless the application is considered to be manifestly ill-founded by the Refugee Commissioner at first instance.
Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Union on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals provides that in situations where deportation is blocked by the failure of a third country to deliver the necessary travel documents, detention cannot exceed eighteen months.
An application in terms of Article 409A of the Criminal Code, Chapter 9 of the Laws of Malta, consists of a request to the Court of Magistrates to examine the lawfulness of detention and order release from custody. In so far as relevant, the Article reads as follows:
“(1) Any person who alleges he is being unlawfully detained under the authority of the police or of any other public authority not in connection with any offence with which he is charged or accused before a court may at any time apply to the Court of Magistrates, which shall have the same powers which that court has as a court of criminal inquiry, demanding his release from custody. Any such application shall be appointed for hearing with urgency and the application together with the date of the hearing shall be served on the same day of the application on the applicant and on the Commissioner of Police or on the public authority under whose authority the applicant is allegedly being unlawfully detained. The Commissioner of Police or public authority, as the case may be, may file a reply by not later than the day of the hearing.
(2) On the day appointed for the hearing of the application the court shall summarily hear the applicant and the respondents and any relevant evidence produced by them in support of their submissions and on the reasons and circumstances militating in favour of or against the lawfulness of the continued detention of the applicant.
(3) If, having heard the evidence produced and the submissions made by the applicant and respondents, the court finds that the continued detention of the applicant is not founded on any provision of this Code or of any other law which authorises the arrest and detention of the applicant it shall allow the application. Otherwise the court shall refuse the application.
(4) Where the court decides to allow the application the record of the proceedings including a copy of the court's decision shall be transmitted to the Attorney General by not later than the next working day and the Attorney General may, within two working days from the receipt of the record and if he is of the opinion that the arrest and continued detention of the person released from custody was founded on any provision of this Code or of any other law, apply to the Criminal Court to obtain the re-arrest and continued detention of the person so released from custody. The record of the proceedings and the court's decision transmitted to the Attorney General under the provisions of this sub-article shall be filed together with the application by the Attorney General to the Criminal Court.”
The second remedy existing under domestic law is an application to the Immigration Appeals Board (“IAB”) if an asylum seeker feels that his or her detention is no longer reasonable. It entails requesting release from custody pending the determination of an individual's asylum claim or his or her deportation in accordance with Article 25A of the Immigration Act, Chapter 217 of the Laws of Malta. The same article regulates the manner in which and when such release may be granted. The relevant provisions read as follows:
(6) During the course of any proceedings before it, the Board, may, even on a verbal request, grant provisional release to any person who is arrested or detained and is a party to proceedings before it, under such terms and conditions as it may deem fit, and the provisions of Title IV of Part II of Book Second of the Criminal Code shall, mutatis mutandis apply to such request.
 (8) The decisions of the Board shall be final except with respect to points of law decided by the Board regarding decisions affecting persons as are mentioned in Part III, from which an appeal shall lie within ten days to the Court of Appeal (Inferior Jurisdiction).
 (9) The Board shall also have jurisdiction to hear and determine applications made by persons in custody in virtue only of a deportation or removal order to be released from custody pending the determination of any application under the Refugees Act or otherwise pending their deportation in accordance with the following subarticles of this article.
(10) The Board shall only grant release from custody under subarticle (9) where in its opinion the continued detention of such person is taking into account all the circumstances of the case, unreasonable as regards duration or because there is no reasonable prospect of deportation within a reasonable time:
Provided that where a person, whose application for protection under the Refugees Act has been refused by a final decision, does not co-operate with the Principal Immigration Officer with respect to his repatriation to his country of origin or to any other country which has accepted to receive him, the Board may refuse to order that person's release.
(11) The Board shall not grant such release in the following cases:
(a) when the identity of the applicant including his nationality has yet to be verified, in particular where the applicant has destroyed his travel or identification documents or used fraudulent documents in order to mislead the authorities;
 (b) when elements on which any claim by applicant under the Refugees Act is based, have to be determined, where the determination thereof cannot be achieved in the absence of detention;
(c) where the release of the applicant could pose a threat to public security or public order.
An alternative remedy is a constitutional application before the  (First Hall), followed, if necessary, by an appeal to the . However, in Sabeur Ben Ali v. Malta (no. 35892/97, 29 June 2000, § 40) and Kadem v. Malta (no. 55263/00, § 53, 9 January 2003), the  held that this procedure was rather cumbersome and therefore lodging a constitutional application would not have ensured a speedy review of the lawfulness of the applicants' detention. Consequently, the Court held in the cited cases that the applicants had not had at their disposal, under domestic law, a remedy for challenging the lawfulness of their detention under Article 5 § 4 (see also Stephens v. Malta (no. 2), no. 33740/06, § 90, 21 April 2009).
The domestic court, referring to the competence of the court under Article 409A, held that:
“it is not within the competence of the Court of Magistrates or the Criminal Court to examine whether, beyond the fact that there is a clear law authorising continued detention, there are other circumstances which could render it illegal, such as an incompatibility with the rights granted by the Constitution or the Convention. There exist other proceedings before other courts vested by law to take cognisance of such cases and which may give adequate remedies if they find a violation of human rights. Article 409A is shaped in accordance with the legislator's words and no court should exceed the limits of the jurisdiction conferred upon it.”
In circumstances similar to the present one, the first-instance constitutional jurisdiction did not reject the claims for non-exhaustion of ordinary remedies but took cognisance of the case. It held that the remedy provided by the Immigration Act could not, even in the best possible scenario, grant a complete fair and certain remedy in cases where a person had been deprived of the right to liberty even for a short while.
The case is currently adjourned for judgment to June 2010.
At the hearing of 24 May 2007 concerning these proceedings, an NGO lawyer who regularly lodges applications for release with the IAB was asked about the longest and shortest time span he has had to wait for a decision on an application. He testified as follows:
“The shortest would be twenty-eight days and the longest eighty-six days for a decision, but there are cases which are pending which have been over three months or where the client has been released because the eighteen month period had expired.”
At the same hearing the Chairman of the IAB was asked to outline the criteria applied when determining if detention was reasonable or not in the circumstances. His testimony reads as follows:
“We take all circumstances into account but obviously you have to consider the situation from a management point of view as well, and you have to consider as well that releasing somebody from detention is not just a matter concerning the applicant himself, because once he is released and he goes into society, if he is of bad character, you have to check his physical and medical condition and that is why we impose certain conditions because otherwise you would be, sort of doing, a good thing in favour of the applicant and not such a good thing vis a vis society at large. So we have to take into account everything but each case is dealt on its own merits.”