The case concerns the allegedly inadequate conditions of the applicants’ detention in breach of Article 3 as well as the alleged lack of reasoning of the judicial decisions ordering their arrest and continued detention, the allegedly unreasonable duration of their detention on remand, the alleged absence of an effective procedure to challenge the lawfulness of their detention on remand, and the alleged absence of a right to compensation for alleged violations of their Article 5 rights.
The applicants’ personal details appear in the appended table below.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On various dates the applicants were arrested in the context of criminal investigations against them. Shortly afterwards the courts ordered their pre-trial detention. The relevant judicial decisions stated that the applicants were accused of serious crimes and might flee from and hinder the investigation or continue with their criminal activities if they were not placed in detention. The courts did not provide specific details explaining why these reasons remained valid.
Moreover, in application no. 25353/16 the court noted, without providing specific details, that the crime imputed to the applicant had been committed by members of a group, not all of whom had been identified.
In the course of the proceedings the courts extended the applicants’ detention a number of times, referring to the reasons set out in the initial decisions on the applicants’ detention. The courts furthermore noted that there were no reasons for releasing the applicants: no new circumstances had been identified that would warrant their release, and the circumstances that had led to the initial decision to place the applicants in detention pending trial had not changed.
On 17 September 2013 the trial court convicted the first applicant and sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment.
On 8 November 2012 the trial court convicted the second applicant and sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment. On 17 September 2013 that sentence was quashed on appeal and the case was remitted for retrial. The Court of Appeal noted that there were no reasons for the second applicant to be released pending retrial. On 4 April 2014 the trial court again convicted the second applicant and sentenced him to six years’ imprisonment.
On 15 September 2014 the trial court convicted the third applicant and sentenced him to ten years and six months’ imprisonment. On 9 May 2015 that sentence was quashed on appeal and the case was remitted for retrial. On 19 November 2015 in the course of retrial the court discontinued the third applicant’s detention, having released him from custody pending trial.
The applicants provided a description of the conditions of their detention in the pre-trial detention centres (“SIZO”; see paragraph 11 below), which may be summarised as follows. There was no running hot water, and the cold-water supply was intermittent. The cells were damp, mouldy, strong-smelling, inadequately heated and poorly ventilated with no fresh air; they were infested with insects, cockroaches and mice. The sanitary facilities were located in the living area, and were not fully partitioned. Nutrition and drinking water was poor, and the standards of hygiene were inadequate. The applicants were allowed to take a shower only once a week. The bedding was unsuitable. The cells lacked natural light, and artificial lighting was switched on day and night in the cells. There was no regular outdoor exercise.
In addition, the applicants submitted the following information:
the first applicant was held in the Kyiv SIZO from 15 September 2011 to 27 May 2014 in the following cells:
the second applicant was held in the Dnipro (Dnipropetrovsk at the material time) SIZO from 6 September 2013 to 5 November 2014 in various cells (nos. 614, 621, 623, 625, 628, 629, 633, 634, 638 and 641), each measuring approximately 6.7 sq. m and shared by two people;
the third applicant was held in the Dnipro SIZO from 9 March 2013 to 19 November 2015 in various cells (nos. 1002, 1013, 1017 and 1035), each measuring about 15 sq. m and shared by six people.
In the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 9 to 21 October 2013 (CPT/Inf (2014) 15), the CPT noted as follows (original emphasis; footnotes omitted):
“118.  The CPT’s delegation paid follow-up visits to Kyiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Odessa and Simferopol SIZOs, where remand prisoners/inmates not yet serving their sentences represented about 90% or more of the whole prison population in these establishments. It should be noted from the outset that these establishments were operating below their official capacities at the time of the 2013 visit, although these capacities were still based on the national standard of 2.5 m² of living space per inmate:
●  with an official capacity of 3,271 places, Kyiv SIZO was holding 2,618 prisoners (including 207 women and 80 juveniles). The opening of a new accommodation building for women in December 2011 helped to increase the capacity of the establishment (with 173 additional places);
●  Dnipropetrovsk SIZO was accommodating 1,777 inmates (including 129 women and 24 juveniles) for an official capacity of 3,519 places; ...
The CPT is pleased to note that in the establishments visited, all the inmates appeared to have been provided with their own beds in the cells seen by the delegation. Further, the standard advocated by the Committee of 4 m² of living space per inmate in multi-occupancy cells was observed in many cells of the establishments concerned. Both penitentiary staff and prisoners with whom the delegation spoke expressed their appreciation about the significant reduction of the prison population and the larger amount of living space in the cells in the context of the adoption and entry into force of the new CCP.
Nevertheless, ... the CPT’s delegation observed localised overcrowding in all the establishments visited. Cell occupancy rates in many cells were not only far from meeting the CPT’s standard of at least 4 m² per prisoner, but were also in breach of Ukrainian standards, with as little as 1.5 m² of living space per prisoner in some multi-occupancy cells (e.g. 38 prisoners were being held in a cell of some 57 m², without counting the space taken up by the in-cell toilet, in Kyiv SIZO; four prisoners were being accommodated in a cell of some 7 m², not including the space taken up by the in-cell toilet, at Odessa).
...
The delegation noted that at Dnipropetrovsk SIZO, metal shutters attached to the cells’ windows in blocks Nos. 9 and 10 had been removed following the 2009 visit. Steps were also being taken to pursue gradual renovation works in the cells; most of the accommodation areas were indeed in a poor state of repair, badly ventilated and dirty. Further, in-cell toilets were only partially partitioned. ...
outdoor exercise
In all the SIZOs visited, inmates had access to one hour of daily outdoor exercise (two hours for juveniles). Nevertheless, the yards seen by the CPT’s delegation were frequently too small for their intended occupancy and for real physical exertion (e.g. 9.5 m² for up to two inmates or 34 m² for up to 12 prisoners in Kyiv). ...
activity programmes
...
In the course of the 2013 visit, the delegation found that there was virtually no change as regards the provision of out-of-cell activities for remand prisoners. Most remand prisoners were locked up in their cells for 23 hours per day, with little to occupy themselves (e.g. watching TV or reading books). ...”