The case originated in an application (no. 19397/10) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Ms Olga Ivanovna Katan (“the applicant”), on 16 March 2010.
The applicant was represented by Ms A. Kulchytska, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
On 12 June 2018 notice of the complaints concerning the lawfulness of the applicant’s detention ordered on 31 January and 5 February 2009, the overall length of her pre-trial detention, and the lack of effective judicial review of the lawfulness of her continued detention, as well as the complaint of a lack of access to a court, were given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Kyiv.
On 28 January 2009 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant, then advisor to the mayor of Dnipropetrovsk, in connection with a number of incidents of fraud. She was suspected of forging documents to sell apartments that were in communal ownership. It was alleged that she had conspired with other individuals to transfer the ownership rights to the apartments to third parties for remuneration.
On the same date the applicant was arrested by the investigator as a suspect in the context of the above-mentioned criminal proceedings.
On 31 January 2009 the investigator requested the Babushkinskyy District Court of Dnipropetrovsk (“the District Court”) to order the applicant’s detention as a preventive measure on the grounds that she was suspected of a serious crime and might, as advisor to the mayor, hinder the investigation by putting pressure on witnesses or victims. He also submitted that not all of the applicant’s accomplices had yet been identified. The applicant in turn requested the court not to order her detention as she needed to undergo medical treatment.
On the same day the District Court refused the investigator’s request but extended the applicant’s police custody until 5 February 2009 pursuant to Article 165-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of Ukraine (“the CCP”) in order to obtain information on the need for her to undergo medical treatment. It also instructed the investigating authorities to provide more evidence of the applicant’s involvement in the crime. The decision was not amenable to appeal.
On 5 February 2009 the District Court allowed the investigator’s request and ordered the applicant’s detention as a preventive measure with effect from the same date. It noted that she was suspected of a serious crime and might, if released, hinder the investigation by influencing witnesses. No further details were provided in that regard. That decision was amenable to appeal within three days of service.
On 9 February 2009 the applicant appealed against the decision of 5 February 2009. The documents in the file indicate that the applicant’s appeal was received by the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) on the same date. In her appeal, the applicant also requested an extension of the time-limit for lodging it as the last day of the three-day’ time limit set by the law in this respect had fallen on Sunday, 8 February 2009. According to the applicant, she has no knowledge as to whether her appeal was ever examined by that court.
On 25 March 2009, at the investigator’s request, the District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 28 May 2009 on the grounds that additional time was required to complete the investigation. The court further found that there were no grounds for changing the preventive measure as the applicant was accused of a serious crime and might, if released, abscond or in some other way impede the investigation and trial. The court noted that the applicant’s reference to her poor state of health could not serve as grounds for changing the preventive measure as her health conditions, according to the medical evidence in the case file, did not prevent her from participating in court hearings. The applicant did not appeal against that decision.
On 27 May 2009 the Court of Appeal extended the applicant’s detention until 9 June 2009 on the grounds that she had been examining the case file and, accordingly, more time was required to complete the investigation. That decision was not amenable to appeal.
On 25 June 2009, when committing the applicant for trial, the District Court found that there were no grounds for changing the previously chosen preventive measure and accordingly rejected a request by the applicant for release.
During the trial the applicant regularly asked to be released, merely relying on her poor state of health. In a number of requests she also argued that there were no grounds to believe that she would abscond or in any way impede the investigation and trial as she had no criminal record, had a permanent place of residence and had been given a positive character reference by others.
On 20 and 25 August, 4 September, 27 October and 29 December 2009, and on 19 January, 2 February, 27 April, 20 May and 19 October 2010 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s requests for release with the same reasoning. In particular, it found, without providing any details, that all the relevant circumstances, including the applicant’s health conditions, had been taken into account when her pre-trial detention as a preventive measure had been ordered. It went on to note that she had failed to provide any evidence which could serve as grounds for changing the preventive measure.
On 10 December 2010 the District Court convicted the applicant of fraud and forgery of documents and sentenced her to five and a half years’ imprisonment, with confiscation of property. On 15 June 2011 the Court of Appeal upheld her conviction.
On 11 August 2011 the applicant’s husband concluded an agreement authorising a lawyer, Sh., to provide legal assistance to her in proceedings before the higher court. On 12 September 2011 Sh., acting on the basis of that agreement, applied for leave to appeal in cassation on the applicant’s behalf. On 26 October 2011 the Higher Specialised Civil and Criminal Court (“the HSCCC”) refused to grant him leave to appeal in cassation on the grounds that there was no evidence that he had had authority to sign the leave for appeal form on the applicant’s behalf.
On unspecified date Sh. relodged the request for leave to appeal in cassation, providing arguments as regards his authority to act as the applicant’s representative. He also requested that the examination of the applicant’s appeal on points of law be carried out in the applicant’s presence. Both requests were allowed by the HSCCC, and on 2 February 2012, in the presence of the applicant and Sh., the appeal on points of law was rejected as unsubstantiated and the judgment of the Court of Appeal upheld in substance.
The provisions of the CCP, as worded at the material time, concerning the types of preventive measures and their application, the timelimits for pre-trial detention, and the grounds for and procedure of detention, can be found in Molodorych v. Ukraine (no. 21618/02, §§ 56-58, 28 October 2010).