The case originated in an application (no. 39070/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Anatoliy Atabayevich Atayev (“the applicant”), on 15 August 2008.
The applicant was represented by Ms O.A. Sadovskaya, Mr I.A. Kalyapin, and Mr A.I. Ryzhov, lawyers from the Committee against Torture in Nizhniy Novgorod. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the former Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 27 August 2010 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Krasnodar.
On 11 June 2008 the Leninskiy District Court of Krasnodar convicted the applicant of fraud and sentenced him to five years and one month’s imprisonment. The term of imprisonment started running from the date of his arrest on 4 November 2005.
In July 2008 the applicant’s representative submitted an application for the applicant’s conditional release.
On 5 August 2008 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Krasnodar (“the District Court”) allowed the application. The operative part of the decision indicated that it took effect on the date of its pronouncement and could be appealed against to the Krasnodar Regional Court (“the Regional Court”) within ten days of that date.
The management of the facility where the applicant was detained, IZ23/1, was informed of the decision of 5 August 2008 on the same date. It refused to release the applicant because “doubts” had been “raised” concerning the decision’s form and lawfulness. The prison governor sent the decision back to the District Court requesting clarification on the matter of its entry into effect.
By a letter of 6 August 2008, the vice-president of the District Court informed the prison governor that the moment of the entry into effect of the decision of 5 August 2008 in the part concerning the applicant’s release – the date of the pronouncement of that decision – was correct and fully corresponded to the Code of Criminal Procedure of Russia (“the CCrP”). The vice-president specified that despite the general rule on the entry into effect of a decision by a first-instance court, decisions on release from pre-trial detention or exemption from serving a sentence were an exception to that general rule and had to be enforced immediately in the part concerning the release of the person concerned. The right of appeal against the decision of 5 August 2008 did not affect the obligation to immediately release the applicant.
The prison administration received the letter on the same date, 6 August 2008, but again refused to release the applicant.
On 7 August 2008 the prosecutor’s office appealed against the decision of 5 August 2008. The statement of appeal did not mention the issue of the decision’s entry into effect.
By a letter of 14 August 2008, the prison governor informed the applicant’s representative that the execution of a court decision to release which raised doubts could be suspended pending additional verification. He mentioned that the exceptions to the general rule on the entry into effect of court decisions referred to by the vice-president of the District Court in his clarification letter of 6 August 2008 did not apply to conditional release. Noting the prosecutor’s office’s appeal against the decision of 5 August 2008, the prison governor concluded that that decision in the part concerning the applicant’s immediate release could not be enforced.
On 10 September 2008 the Regional Court quashed the decision of 5 August 2008. It disagreed with the first-instance court’s assessment that the applicant had mended his ways because during the criminal proceedings against him he had been attempting, among others, to discredit the Russian Federal Security Service and the Prosecutor’s Office. The Regional Court remitted the applicant’s application for conditional release for a fresh examination. It did not examine the issue of the lawfulness of the applicant’s detention from 5 August to 10 September 2008 or the lawfulness of the operative part of the decision of 5 August 2008.
On 1 October 2008 the applicant’s representative withdrew the application for conditional release, considering that it had no prospects of success in view of the Regional Court’s appeal decision. On 9 October 2008 the District Court accepted the withdrawal of the application and terminated the proceedings.
During his stay in the IZ-23/1 prison in Krasnodar, the applicant was held in overcrowded cells.
According to medical documents dated 2004 and 2005 the applicant suffered from chronic hepatitis, a duodenal ulcer, gastritis and chronic pancreatitis. He was to follow a special diet and a course of medical treatment.
On 14 August 2008 the applicant informed the authorities that he would go on hunger strike until his release. According to the applicant, he did not receive any medical treatment during his hunger strike.
According to the Government’s letter of 9 September 2008 in reply to the Court’s request for information, the applicant was seen by a doctor on 20, 21 and 22 August 2008. As his state of health was satisfactory and he did not have any medical complaints, no medical assistance was required.
On 23 August 2008 the applicant informed the authorities of the end of the hunger strike.