The case originated in an application (no. 42337/12) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Ibrahim Suso Musa (“the applicant”), on 4 July 2012.
The applicant was represented by Dr N. Falzon, a lawyer practising in Valletta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicant alleged that his detention had not been in accordance with Article 5 § 1 of the Convention and that he had not had an effective means of challenging its lawfulness as provided for by Article 5 § 4 of the Convention.
On 22 October 2012 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
Written observations were also received from the International Commission of Jurists, which had been given leave to intervene by the President of the Chamber (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention).
The applicant, allegedly a Sierra Leone national, was born in 1983 and was detained at Safi Barracks at the time of the introduction of the application.
The applicant entered Malta in an irregular manner by boat on 8 April 2011. Upon arrival, he was arrested by the police and presented with a document containing both a Return Decision and a Removal Order in view of his presence in Malta as a prohibited immigrant in terms of Article 5 of the Immigration Act (Chapter 217 of the Laws of Malta). He was defined as such owing to his entry into Malta in an irregular manner and in consideration of the fact that he did not have sufficient means to support himself. The Return Decision informed the applicant of the possibility to apply for a period of voluntary departure. The lower half of the same document contained a Removal Order based on the rejection of the applicant’s request for a period of voluntary departure. It noted that the request had not been acceded to for the following reasons: the risk that the applicant might abscond; the fact that his application for legal stay was considered to be manifestly unfounded or fraudulent; and the fact that he was considered to be a threat to public policy, public security or national security (see paragraph 27 below).
In fact, the applicant never actually made a request for a voluntary departure period, since the rejection was, as explained above, automatically presented to him with the information regarding the possibility of making such a request. The applicant was never informed of the considerations leading to this decision or given any opportunity to present information, documentation and/or other evidence in support of a possible request for a voluntary departure period.
The applicant was further informed, through the joint Return Decision and Removal Order, of his right to appeal against the Decision and Order before the Immigration Appeals Board (“the IAB”) within three working days. No further information was provided on the appeals procedure, including the availability of legal assistance; the latter assertion was denied by the Government.
On the basis of the Return Decision and Removal Order, and in accordance with the Immigration Act, the applicant was detained in Safi Barracks.
On 14 April 2011, whilst in Safi Barracks, the applicant submitted the Preliminary Questionnaire, the first stage of his application for asylum in Malta.
On 31 December 2011 the applicant’s asylum application was rejected by the Office of the Refugee Commissioner, who considered that the claim as presented failed to meet the criteria for recognition of refugee status.
On 24 January 2012 the applicant appealed to the Refugee Appeals Board. The parties presented submissions on 29 March 2012.
On 2 April 2012 the Refugee Appeals Board rejected the applicant’s appeal, thereby definitively closing the asylum procedure almost twelve months after his arrival in Malta.
In the meantime, pending the above asylum proceedings, the applicant lodged an application with the IAB on 28 June 2011 in order to challenge the legality of his detention in terms of the Immigration Act. The application was based on Article 5 § 1 of the Convention and Regulation 11(10) of the Common Standards and Procedures for Returning Illegally Staying Third-Country Nationals Regulations (Legal Notice 81 of 2011, hereinafter “LN 81”) (see “Relevant domestic law” below). In his application the applicant argued that the decision to detain him, as well as his ongoing detention, were contrary to the law. With regard to the original decision to detain him, the applicant argued that, contrary to the requirements of Regulation 11(8) of LN 81, when he was presented with the Return Decision and Removal Order no assessment had been made as to the possibility of exploring “other sufficient and less coercive measures”. Furthermore, in deciding to detain him, the responsible authorities had decided a priori and without an individual assessment of his situation that he presented a risk of absconding and that he was avoiding or hindering the return or removal procedure. Moreover, the decision was taken without the applicant having had an opportunity to make a request for voluntary departure. The applicant further argued that his ongoing detention was also contrary to the law because once he had presented his asylum application in April 2011, return procedures could not be commenced or continued in his regard under Regulation 12 of the Procedural Standards in Examining Applications for Refugee Status Regulations (Legal Notice 243 of 2008, hereinafter “LN 243”) (see “Relevant domestic law” below).
On 27 September 2011 the Immigration Police responded to the applicant’s application before the IAB; this was followed by further submissions by the applicant. On 22 November 2011 the IAB issued a decree requesting the parties to submit further information on specific queries raised by it. The applicant made further submissions highlighting the delay that was being created in the proceedings, and final submissions were also made by the Immigration Police.
On 5 July 2012, more than a year after the applicant’s challenge, the IAB rejected his application. It noted that, despite the fact that, according to Regulation 11(1) of LN 81, Part IV of those Regulations did not apply to persons who were apprehended or intercepted by the competent authorities in connection with the irregular crossing by sea or air of the external border of Malta and who did not subsequently obtain an authorisation or a right to stay in Malta, the applicant had obtained the right to stay (“joqgħod”) in Malta on lodging his application for asylum. Indeed it had been correct to rely on Regulation 12(1) of LN 243, which stated that an individual had the right to enter or remain on the island pending a decision on his asylum request. In the present case, that situation had applied to the applicant when he instituted his challenge before the IAB. In the applicant’s case, had the asylum request still been pending, Section IV of LN 81 would in fact have been applicable, in particular in so far as an individual could not be kept in detention unless return proceedings were under way or he or she presented a risk of absconding. However, the situation had changed, given that on 2 April 2012 the applicant’s asylum request had been rejected by a final decision. The latter implied that Section IV of LN 81 was no longer applicable to the applicant and thus the IAB could no longer decide on the request in terms of Regulation 11(8) of LN 81. Moreover, the applicant was not arguing the illegality of his detention on the basis of its length. In any event the IAB was not competent to decide whether there had been a breach of Article 5 of the Convention.
While the above procedures were pending, on 16 August 2011, a riot broke out at Safi Barracks, resulting in a number of detained migrants, police officers and soldiers of the Armed Forces of Malta being injured. That same day, twenty-three migrants were arrested and charged in court in relation to the riot. The applicant was amongst the persons arrested and, together with the others, was accused of a number of offences including damage to private property, use of violence against public officers, refusal to obey lawful orders and breach of public peace and good order. The arrested men, including the applicant, were taken to Corradino Correctional Facility to await the outcome of the criminal proceedings.
The following day, on 17 August 2011, the Court of Magistrates confirmed that the arrest of the migrants, including the applicant, was justified and in accordance with the law. They were remanded in custody.
On 30 January 2012 the Court of Magistrates granted the applicant bail, under the terms of which he was released from Corradino Correctional Facility and returned to Safi Barracks.
The applicant was released from detention in Safi Barracks on 21 March 2013, following 546 days of detention in an immigration context. The criminal proceedings in relation to the riot at Safi Barracks were still pending.
On an unspecified date (around January 2013), in an effort to make arrangements for the deportation of the applicant, the authorities interviewed him in the presence of a representative from the Consulate of the Republic of Sierra Leone. The latter, by a communication of 11 February 2012, informed the Maltese authorities that the applicant did not hail from Sierra Leone and that they could therefore not provide further assistance.
Immigration and asylum procedures are mainly regulated by the Immigration Act (“the Act”), Chapter 217 of the Laws of Malta. Article 5 of the Act defines the term “prohibited immigrant” and, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“(1) Any person, other than one having the right of entry, or of entry and residence, or of movement or transit under the preceding Parts, may be refused entry, and if he lands or is in Malta without leave from the Principal Immigration Officer, he shall be a prohibited immigrant.
(2) Notwithstanding that he has landed or is in Malta with the leave of the Principal Immigration Officer or that he was granted a residence permit, a person shall, unless he is exempted under this Act from any of the following conditions or special rules applicable to him under the foregoing provisions of this Act, be a prohibited immigrant also -
(a) if he is unable to show that he has the means of supporting himself and his dependants (if any) or if he or any of his dependants is likely to become a charge on the public funds; or ...”
Articles 6 and 9 regarding the powers of the Principal Immigration Officer in granting entry, and the relevant procedure, read as follows:
Article 6
“(1) Without prejudice to any rights arising from the preceding Parts, for the purposes of this Act, the Principal Immigration Officer may –
...
 (b) grant leave to land or leave to land and remain to any other person arriving in Malta, under such conditions and for such period as the Principal Immigration Officer may deem proper to establish;
...”
Article 9
 “(1) Without prejudice to any regulations made under Part III of this Act, leave to land or to land and remain in Malta shall be signified either by a written permit delivered to, or by an appropriate endorsement on the passport of, the person concerned, but the conditions attached to such leave may be contained in a separate document delivered to such person.”
Article 10 of the Act regarding temporary detention reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“(1) Where leave to land is refused to any person arriving in Malta on an aircraft ...
(2) Where leave to land is refused to any person arriving in Malta by any other means, such person at his own request may, with the leave of the Principal Immigration Officer, be placed temporarily on shore and detained in some place approved by the Minister and notified by notice in the Gazette:
Provided that he shall be returned to the vessel by which he is to leave Malta immediately that he makes a request to that effect or that the Principal Immigration Officer so directs, whichever is the earlier.
(3) Any person, while he is detained under sub-article (1) or (2), shall be deemed to be in legal custody and not to have landed.”
Article 14 of the Act, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“(1) If any person is considered by the Principal Immigration Officer to be liable to removal as a prohibited immigrant under any of the provisions of article 5, the said Officer may issue a removal order against such person who shall have a right to appeal against such order in accordance with the provisions of article 25A:...
 (2) Upon such order being made, such person against whom such order is made, shall be detained in custody until he is removed from Malta.
Provided that if the person in respect of whom an expulsion order has been made is subject to criminal proceedings for a crime punishable with imprisonment or is serving a sentence of imprisonment, the Minister may give such directions as to whether the whole or part of the sentence is to be served before the expulsion of such person from Malta, and, in default of such directions, such person shall be removed after completion of the sentence”
In practice, on being apprehended prohibited immigrants are issued with a Return Decision and a Removal Order (on the same sheet of paper), in accordance with Article 14 of the Act. The document consists of a standard-format text which, in the applicant’s case, read as follows:
RETURN DECISION
“It transpires that you are a prohibited immigrant by virtue of Article 5 of the Immigration Act, Chapter 217, because you
entered Malta illegally and have no means of subsistence
Therefore, by virtue of the powers vested in me as the Principal Immigration Officer by Regulation 3 of Legal Notice 81 of 2011, I am issuing this return decision and therefore terminating your stay. You have the right to apply for an appropriate period of voluntary departure
REMOVAL ORDER
This Return Decision is accompanied by a Removal Order in accordance with the same regulation since the request for a period of voluntary departure has not been acceded to for the following reasons,
a) there is a risk that you may abscond
b) your application for legal stay is considered as manifestly unfounded or fraudulent,
c) you are considered to be a threat to public policy, public security or national security
By virtue of regulation 7 of the above mentioned Legal Notice an entry ban will be issued against you and this shall remain valid for a period of five years and is subject to renewal
You have the right to appeal from this Decision/Order/Entry Ban to the Immigration Appeals Board within three working days at the Board’s Registry, Fort St Elmo, Valletta”
An “irregular” immigrant is entitled to apply for recognition of refugee status by means of an application (in the form of a Preliminary Questionnaire) to the Commissioner for Refugees within two months of arrival. While the application is being processed, in accordance with Maltese policy, the asylum seeker will remain in detention for a period of up to eighteen months, which may be extended if, on rejection of the application, he or she refuses to cooperate in respect of his or her repatriation.
Article 25A of the Act concerns the appeals and applications (lodged by virtue of the provisions of the Act or regulations made thereunder, or by virtue of any other law) to be heard and determined by the Immigration Appeals Board (“the Board”). Article 25A reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“(5) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the competent authority under any regulations made under Part III, or in virtue of article 7 [residence permits], article 14 [removal orders] or article 15 [responsibility of carriers] may enter an appeal against such decision and the Board shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine such appeals.
(6) During the course of any proceedings before it, the Board, may, even on a verbal request, grant provisional release to any person who is arrested or detained and is a party to proceedings before it, under such terms and conditions as it may deem fit, and the provisions of Title IV of Part II of Book Second of the Criminal Code shall, mutatis mutandis apply to such request.
(7) Any appeal has to be filed in the Registry of the Board within three working days from the decision subject to appeal: ...
(8) The decisions of the Board shall be final except with respect to points of law decided by the Board regarding decisions affecting persons as are mentioned in Part III, from which an appeal shall lie within ten days to the Court of Appeal (Inferior Jurisdiction).
(9) The Board shall also have jurisdiction to hear and determine applications made by persons in custody in virtue only of a deportation or removal order to be released from custody pending the determination of any application under the Refugees Act or otherwise pending their deportation in accordance with the following subarticles of this article.
(10) The Board shall only grant release from custody under subarticle (9) where in its opinion the continued detention of such person is taking into account all the circumstances of the case, unreasonable as regards duration or because there is no reasonable prospect of deportation within a reasonable time:
Provided that where a person, whose application for protection under the Refugees Act has been refused by a final decision, does not co-operate with the Principal Immigration Officer with respect to his repatriation to his country of origin or to any other country which has accepted to receive him, the Board may refuse to order that person’s release.
(11) The Board shall not grant such release in the following cases:
(a) when the identity of the applicant including his nationality has yet to be verified, in particular where the applicant has destroyed his travel or identification documents or used fraudulent documents in order to mislead the authorities;
(b) when elements on which any claim by applicant under the Refugees Act is based, have to be determined, where the determination thereof cannot be achieved in the absence of detention;
(c) where the release of the applicant could pose a threat to public security or public order.
(12) A person who has been released under the provisions of subarticles (9) to (11) may, where the Principal Immigration Officer is satisfied that there exists a reasonable prospect of deportation or that such person is not co-operating with the Principal Immigration Officer with respect to his repatriation to his country of origin or to another country which has accepted to receive him, and no proceedings under the Refugees Act are pending, be again taken into custody pending his removal from Malta.
(13) It shall be a condition of any release under subarticles (9) to (12) that the person so released shall periodically (and in no case less often than once every week) report to the immigration authorities at such intervals as the Board may determine.”
Part IV of Subsidiary Legislation 217.12, Common Standards and Procedures for Returning Illegally Staying Third-Country Nationals Regulations, Legal Notice 81 of 2011 (transposing Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on common standards and procedures in member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals) reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
Regulation 11
“(1) The provisions of Part IV shall not apply to third country nationals who are subject to a refusal of entry in accordance with Article 13 of the Schengen Borders Code or who are apprehended or intercepted by the competent authorities in connection with the irregular crossing by sea or air of the external border of Malta and who have not subsequently obtained an authorisation or a right to stay in Malta.
(2) A return decision, an entry-ban decision and a removal order shall be issued in writing and shall contain reasons in fact and in law and information on legal remedies:
Provided that the reasons in fact may be given in a restrictive way where the withholding of information is regulated by law, in particular where the disclosure of information endangers national security, public policy, and the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of criminal offences.
(3) A return decision shall be issued in a standard form and general information as regards such form shall be given in at least five languages which third-country nationals may reasonably be supposed to understand.
(4) The Board shall review decisions related to return on application by the thirdcountry national as referred to in subregulation (2), and may temporarily suspend their enforcement.
(5) For the purposes of sub-regulation (4) a legal adviser shall be allowed to assist the third-country national and, where entitled to, free legal aid shall be provided to the third-country national.
(6) The Principal Immigration Officer shall provide, upon request, a written or oral translation of the main elements of a return decision and information on the legal remedies in a language the third-country national may reasonably be supposed to understand. (...)
(8) Where a third-country national is the subject of return procedures, unless other sufficient and less coercive measures are applicable, the Principal Immigration Officer may only keep him in detention in order to carry out the return and removal procedure, in particular where:
(a) there is a risk of absconding; or
(b) the third-country national avoids or hinders the return or removal procedure:
Provided that the detention shall be for a short period and shall subsist as long as the removal procedure is in progress and is executed with due diligence.
(9) Detention shall be a consequence of the removal order issued by the Principal Immigration Officer and it shall contain reasons in fact and in law.
(10) The third-country national subject to the provisions of subregulation (8) shall be entitled to institute proceedings before the Board to contest the lawfulness of detention and such proceedings shall be subject to a speedy judicial review.
(11) Where the third-country national is entitled to institute proceedings as provided in sub-regulation (10) he shall immediately be informed about such proceedings.
(12) The third country-national shall be immediately released from detention where in the opinion of the Board such detention is not lawful.”
Regulation 12 of the Procedural Standards in Examining Applications for Refugee Status Regulations (Legal Notice 243 of 2008), Subsidiary Legislation 420.07, provides, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, and except where a subsequent application will not be further examined, or where an applicant is to be surrendered or extradited as appropriate to another Member State pursuant to obligations in accordance with a European Arrest Warrant or otherwise, or to a third country or to international criminal courts or tribunals, an applicant shall not be removed from Malta before his application is finally determined and such applicant shall be allowed to enter or remain in Malta pending a final decision of his application.
(2) An applicant for asylum shall -
(a) not seek to enter employment or carry on business unless with the consent of the Minister;
(b) unless he is in custody, reside and remain in the places which may be indicated by the Minister;
(c) report at specified intervals to the immigration authorities as indicated by the Minister;
(d) hand over all documents in his possession;
(e) be subject to search and his oral statements may be recorded subject to the applicant being previously informed thereof;
(f) be photographed and have his fingerprints taken:”
Subsidiary legislation 12.09, namely the Court Practice and Procedure and Good Order Rules, makes specific reference to constitutional cases. Rule 6 thereof reads as follows:
“Once a case has been set down for hearing the court shall ensure that, consistently with the due and proper administration of justice, the hearing and disposal of the case shall be expeditious, and the hearing of the cause shall as far as possible continue to be heard on consecutive days, and, where this is not possible, on dates close to one another.”
The following are extracts of the relevant international reports and guidelines or recommendations relied on by the parties:
“13. While noting the large inflow of immigrants and efforts made by the State party to dealing therewith, the Committee is concerned about reports that their legal safeguards are not always guaranteed in practice. The Committee is also concerned about the detention and living conditions of immigrants in irregular situations in detention centres, in particular of women and families with children (art. 5).
The Committee is concerned about the recurrence of riots (2005, 2008 and 2011) by detained immigrants against their detention conditions, for example at Safi Barracks, and about the reported excessive use of force to counter the riots.”
“During 2011, more than 1,500 people arrived by sea from either the Middle East or North Africa, returning to the levels seen in 2009. Immigration detention continued to be mandatory for anyone whom the authorities deemed to be a “prohibited immigrant”, and was often prolonged for up to 18 months.
According to reports, conditions in both detention and open reception centres worsened as a consequence of the number of new arrivals, increasing the impact on detainees’ mental and physical health.
In March, the EU’s 2008 “Returns Directive” was transposed into domestic legislation. The Directive provided common standards and procedures in EU member states for detaining and returning people who stay in a country illegally. However, the domestic legislation excluded those who had been refused entry – or had entered Malta irregularly – from enjoying these minimum safeguards. The Directive would therefore not apply to the vast majority of those it was meant to protect.”
“19. At the end of their detention, migrants, including refugees, beneficiaries of subsidiary protection, asylum seekers and persons whose asylum claims have been rejected, are accommodated in open centres around Malta. Conditions prevailing in these centres vary greatly, with adequate arrangements reported in the smaller centres that cater for some vulnerable groups, such as families with children or unaccompanied minors, and far more difficult conditions in the bigger centres. As mentioned above, when the Commissioner’s visit took place the number of irregular arrivals had been very low for over 18 months and the 2011 arrivals from Libya had not yet started. As a result, the vast majority of migrants had moved out of the detention centres and were living in open centres, with the respective populations numbering at 49 and 2 231 respectively. The Commissioner visited the detention centre in Safi, and three open centres - the Hal-Far tent village, the Hangar Open Centre in Hal-Far and Marsa.
At the time of the visit the material conditions in the Safi detention centre, where all 49 of the migrant detainees were kept, appeared to be considerably better than those in open centres. Although a number of issues remained to be addressed, including those regarding the detainees’ access to a diversified diet and water other than from the tap, the premises visited, including the dormitories, toilets and showers had been recently refurbished. The only female detainee of the centre was accommodated in a separate facility. The Commissioner wishes to note however, that in accordance with the mandatory detention policy referred to above, most of the persons (approximately 1 100) who have arrived from Libya since his visit have been placed in detention centres. This is naturally bound to have a significant impact on the adequacy of the conditions in these centres.”
“52. In accordance with Maltese policy on administrative detention of foreigners under aliens’ legislation, all foreigners arriving illegally in Malta are still detained for prolonged periods, in the case of asylum seekers until such time as their request for refugee status is determined (normally 12 months) and for irregular immigrants for up to a maximum of 18 months. In practice, however, some may spend even longer periods in detention. The only declared exceptions to this general rule concern persons deemed to be vulnerable because of their age and/or physical condition, unaccompanied minors and pregnant women ...
The situation found in the detention centres visited by the delegation had not substantially improved since the CPT’s previous visit in 2005. Indeed, many of the problems identified in the report on that visit still remain unresolved. In several parts of the detention centres, the combined effects of prolonged periods of detention in poor, if not very poor, material conditions, with a total absence of purposeful activities, not to mention other factors, could well be considered to amount to inhuman and degrading treatment.
material conditions
...
At Safi Barracks Detention Centre, which at the time of the visit accommodated a total of 507 immigration detainees, living conditions for detainees had slightly improved in comparison to the situation observed by the CPT in 2005.
At Warehouse No. 1, living conditions were less cramped than when last visited by the CPT, and the toilet facilities were new and clean. That said, the Committee has strong reservations as regards the use of converted warehouses to accommodate detainees. This should only be seen as a temporary - and short term - solution.
B Block has been refurbished since the CPT’s last visit. The sanitary facilities have been renovated and a large exercise area is at the disposal of the immigration detainees. However, conditions were still difficult in certain rooms, where immigration detainees were sleeping on mattresses on the floor.
Surprisingly, poor conditions of detention were observed in the new C Block. Living conditions were cramped, access to natural light was insufficient and ventilation very poor. Further, access to running water was limited, as well as access to hot water, the latter being unavailable for prolonged periods.
In addition, the internal regulation in force at Safi Barracks provided for the compulsory closing of the doors in B and C Blocks every afternoon at 5 p.m., thereby preventing access to the outdoor yard. This exacerbated significantly the already far from ideal living conditions in these blocks.”
“Because of their experience of seeking asylum, and the often traumatic event precipitating flight, asylum seekers may present with psychological illness, trauma, depression, anxiety, aggression and other physical, psychological and emotional consequences. Such factors need to be weighed in the assessment of the necessity to detain (see Guideline 4). Victims of torture and other serious physical, psychological or sexual violence also need special attention and should generally not be detained.”
 “The aim of detention is not to penalise asylum seekers. Measures of detention of asylum seekers may be resorted to only in the following situations:
– when their identity, including nationality, has in case of doubt to be verified, in particular when asylum seekers have destroyed their travel or identity documents or used fraudulent documents in order to mislead the authorities of the host state;
– when elements on which the asylum claim is based have to be determined which, in the absence of detention, could not be obtained;
– when a decision needs to be taken on their right to enter the territory of the state concerned, or
– when protection of national security and public order so requires.”
“A person may only be deprived of his/her liberty with a view to ensuring that a removal order will be executed, if this is in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law and if, after a careful examination of the necessity of deprivation of liberty in each individual case, the authorities of the host state have concluded that compliance with the removal order cannot be ensured as effectively by resorting to non-custodial measures such as supervision systems, the requirement to report regularly to the authorities, bail or other guarantee systems.”