The case originated in an application (no. 29971/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Ukrainian nationals, Mr Oleg Volodymyrovych Kats, Mrs Tetiana Yakivna Kats and Mr Stanislav Ihorovych Beliak (“the applicants”), on 29 July 2004.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Ms Zoya Shevchenko and Mr Arkadiy Bushchenko, lawyers practising in Kyiv and Kharkiv respectively. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Yuriy Zaytsev, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 14 March 2006 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaints concerning Articles 2, 3, 5 § 1 and 13 of the Convention to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility. The case was given priority under Rule 41 of the Rules of the Court.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government's objection, the Court dismissed it.
The Government's observations on the admissibility and merits of the application were received on 7 June 2006, 1 November 2006 and 29 March 2007. The applicants' observations in reply and just-satisfaction claims dated 5 September 2006, 29 January and 22 February 2007 were received on 18 September 2006, 13 February and 5 March 2007 and admitted to the file.
The first and second applicants, Mr Oleg Volodymyrovych Kats and Mrs Tetiana Yakivna Kats, born in 1946, are the father and mother of the late Ms Olga Olegivna Biliak (hereinafter Olga Biliak), who was born in 1971 and died in 2004. The third applicant, Mr Stanislav Ihorovych Beliak, born in 1993, is the son of Olga Biliak. All three applicants live in Kyiv.
Criminal proceedings against Olga Biliak
Olga Biliak's pre-trial detention and medical treatment
The investigation into the death of Olga Biliak
On 21 July 2004 the applicants sued the SIZO for non-pecuniary damage incurred on account of the inadequate medical treatment of Olga Bilaik and the failure to hospitalise or release her on medical grounds. They also claimed compensation for burial expenses.
On 27 October 2006 the  partially allowed these claims. It found, inter alia, that the prison authorities had learned of Olga Bilaik's HIV status on 26 September 2003 from her father's letter. The court further indicated that although the relevant regulations provided that each newly admitted detainee should be examined and interviewed in relation to AIDS or HIV infection, this had never been done in respect of Olga Bilaik. The  also established that, contrary to the domestic law, she had not been X-rayed within three days of her arrival at the SIZO. She did not undergo that examination until 18 December 2003.
The  concluded that the applicants had suffered distress on account of the inadequate medical assistance offered to their daughter and mother in the SIZO. The court further stated that:
“It should be noted that [the finding of Olga Bilaik's lack of medical treatment in the SIZO] does not mean that there is a causal link with Olga Bilaik's death, the circumstances of which have not been established during the hearings and are currently being considered by the Shevchenkovsky District Prosecutor's Office of Kyiv in the context of the criminal investigation into the death of Olga Bilaik.”
The applicants were awarded 20,000 Ukrainian hryvnas (UAH) in total for non-pecuniary damage. The claim for burial expenses was rejected as unsubstantiated.
The SIZO and the applicants appealed against this judgment.
On 24 May 2007 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal quashed the judgment of 27 October 2006 and remitted the case for fresh consideration on the ground that the first-instance court had failed to identify the medical staff who had examined Olga Biliak, diagnosed her, prescribed her treatment, etc., and to decide whether they should have participated in the proceedings
The relevant extract of the Constitution of Ukraine provides:
Article 27
“Every person has the inalienable right to life.
No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of life. The duty of the State is to protect human life. ...”
Article 28
“Everyone has the right to respect for his or her dignity.
No one shall be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment that violates his or her dignity. ...”
Article 55
“Human and citizens' rights and freedoms shall be protected by the courts.
Everyone shall be guaranteed a right to challenge in court the decisions, actions or omissions of bodies of State power, bodies of local self-government, officials and officers. ...
Everyone shall have a right to protect his or her rights and freedoms from violations and illegal encroachments by any means not prohibited by law.”
Article 56
 “Everyone shall have a right to compensation from public or municipal bodies for losses sustained as a result of unlawful decisions, acts or omissions by public or municipal bodies or civil servants in the performance of their official duties.”
The Code requires a competent authority to institute criminal proceedings if there is a suspicion that a crime has been committed. That authority is under an obligation to carry out all measures provided for by law to establish the facts and to identify those responsible and secure their conviction (Article 4).
Article 94 of the Code provides that criminal proceedings shall be instituted in the following cases:
“Criminal proceedings shall be instituted following:
(1)  applications or communications from ... individuals; ...
(5)  direct detection of signs of a crime by a body of inquiry, investigation, a prosecutor or a court.
A case can be instituted only when there is sufficient information indicating a crime.”
No criminal proceedings can be brought in the absence of a corpus delicti (Article 6).
According to Article 165-1 § 3 of the Code, the decision of the body of inquiry, investigator, prosecutor or court to apply, change or discontinue a preventive measure (including pre-trial detention) should be communicated to the person concerned immediately.
Article 236-1 of the Code provides:
“Within seven days of notification, a decision of the body of inquiry, investigator or prosecutor not to institute criminal proceedings or a refusal of the higher prosecutor to quash such a decision can be appealed against by an interested party or their representative to the district (town) court within whose area of jurisdiction the authority which took the decision falls...”
The relevant part of Article 236-2 of the Code provides:
“An appeal against the decision of the body of inquiry, investigator or prosecutor not to institute criminal proceedings shall be examined [by a court] in a single-judge formation within ten days of being lodged.
The judge shall request the materials on the basis of which the decision not to institute criminal proceedings was made, examine them and inform the prosecutor and the appellant of the date on which the hearing of the appeal is listed.
Having examined the case, the judge ... may take one of the following decisions:
(1)  to set aside the decision not to institute criminal proceedings and to remit the case for further preliminary inquiries...
(2)  to dismiss the appeal ...”
Civil Code, 2003
Article 201 § 1 (4) of the Code of Civil Procedure provides in its relevant part:
“The court must suspend its examination of a case if ...it is impossible to hear that case before the termination of another set of civil, criminal or administrative proceedings.”
Article 20 § 4 reads as follows:
“Rulings, judgments or decisions granting release shall be implemented immediately upon their receipt by the detention centre.”
In accordance with Section 6.1.3 of the Rules, all persons should undergo an initial medical examination on their arrival at the SIZO. The results of this examination are entered in the SIZO medical register. During the examination the doctor should inform the detainee about the possibility of undergoing a HIV test.
The relevant extracts from the European Prison Rules read as follows:
“Medical services
1. At every institution there shall be available the services of at least one qualified general practitioner. The medical services should be organised in close relation with the general heath administration of the community or nation. They shall include a psychiatric service for the diagnosis and, in proper cases, the treatment of states of mental abnormality.
Sick prisoners who require specialist treatment shall be transferred to specialised institutions or to civil hospitals. Where hospital facilities are provided in an institution, their equipment, furnishings and pharmaceutical supplies shall be suitable for the medical care and treatment of sick prisoners, and there shall be staff of suitably trained officers.
...
1. The medical officer shall have the care of the physical and mental health of the prisoners and shall see, under the conditions and with a frequency consistent with hospital standards, all sick prisoners, all who report illness or injury and any prisoner to whom attention is specially directed.
The medical officer shall report to the director whenever it is considered that a prisoner's physical or mental health has been or will be adversely affected by continued imprisonment or by any condition of imprisonment.”
The relevant extract from the Report of the CPT on a visit to Ukraine from 24 November to 6 December 2002 reads as follows: