The case originated in an application (no. 79947/12) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Russian nationals, listed below (“the applicants”), on 10 December 2012.
The applicants were represented by the Stichting Russian Justice Initiative, in partnership with another non-governmental organisation, Astreya (“SRJI/Astreya”). The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 27 June 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicants are:
(1)  Ms Madina Satybalova, who was born in 1961;
(2)  Ms Luiza Satybalova, who was born in 1968; and
(3)  Ms Taisa Nartayeva, who was born in 1940.
The first applicant lives in Khasavyurt and the other applicants in Aksay, the Khasavyurt district, Dagestan. They are respectively the sister, wife and mother of Mr Marat (in the documents submitted also referred to as AbuAli) Satybalov, who was born in 1974 and died in 2010.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On the evening of 2 May 2010 Marat Satybalov and his six friends, Mr M.Sh., Mr M.G., Mr K.A, Mr K.S., Mr A.N. and Mr D.Kh., were driving to the countryside for a barbecue in two cars. On the way there Mr Satybalov, Mr M.Sh. and Mr M.G., who were driving together in one car, stopped at a pharmacy in the village of Dylym to get painkillers for Mr M.G.’s toothache.
The pharmacy was already closed, so Mr M.G. went to buy the painkillers directly from the pharmacist, who lived next door. Mr Satybalov and Mr M.Sh. waited for him in the car. The pharmacist thought that Mr M.G. looked suspicious with his long beard and called the police.
After Mr M.G. purchased the medicine and went outside, a UAZ-type vehicle with police officers was already waiting in the street. The policemen, who were from the investigative-operational unit (СОГ) of the Kazbekovskiy district police station (“the ROVD”), got out and searched him at gunpoint. They then approached the passengers in the car, grabbed Mr M.Sh. and forced him out.
Then, the commander of the officers, Major A.S., dragged Mr Satybalov out of the car by his beard and hit him on the head with the butt of his machine gun.
The police officers then subjected Mr Satybalov, Mr M.Sh. and Mr M.G. to beatings, hitting them with the butts of their machine guns and kicking them. Then they took them to the ROVD without telling them the reasons for their detention.
At the ROVD the three men were taken to the courtyard and subjected to beatings. They were punched, kicked and hit with the butts of machine guns. They were then taken inside and asked repeatedly why they had long beards.
Major A.S. repeatedly pulled Mr Satybalov’s beard, beat him and asked him about his beard. He filmed the ill-treatment of the three men on his telephone whilst hurling insults at them. After having been asked where they had been heading and the reasons for their trip, Mr Satybalov, Mr M.Sh. and Mr M.G. were subjected to further beatings in the courtyard.
Meanwhile, the four men from the second car went to the police station to look for their friends. They were also taken into the courtyard and subjected to beatings. A relative of one of the four men, Mr R.G., a lawenforcement officer who worked at the ROVD, then arrived at the police station. He spoke with his colleagues and the four men from the second car were released. Mr Satybalov, Mr M.Sh. and Mr M.G. were taken to a cell on the station premises.
The cell where the three men were held overnight was cold. They were not provided with medical assistance, food or drink.
At approximately 10 a.m. the following morning Mr Satybalov, Mr M.Sh. and Mr M.G. were taken to the Kazbekovskiy District Court and ordered to pay an administrative fine of 500 roubles (about 12 euros) each for failing to obey lawful orders of the police. They were not provided with any documents concerning their detention at the police station or the court hearing (see paragraph 26 below).
Mr Satybalov, Mr M.Sh. and Mr M.G. were subsequently released on 3 May 2010.
At about 3 p.m. on 3 May 2010 Mr M.Sh. and Mr M.G. took Mr Satybalov, who was unable to walk, to Khasavyurt Hospital, where he underwent an X-ray. The doctor said that he had no fractures, gave him some painkillers and sent him home.
The two men carried Mr Satybalov home. The applicants noticed that all three men had been injured. Mr Satybalov was injured particularly badly: he could not stand up, his entire body and head were covered in haematomas, abrasions and bruises and part of his beard had been pulled out. He could not breathe normally. Mr Satybalov remained at home and by 4 and 5 May 2010 the state of his health had worsened.
In the early hours of 6 May 2010 the applicants and their relatives took Mr Satybalov back to Khasavyurt Hospital, where he immediately underwent emergency surgery. According to the doctors, he had lost a lot of blood owing to internal bleeding following the beatings on 2 May 2010.
At about 5 p.m. on 6 May 2010 the doctors performed further emergency surgery and informed the applicants that Mr Satybalov was in a critical condition. He had punctured lungs, broken ribs and damage to his heart and arteries. They said that his kidneys were severely damaged and had stopped functioning. On 7 May 2010 Mr Satybalov died in hospital.
On 7 May 2010 about 600 residents of the Kazbekovskiy district blocked the Rostov-Baku motorway in the vicinity of the Uzun-Otar settlement to demand that the policemen responsible for Mr Satybalov’s death be prosecuted. The Dagestan Minister of the Interior, Mr Ali M., arrived at the scene and promised that all the police officers involved, including Major A.S., would be prosecuted. The incident received wide local and online media coverage.
In support of their submissions to the Court, the applicants furnished copies of their complaints to the authorities and their statements concerning the circumstances of the events provided throughout the investigation, a copy of Mr Satybalov’s medical records and copies of several articles published in local newspapers in connection with the incident.
At 9.50 p.m. on 2 May 2010 at the ROVD, in the presence of two attesting witnesses, Mr A.M. and Mr N.A., Major Kh.Kh. drew up administrative detention records concerning Mr Satybalov, Mr M.Sh. and Mr M.G. According to the document, Mr Satybalov “failed to obey lawful orders of the police” in violation of Article 19.3 of the Code of Administrative Offences.
On 2 May 2010 Major Kh.Kh. took statements from Mr M.Sh. and Marat Satybalov, both of whom stated that on 2 May 2010 they and their friends had been driving in two cars for a picnic. On the way they had had to stop at a pharmacy in Dylym. A group of police officers had asked for their identity documents and had then taken them to the police station as they and their friends had had long beards.
On 3 May 2010 Major Kh.Kh. also interviewed Mr M.G., who stated that on 2 May 2010 he and his six friends had been driving in two cars for a barbecue. On the way, he had got a toothache, so they had had to stop in Dylym to pick up some painkillers. As the local pharmacy had been closed, he had had to purchase the medication from the pharmacist’s house next door. A group of police officers had then run up to their car, forced him and his friends to the ground and then, without any explanation, had taken them to the police station. About one and a half hours later, the second car with his friends had also been taken to the police station.
On 3 May 2010 the justice of the peace of department no. 116 in the Kazbekovskiy district, Mr Ya.Sh., examined the administrative cases against Mr M.G., Mr M.Sh. and Mr Satybalov. Without examining the grounds for their detention between 2 and 3 May 2010 at the police station, the justice of peace fined them 500 roubles (about 12 euros) each. The decisions issued in respect of the three men were almost identical and stated, among other things, as follows:
“... the fact of failing to obey lawful orders of the police in connection with the execution of their responsibility to protect public order is confirmed by a telephone message. From [that], it appears that at 9.45 p.m. on 2 May 2010 the Kazbekovskiy ROVD [the police station] received a telephone message from a policeman from the investigative-operational unit stating that, in the centre of Dylym in the Kazbekovskiy district, next to the pharmacy, there were people acting suspiciously with overgrown beards ... where [the police officers] did in fact find three strangers, suspicious looking, all of whom had overgrown beards and one of whom was in a military uniform. The officers approached them and introduced themselves as policemen from the ROVD and asked for [their] identity documents. The strangers replied that they did not have any documents on them and started to express their discontent, asking why they needed to have the documents on them. The officers then asked the men to follow them to the police station to establish their identity and carry out further clarifications.
The men then started to show their indignation and said that they had not done anything and should not go to the station. [They did not respond] to the lawful and repeated requests to [go to] the police station, and by doing so failed to obey lawful orders [of the police]. As it was impossible to establish [their] identity on the spot, and given that the three of them had committed an administrative violation under Article 19.3 of the Code of Administrative Offences [failing to obey lawful orders of the police], the individuals, with the use of physical force, were taken to the police station for an identity check and further clarifications ...”
On 8 May 2010 the third applicant complained to the Dagestan prosecutor’s office that her son Marat Satybalov had been ill-treated by the police and had died as a result. She pointed out that her son had described the circumstances of the incident to her while still alive. According to him, the commander of the investigative-operational unit of the ROVD, Major A.S., had dragged him out of the car by his beard and had hit him on the head with the butt of a machine gun. He and his two friends had then been subjected to beatings, taken to the police station and then to its courtyard. Her son had been questioned afterwards about his religious beliefs and his beard; Major A.S. had filmed it all on a telephone. After spending a night in the cell without food, drink or medical assistance, her son had been taken to court and fined for an administrative violation. No paperwork concerning either his detention or the court proceedings had been given to him. He had then been taken home. By 4 and 5 May 2010 his health had deteriorated as he could not walk or speak. Indeed, his state had worsened because his two ribs had been broken by Major A.S. The fractured ribs had damaged an artery, which in turn had caused extensive internal bleeding. On 7 May 2010 Marat Satybalov had died in hospital as a result of the beatings carried out by Major A.S. and his subordinates from the ROVD. The applicant requested that the perpetrators of her son’s illtreatment be prosecuted and that she be informed of the steps taken.
On 8 May 2010 the Khasavyurt investigations department of the Dagestan prosecutors’ office (“the investigators”) interviewed Mr Satybalov’s friends, Mr M.Sh., Mr K.A., Mr M.G., Mr K.S. and Mr D.Kh., who had witnessed the events. They all gave statements similar to the applicants’ submissions to the Court, including the description of Mr Satybalov’s beatings by the policemen.
On the same date, 8 May 2010, the investigators also interviewed Mr U.U., who lived next to the police station and worked at the pharmacy in Dylym. He stated that late in the evening of 2 May 2009 a young man had shown up at the door of his house and asked for painkillers. The witness had sold him two types of painkillers from his house as the pharmacy was already closed.
On 13 May 2010 one of Marat Satybalov’s friends, Mr D.Kh., complained to the Dagestan prosecutor’s office that he and his friends had been subjected to severe beatings on 2 May 2010 at the ROVD, and requested that the perpetrators be prosecuted. He described the illtreatment in detail, stating that a police officer wearing a balaclava had broken his nose. He stressed that Major A.S. and his subordinates had beaten Mr Satybalov and fractured, amongst other things, two of his ribs, which had subsequently led to internal bleeding and his death on 7 May 2010.
On 18 May 2010 the investigators opened criminal case no. 02222 under Article 286 of the Criminal Code (abuse of authority). The applicants were informed thereof on 18 June 2010.
On various dates between 13 and 26 May 2010 six persons who had been detained with Mr Satybalov complained to the Dagestan prosecutor’s office that they and Marat Satybalov had been subjected to severe beatings on 2 May 2010 at the Kazbekovskiy police station. They described the circumstances of the incident in detail and requested that the perpetrators, including Major A.S., be prosecuted. They also stressed that their detention at the station had been unlawful.
On 22 and 23 May 2010 those who had been involved in the incident on 2 May 2010 were granted victim status in the criminal case and questioned about the circumstances of the illtreatment. Their detailed statements were similar to the applicants’ submissions to the Court.
Between 23 and 26 May 2010 the investigators ordered a forensic examination of the victims. According to the relevant expert report, each of them had sustained physical injuries of varying degrees of severity.
On 26 May 2010 the third applicant again complained to the Dagestan prosecutor’s office that her son and his friends had been unlawfully detained and beaten by the police and that he had died as a result of that ill-treatment. She stressed that, according to her son, Major A.S. had filmed the beatings and degrading treatment by the officers at the police station.
On 4 June 2010 the Dagestan prosecutor issued an order concerning the elimination of procedural violations committed during the investigation of the criminal case (Требование об устранении нарушений федерального законодательства, допущенных в ходе предварительного расследования). The order stated, amongst other things, as follows:
“... the case material clearly shows that a crime was committed; there is direct evidence from the victims concerning the identity of the culprits and the circumstances in which the crime was committed. [However], to date, the crime scene has not been examined.
The investigators have seriously violated criminal procedure regulations by failing to take urgent steps for more than [twenty] days since the opening of the investigation, in particular by failing to take the following measures:
- obtaining information from the Kazbekovskiy ROVD concerning the policemen on duty on 2 May 2010 who had gone to the pharmacy;
- identifying and questioning the driver of the UAZ vehicle belonging to the ROVD and identifying those who had gone to the pharmacy;
- questioning the police officers who had gone to the crime scene (the pharmacy) concerning the allegations of the victims and their statements given to the investigation;
- questioning Mr U.U. (the pharmacist) and verifying the victims’ allegations ...
- questioning the police officer Rashid concerning the discovery of the grenade launcher in the victims’ car and finding out whether it had been placed to imitate the illegal possession of firearms;
- questioning the victims and finding out why they had called Marat Satybalov by the name Abu-Ali;
- establishing every minute of the whereabouts of [Major] A.S. on the date of the incident by questioning the witnesses at the ROVD, as well as finding out what he had done on that date. All those facts should have been duly reflected in the documents and supported by witness statements;
- granting victim status to Marat Satybalov’s relatives and questioning them ...
The investigation has been conducted without a plan. The steps taken to establish the motive for the crime have not been sufficient. In addition, the investigators failed to reply to the victims’ complaints ...”
On 27 June 2010 the head of the Internal Security Department of the Dagestan Ministry of the Interior issued a conclusion on “the internal inquiry regarding information concerning the unlawful actions of police officers from the Kazbekovskiy ROVD”. According to the document, the inquiry established, among other things, the following:
“... thus, the inquiry established the involvement of the ROVD officers, including the commander Major A.S., in the unlawful forcible actions on 2 May 2010 against Mr M.G., Mr M.Sh., Mr Marat Satybalov, who had been taken to the police station, and against Mr K.A., Mr A.N., Mr D.Kh. and Mr K.S., who had [gone there] to find out the reasons for their [friends’] detention ... It is necessary, in order to establish the circumstances of the use of physical force against those individuals, to take a number of investigative steps, which is possible only within the framework of criminal case no. 02222.
In addition, [the documents show that] Warrant Officer A.A. and Sergeant S.G. from the ROVD submitted information that on 2 May 2010 they had taken Mr M.Sh., Mr M.G. and Marat Satybalov to the ROVD for allegedly disobeying lawful orders of the police. However, in fact, the inquiry established that [both] officers had not left the police station and had remained on its premises; the duty officer, Major Kh.Kh., having received information concerning suspicious-looking people in Dylym, had sent [a group] of policemen there without a [commanding] officer and had then failed to log information [in the register] concerning the identity of the policemen who had actually gone to that location.
Based on the above, the following measures [are to be taken]:
The internal inquiry aimed at verifying the information concerning the Kazbekovskiy ROVD policemen is considered to be finished;
For the gross violations of the Code of Professional Ethics ... expressed by the lack of sincerity, unscrupulousness and false statements given in the internal inquiry, as well as false information concerning the taking to the ROVD on 2 May 2010 of Mr M.SH., Mr M.G. and Mr Marat Satybalov [for allegedly] disobeying lawful orders and insubordination, Warrant Officer A.A. and Sergeant S.G. are to be subjected to disciplinary measures by the head of the ROVD;
For the gross violations of the orders of the Ministry of the Interior ... expressed on 2 May 2010 by the sending of a special unit of policemen without a commanding officer and the failure to duly log that information, Major Kh.Kh. is to be subjected to disciplinary measures by the head of the ROVD;
The supervising officers of the Kazbekovskiy ROVD should be denounced for their lack of control over the actions of their subordinates, as a result of which gross violations of professional discipline and lawfulness took place;
A copy of the conclusion of the internal inquiry should be incorporated into the case file in criminal case no. 02222.
The issue of the responsibility of the police officers from the Kazbekovskiy ROVD who allegedly caused bodily harm to Mr M.G., Mr M.Sh., Mr K.A., Mr A.N., Mr D.Kh., Mr K.S. and Mr Marat Satybalov, as a result of which the latter died, should be examined within the framework of criminal case no. 02222, to establish the identity of the perpetrators and the extent of their [individual] involvement in the crime ...”
From the documents submitted it is unclear whether the ordered measures were taken. The applicants were not informed of the inquiry.
On 12 July 2010 the applicants’ lawyer asked Khasavyurt Hospital to provide a copy of Mr Satybalov’s medical records. On 13 July 2010 his request was granted.
On 18 August 2010 the investigation of the criminal case was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators. The applicants were not informed thereof.
On 24 January 2011 the first and second applicants requested that the investigators grant them and the third applicant victim status in the criminal case and inform them of the steps taken to prosecute the ROVD police officers. In particular, they asked whether all of the witnesses and victims had been questioned, whether a post-mortem of Mr Satybalov’s body had been carried out and whether his medical records had been examined. The applicants also asked to be provided with copies of documents showing the main steps taken by the investigators.
On 31 January 2011 the Kazbekovskiy district prosecutor issued an order concerning the elimination of procedural violations committed during the investigation of the criminal case. The prosecutor ordered that a number of urgent steps be taken, including those ordered on 4 June 2010 by the Dagestan prosecutor (see paragraph 36 above).
On 13 February 2011 the investigators granted the applicants victim status in the criminal case, but refused to grant the rest of their request of 24 January 2011. In particular, they stated that access to the contents of the investigation file was only allowed after the conclusion of the criminal proceedings. No other information concerning the investigation was given.
On 13 February 2011 the investigators’ supervisor overruled the suspension of the investigation of 18 August 2010 as unlawful and premature and ordered that the proceedings be resumed immediately and that a number of urgent steps be taken, including those ordered on 4 June 2010 and 31 January 2011 (see paragraphs 36 and 41 above).
On 13 March 2011 the investigation of the criminal case was again suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators. The steps ordered on 13 February 2011 were not taken. The applicants were not informed of the suspension.
On 4 April 2011 the investigators’ supervisor overruled the suspension of the investigation of 13 March 2011 as unlawful and premature, ordering that the proceedings be resumed immediately and that a number of urgent steps be taken, including those ordered on 4 June 2010, 31 January 2011 and 13 February 2011 (see paragraphs 36, 41 and 43 above).
On 4 May 2011 the investigation of the criminal case was again suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators. The steps ordered on 13 February and 4 April 2011 were not taken. The applicants were not informed of the suspension.
On 5 September 2012 the first applicant again requested that the investigators allow her to access the investigation file and inform her of the steps taken to have the perpetrators prosecuted. In particular, she asked to be informed whether all of the witnesses and victims had been questioned, whether a post-mortem of her brother’s body had been carried out and whether his medical records had been examined.
On 24 September 2012 the investigators replied to the first applicant that she had been granted victim status in the criminal case and that the investigation had been suspended on 13 March 2011. No other information was given.
On 6 May 2013 the investigators’ supervisor overruled the suspension of the investigation of 4 May 2011 as unlawful and premature and ordered that the proceedings be resumed immediately and that a number of the previously ordered urgent steps be taken (see paragraphs 36, 41 and 43 above).
On 7 June 2013 the investigation of the criminal case was again suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators. The steps ordered on 6 May 2013 were not taken. The applicants were not informed of the suspension.
On 21 September 2015 the investigators’ supervisor overruled the suspension of the investigation of 7 June 2013 as unlawful and premature and ordered that the proceedings be resumed immediately and that a number of the previously ordered urgent steps be taken (see paragraphs 36, 41, 43 and 49 above).
On 25 September 2015 the first applicant was granted victim status in the criminal case and questioned. Her detailed statement was similar to the applicants’ submissions to the Court.
On 25 September 2015 the investigators ordered a forensic examination to establish the cause of Mr Satybalov’s death on the basis of his medical records. The applicants were not informed thereof, despite their requests to this effect (see paragraphs 40 and 47 above).
On 21 October 2015 the investigation of the criminal case was again suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators. The applicants were not informed of that decision.
From the documents submitted it appears that the proceedings are still pending.
In their submissions to the Court, the Government did not dispute the circumstances of Mr Satybalov’s detention and alleged ill-treatment as described by the applicants. They only stated that he had been taken to the ROVD for “not obeying lawful orders of the police” and that the following day he had been taken before a judge, who had sanctioned him with a fine.
For a summary of the relevant domestic regulations, see Turluyeva v. Russia (no. 63638/09, §§ 56-64, 20 June 2013) and Tsvetkova and Others v. Russia (nos. 54381/08 and 5 others, §§ 60-81, 10 April 2018).