The case originated in an application (no. 21203/10) against the Kingdom of the Netherlands lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a  national, Mr Hendrik Jan van der Velden (“the applicant”), on 6 April 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr G. van Buuren, a lawyer practising in Weert. The  Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Agent, Mr R.A.A. Böcker, and Deputy Agent, Ms L. Egmond, both of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been a victim of a violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention in that his confinement in a custodial clinic was extended contrary to domestic law.
On 16 December 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant, Mr Hendrik Jan van der Velden, is a  national who was born in 1965. As far as the Court is aware, he is currently detained in a custodial clinic in .
On various dates in 2002, the applicant committed five bank robberies and stole four cars.
In the course of the criminal investigation, the applicant underwent psychological and psychiatric examinations. The report by the psychologist contains the following:
“At the time of the facts charged, the [applicant] was suffering from inadequate development or pathological disorder. Most likely there is a schizoid personality disorder, but atypical autism cannot be ruled out.
Owing to a lack of social reciprocity the [applicant] cannot adequately adapt his actions to the consequences for the other person. In weighing his motives to act, those consequences remain out of the picture to a large extent. For that reason, the [applicant’s] control of his impulses is impaired.”
The psychiatrist’s report contained the following:
“At the time of the facts charged, the [applicant] was suffering from inadequate development of his mental faculties that can be described as: a personality structure showing signs of serious neurotic distortion. It is then certain that there is no present pathological disorder of the mental faculties. The [applicant’s] various personality characteristics, including in particular his limited frustration tolerance and insufficient impulse control, make him more liable than someone without these personality traits to impulsive behaviour transgressing limits. He gets annoyed and irritated more readily than a person without the personality traits described, has poor ‘stress resistance’, and is relatively easily inclined to ill-considered, reckless and, as it turns out, criminal acts. The [applicant] himself uses the expression ‘short-sightedness’ in this connection.”
Both recommended a finding of diminished criminal responsibility.
The applicant was tried by the  (rechtbank), which on 22 April 2003 convicted him of extortion and theft by means of breaking and entering. It sentenced him to six years’ imprisonment. It ordered him placed at the disposal of the Government (terbeschikkingstelling, hereafter “TBS order”) with confinement in a custodial clinic (bevel tot verpleging van overheidswege). Its reasoning, as relevant to the case before the Court, included the following:
“The accused, through his actions, has committed a serious interference with the mental integrity (geestelijke integriteit) of the staff of the banks he robbed. In so doing, he has caused them personal suffering and psychological harm.
In addition, it is a fact of general knowledge that victims of crimes such as [the bank robberies found proven] may for a long time continue to suffer feelings of fear and insecurity, which can seriously hamper their participation in social life.”
The prosecution did not appeal against this judgment. The applicant did, but withdrew his appeal before it was heard.
The TBS order started to run on 29 August 2005, the day on which the applicant would otherwise have become eligible for provisional release from his prison sentence. On 12 September 2007, after an initial two-year term, the  extended it for a further two years.
On 7 July 2009 the public prosecutor applied to the  for a further two-year extension of the TBS order. The application stated that the original order had been given in connection with “a crime of violence directed against, or endangering, one or more persons”, and that it was necessary for the safety of others or the general safety of persons for it to be extended.
An expert report prepared by the custodial clinic, dated 29 June 2009, noted a certain improvement in the applicant’s state but expressed the view that his return to society should be a gradual and supervised process. It accordingly recommended extending the TBS order.
The , sitting in a composition other than at the time of the applicant’s trial, gave its decision on 18 August 2009. It declared the public prosecutor’s application inadmissible. Its reason for so doing was that the TBS order could not lawfully be extended beyond four years: the judgment of the trial court did not state that the applicant had been found guilty of an indictable offence (misdrijf) directed against, or endangering, the bodily inviolability of one or more persons (Article 38e § 1 of the Criminal Code (Wetboek van Strafrecht); see below). Its reasoning included the following:
“The  considers ... that acts such as those of which [the applicant] has been convicted may raise issues as regards the physical integrity of persons.
It does not appear from the ’s judgment of 22 April 2003, either explicitly or implicitly, that such an issue arises in the present case, nor whether the TBS order has been given for that reason.
In giving reasons for ordering the measure, the judgment states in so many words that there has been a serious interference with the mental integrity of persons, whereas for the remainder a formulation referring to physical integrity is entirely absent.
Although the duty to give reasons, set out in Article 359 § 7 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Wetboek van Strafvordering), is not subject to stringent requirements, the Regional Court takes the view that the aforementioned line of reasoning, given especially that the acts found proven cannot be considered per se as directed against physical integrity, does not justify finding that the Regional Court intended the TBS order to be indefinite.
This means that the TBS order was imposed for a term not exceeding four years.”
The public prosecutor appealed, arguing that the danger posed to physical integrity was apparent from the circumstances in which the bank robberies had been committed. These had included the threat of violence using a handgun.
The custodial clinic submitted an additional report. It stated that the ’s decision had raised the applicant’s hopes, but that a process of gradual and supervised resocialisation remained preferable to the complete termination of the TBS order.
The appeal was heard by the Arnhem Court of Appeal, which gave a decision on 13 October 2009. Its reasoning included the following:
“It is laid down in Article 359 §§ 7 and 8 of the Code of Criminal Procedure that a judgment imposing a TBS order in connection with an indictable offence that is directed against, or endangers, the bodily inviolability of one or more persons shall so indicate, giving reasons, on pain of nullity. Contrary to what counsel has argued, the , in its judgment of 22 April 2003, has not devoted any explicit consideration to the question whether the TBS order is imposed on the [applicant] in connection with an indictable offence that is directed against, or endangers, the bodily inviolability of one or more persons. In disagreement with counsel, the Court of Appeal takes the view that the use in the judgment of the formulations ‘serious interference with [...] mental integrity’ and ‘personal suffering and psychological harm’ cannot be taken as ‘giving reasons’ within the meaning of Article 359 § 7 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Said formulations have plainly been included in the judgment within the framework of setting the sentence. In the considered view of the Court of Appeal, as regards what is set out in Article 359 § 7 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, there is an omission (verzuim). However, the judgment is final and no legal consequence can any longer be attached to that omission. ...”
It went on to find that the applicant’s use of a gas alarm pistol to threaten bank staff constituted violence directed not only against the mental integrity of persons but also against their bodily inviolability, which meant that the four-year maximum provided in Article 38e § 1 of the Criminal Code did not apply, and to extend the TBS order for one year.
As relevant to the case, the Criminal Code provides as follows:
Article 37a
“1.  The court may impose a TBS order on a suspect whose mental faculties were inadequately developed or pathologically disturbed at the time of the commission of the offence if:
In giving an order under paragraph 1, the court shall take account of the statements contained in the other opinions and reports made concerning the suspect’s personality, and shall take account of the seriousness of the offence committed and the number of previous convictions for indictable offences.”
The offences of which the applicant was found guilty all carry a maximum sentence of four years or more (Article 317, extortion, nine years; Article 310, theft, four years).
Article 37b
“1.  The court may order that a person who is subject to a TBS order shall be confined in a custodial clinic if this is necessary in the interests of the safety of others or the general safety of persons or goods. ...”
Article 38d
“1.  A TBS order shall remain in force for a period of two years, counting from the day on which the judgment imposing it has become final.
Except as provided in Article 38e ..., the duration of the TBS order can be extended, on the application of the public prosecution service (openbaar ministerie), for either one year or two years at a time, if the safety of others or the general safety of persons or goods requires such extension. A second extension is possible only when an order as mentioned in Article 37b ... has been given.”
Article 38e
“1.  The total duration of the TBS order shall not exceed a four-year period, unless the TBS order is imposed in connection with an indictable offence that is directed against, or endangers, the bodily inviolability of one or more persons.
If the total duration of the TBS order is not limited in time, the duration of the TBS order can be extended periodically, if the safety of others or the general safety of persons requires such extension.”
As relevant to the case, the Code of Criminal Procedure provides as follows:
Article 359
“...
If a TBS order with an order for confinement in a custodial clinic has been imposed in connection with an indictable offence directed against, or endangering, the bodily inviolability of one or more persons, the judgment shall so indicate, giving reasons.
All on pain of nullity.”
The following passages are excerpted from the drafting history of Article 38e of the Criminal Code and Article 359 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
“... I [i.e. the Deputy Minister of Justice (Staatssecretaris van Justitie)] propose to let the court which imposes the TBS order with confinement in a custodial clinic decide whether that order is maximised or not. That court knows the case file well and is best placed to get an idea of the interaction between the act and the actor (daad-dadercomplex). It will then be determined from the outset whether it is maximised or not. Moreover, it is desirable both from the perspective of treatment and from that of the legal position of the person subject to the order that it be foreseeable at the time when the TBS order is imposed whether TBS order is maximised or not. The treatment plan can be drawn up accordingly. The person subject to the TBS order will then know, if the order is maximised, what its maximum duration will be.” (page 9)
“The proposed amendment of Article 359 [of the Code of Criminal Procedure] can be seen as a logical consequence (pendant) of the proposed amendment of Article 38e of the Criminal Code. The court which imposes the TBS order with confinement in a custodial clinic must indicate in its judgment, giving reasons, whether it considers that the crime in issue is one that is directed against, or endangers, the bodily inviolability of one or more persons. It is thus clear from the start whether the TBS order is maximised or not. As a rule, it will be enough for the court to point to the nature of the indictable offence as found proven and qualified. The prescribed reasoning will therefore not normally be subject to such stringent requirements. However, in certain circumstances the court will have to give reasoning setting out the specific facts or circumstances.” (page 13)
“The court which imposes the [TBS order with confinement in a custodial clinic] at the same time decides whether it shall be limited in time or not. The court to which it falls to consider whether the order should be extended or not is dispensed from making that choice.” (pages 1-2)
“The current maximisation arrangement [i.e. the arrangement existing until the entry into force of the legislation here in issue] differs from that proposed as regards the moment at which it is decided whether the duration of the TBS order shall be determined in advance or not. The decision on the question whether the TBS order is maximised will be taken, pursuant to the proposed Article 38e of the Criminal Code, when the order is imposed and is to be based on the trial court’s view of the nature of the crime. In considering the request to extend the TBS order it is no longer an issue whether the crime belongs to the exceptions enumerated in the first paragraph of Article 38e; the court which imposed the order will already have determined that, giving reasons in accordance with the additional requirements set out in Article 359 [of the Code of Criminal Procedure]. The current arrangement allows the court [which decides on the extension of the TBS order] to express its views on the seriousness of the crime for which the order was imposed in its decision.” (page 5)