The case concerns various aspects of the applicant’s arrest and pre-trial detention.
The applicant was born in 1984. The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms O.O. Richko, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 8 November 2015 the applicant died. On 2 August 2018 his mother, Ms Svitlana Oleksiyivna Romanova (hereinafter “the applicant’s mother”), expressed the wish to pursue the proceedings before the Court.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 16 June 2011 criminal proceedings for grievous bodily harm were instituted against the applicant. On 25 June 2011 the investigators reclassified the charges against the applicant as attempted murder.
On 21 July 2011 the applicant appeared before the investigator in connection with the criminal investigation into attempted murder and gave an undertaking not to abscond.
On 25 July 2011 the investigator arrested the applicant and placed him in police custody on suspicion of attempted murder. The investigator drew up a report on his arrest, making a general reference to Article 106 § 2 and Article 115 of the 1960 Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”).
According to the official report, the applicant had been arrested on the following grounds:
“1.  [He] was caught at the scene of the crime immediately after an offence had been committed, and
eyewitnesses, including the victim, directly identified [him] as the one who had committed the offence.”
It stated that his arrest was justified by the necessity of preventing him from evading justice or obstructing the establishment of the truth, and to ensure that any eventual court judgment could be executed.
On 26 July 2011 a forensic psychiatric examination of the applicant was carried out. The experts provided the following conclusions:
“1.  Mr Romanov is currently showing signs of chronic mental illness in the form of paranoid schizophrenia. The present psychiatric condition of [Mr Romanov] is such that he is unaware of and cannot control his actions.
At the time of the offence with which he has been charged, Mr Romanov was affected by the above-mentioned mental illness and could not have been aware of or controlled his actions.
In view of his mental health Mr Romanov requires involuntary medical treatment by way of admission to a psychiatric hospital under close supervision.”
On 28 July 2011 the Kyivskyy District Court of Kharkiv (“the District Court”) extended the applicant’s detention in police custody to ten days with a view to obtaining an assessment of his personality and the likelihood of his absconding the investigation. No further reasons were provided by the District Court.
On 4 August 2011 the District Court ordered the applicant’s continued detention without specifying any time-limits. The District Court referred in its decision to the conclusions of the psychiatric examination of 26 July 2011 and stated that the applicant had been accused of a serious offence and might otherwise escape and hinder the investigation or continue with his criminal activity. No further reasons were provided by the District Court, which further ruled that the applicant was to be detained in the Kharkiv pre-trial detention centre (“the SIZO”). On 11 August 2011 that decision was upheld on appeal.
On 12 September 2011 the investigator requested compulsory psychiatric treatment for the applicant. On 19 September 2011 the investigator’s request and the case file were transferred to the District Court.
On 2 December 2011 the District Court committed the applicant to a special psychiatric facility for compulsory psychiatric treatment under close supervision. In substantiating its decision the District Court referred to the conclusions of the forensic psychiatric examination of 26 July 2011. The District Court also specified that the applicant was to be held in the SIZO pending his transfer to a special psychiatric facility.
The applicant and his defence lawyer appealed against that decision on 9 and 8 December 2011 respectively.
On 15 December 2011 the Court of Appeal dismissed their appeals without examining them, on the ground that the applicant and his defence lawyer had both missed the time-limit for lodging their appeals without having requested an extension.
On 7 February 2012 the applicant was placed in the psychiatric hospital under close supervision pursuant to the District Court’s decision of 2 December 2011.
On 23 November 2013 the applicant was discharged from the psychiatric hospital. He died on 8 November 2015.
The provisions of the CCP concerning the conditions of arrest of a suspect by the body of inquiry and further pre-trial detention can be found in Osypenko v. Ukraine (no. 4634/04, § 33, 9 November 2010).