The case originated in an application (no. 60249/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vyacheslav Vladimirovich Lyubimov (“the applicant”), on 14 August 2013.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 10 June 2014 the complaint concerning the length of pre-trial detention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1981 and lived, prior to his arrest, in Sibay, Bashkortostan Republic.
On 11 December 2009 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of drug trafficking. On an unspecified date he was charged with smuggling cocaine into Russia (three counts), transport of cocaine (three counts); preparation to distribution of cocaine (three counts), all the crimes being committed by an organised group.
On 12 December 2009 the Tverskoy District Court of Moscow remanded the applicant in custody pending investigation. The judge found that (1) the applicant was suspected of serious crimes, (2) his involvement in crimes was confirmed by the evidential material in the case file, (3) he had no permanent job, source of income and did not reside at his domicile, and (4) he might abscond or interfere with investigation. The judge also took into account the applicant’s character. The applicant remained in detention pending investigation and trial.
On 20 February 2012 the Kirovskiy District Court of Saint-Petersburg convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to sixteen years’ imprisonment.
On 25 July 2012 the Saint-Petersburg City Court acquitted the applicant of the charges concerning transport of cocaine due to lack of corpus delicti, re-characterised the charges concerning cocaine smuggling into attempted smuggling, reduced the applicant’s sentence to fourteen years’ imprisonment and upheld the judgment in the remaining part.
On 22 May 2013 the Presidium of the Saint-Petersburg City Court quashed the judgments rendered in the applicant’s case by way of supervisory review and remitted the case for a new examination. The Presidium also extended his pre-trial detention stating that the applicant could abscond. The court also took into account the applicant’ character.
On 20 June 2013 the Kirovskiy District Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention on the ground that he was accused of serious crimes, could abscond, commit crimes and that he did not have any permanent job.
On 20 August 2013 the Saint-Petersburg City Court upheld this decision on appeal.
On 10 February 2014 the Kirovskiy District Court of SaintPetersburg convicted the applicant.
On 16 June 2014 the Saint-Petersburg City Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal.