The case originated in an application (no. 6858/11) against the Republic of Albania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Albanian national, Mr Mihal Delijorgji (“the applicant”), on 4 January 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Kokona and Mr M. Haxhia, lawyers practising in Tirana. The Albanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms A. Hicka, the General State Advocate.
The applicant alleged a breach of his rights under Article 5 § 1 (c) and Article 5 § 4 of the Convention.
On 3 September 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Tirana.
On 15 March 2008 a massive explosion occurred at a demilitarisation facility. The explosion claimed 26 lives. Two hundred and sixty-five other persons were either grievously or lightly wounded and a number of nearby buildings was heavily damaged. The demilitarisation process was carried out by a private commercial company, whose administrator the applicant was.
Following the explosion, the prosecutor started criminal proceedings against the applicant and 28 other persons.
On 17 March 2008 the applicant was remanded in custody. The District Court imposed no time-limits on the length of his detention. It appeared that he was suspected of having committed the criminal offences of murder in aggravating circumstances of more than two persons, destruction of property with explosives and breach of the rules on explosive, flammable or radioactive substances” contrary to Articles 79 (dh) and (ë), 152 and 282 of the Criminal Code.
On 13 March 2009 the prosecutor sent the case against the applicant and the other co-accused for examination to the Supreme Court, since one of the co-accused was a Member of Parliament (MP) as well as a Cabinet Minister.
On 22 May 2009 the Supreme Court decided to sever the proceedings against the MP, who also was a Cabinet Minister, from those against the applicant and the other co-accused.
On 11 June 2009 the case file against all co-accused, including the applicant, was registered with the Tirana District Court (“the District Court”) for examination.
On 19 July 2010 the applicant requested his release on the ground that the time-limits laid down by Articles 262 and 263 § 2 (c) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“CCP”) had expired. He argued that the prescribed time-limit started to run from 13 March 2009, the date on which the case was sent for examination to the Supreme Court.
On 23 July 2010 the Tirana District Court, in an interlocutory decision, rejected the request. It considered that, since the time-limit had started to run from 11 June 2009, the date on which the case file was registered at its registry and, since it had been stayed or prolonged on account of other interlocutory decisions, the time-limit had not yet expired.
On 6 August 2010 the Court of Appeal upheld the decision.
On 3 November 2010 the Supreme Court quashed both decisions. It reasoned that Article 263 of the CCP provided for three time-limits: the first running from the date of an accused’s arrest to the date the file is transferred to the first-instance court (Article 263 § 1 of the CCP); the second running from then to the date of delivery of the decision by that court (Article 263 § 2 of the CCP); and the third running from then to the date of delivery of the appellate court’s decision (Article 263 § 3 of the CCP). According to the Supreme Court, in the applicant’s case, the first time-limit ended on 13 March 2009 when the case was sent to the Supreme Court (Article 263 § 1 of the CCP). On that date, the second time-limit before the first-instance court began to run (Article 263 § 2 of the CCP), since the Supreme Court was hearing the case as a first-instance court, one of the co-accused being an MP and a Cabinet Minister. Even though the proceedings against the MP were disjoined from those against the applicant and other co-accused, the period between 13 March 2009 and 11 June 2009, the date on which the case file against the applicant was registered with the District Court, should be taken into account for the purposes of the time-limit prescribed by Article 263 § 2 of the CCP. The Supreme Court indicated that the time-limit set out in Article 265 of the CPP should be deducted from the running of the time-limit prescribed by Article 263, if the stay was attributed, inter alia, to one of the co-accused or his lawyer. For the above reasons, the Supreme Court remitted the case for re-hearing by a different bench.
On 25 November 2010 the applicant’s lawyer, relying on the Supreme Court’s decision of 3 November 2010, requested, in writing, the applicant’s release. He argued that his lawful pre-trial detention period had been exceeded by 81 days.
On 26 November 2010 the District Court rejected the request arguing that it had not been submitted in writing in accordance with the law. The applicant appealed.
On 17 December 2010 the Court of Appeal quashed the decision and remitted the case for a re-hearing by a different bench. It found that the District Court had failed to carry out any of the tasks delegated by the Supreme Court’s decision of 3 November 2010.
The applicant appealed on the ground that the Court of Appeal should have examined the case itself instead of delaying the proceedings.
On 27 January 2011 the Supreme Court rejected the appeal.
On 16 February 2011 the District Court discontinued the proceedings (pushimi i gjykimit) having regard to its decision of 7 February 2011 (see paragraph 25 below).
On 6 December 2010 the applicant’s lawyer lodged a second request for the applicant’s release on the ground that the time-limits laid down by Articles 262 and 263 § 2 (c) of the CCP had expired.
On the same day the District Court, in an interlocutory decision, rejected the request. It ruled that the time-limit had started to run from 11 June 2009, the date on which the case file was registered with it. It had been stayed for a period of 8 months and 12 days. Consequently, the District Court stated that there remained 2 months and 18 days of pre-trial detention until the expiry of the twelve-month time-limit as provided for by Article 263 § 2 (c). As regards the findings of the Supreme Court on 3 November 2010, the District Court stated that they were binding on the bench re-hearing the case and not on a court hearing a separate request for release.
On 7 February 2011 the applicant’s lawyer requested the applicant’s release on the ground that the time-limits laid down by Articles 262 and 263 § 2 (c) of the CCP had expired.
On the same day, in an interlocutory decision, the District Court ordered the applicant’s immediate release and his placement under house arrest in accordance with Article 266 § 1 of the CCP. No further reasons were given. The District Court relied on the Supreme Court decision of 2 February 2011 which had ordered the release of another co-accused who had been detained on the same day as the applicant, because the pre-trial detention time-limits, laid down in Article 263 § 2 (c), had expired (see paragraph 31 below). It accepted that the time-limit had started to run from 13 March 2009 and had exceeded the twelve-month period prescribed by law. The decision did not indicate the expiry date of the time-limit. The prosecutors appealed.
It would appear that the applicant was immediately placed under house arrest.
On 11 March 2011, following the prosecutor’s appeal, the Court of Appeal upheld the District Court’s decision.
On 9 May 2011, following the prosecutor’s appeal, the Supreme Court upheld the lower courts’ decision.
On 24 November 2010 the District Court rejected a co-accused’s request for release on the ground that the time-limit for his detention “pending trial” had expired. In interpreting article 263 § 2 (c) of the CCP, the District Court argued that the time-limit had started to run from 11 June 2009, the date when the case file was registered with its registry. It further held that the Supreme Court’s decision of 3 November 2010 was not binding on that bench (see paragraph 15 above).
On 17 December 2010 the Court of Appeal upheld the decision.
On 2 February 2011 the Supreme Court granted the co-accused’s appeal against the lower courts’ decisions. In interpreting Article 263 § 2 (c) of the CCP, the Supreme Court held that the period of detention “pending trial” had started to run on 13 March 2009, when the prosecutor had registered the case for examination with that court, which had examined it as a first-instance court in accordance with Article 75 (b) of the CCP.
The Supreme Court further referred to its decision of 3 November 2010, which had already directed the lower courts to calculate the period of detention “pending trial”, but had been disregarded by the District Court in that set of proceedings. The Supreme Court ordered the co-accused’s placement under house arrest.
On 12 March 2012, in a lengthy decision, the Tirana District Court found the applicant guilty of a “breach of the rules on explosive, flammable or radioactive substances” – contrary to Article 282 of the Criminal Code and sentenced him to 10 years’ imprisonment. All parties appealed.
On 13 February 2013 the Tirana Court of Appeal upheld the decision. However, it reduced the applicant’s sentence by one third on account of the use of the summary procedure.
The applicant’s appeal was rejected by the Supreme Court on 19 July 2013.
On 14 February 2013, in a letter about the execution of the sentence, the prosecutor’s office stated that the applicant’s pre-trial detention period from 17 March 2008 to 7 February 2011 was to be counted as a period of four years and four months’ imprisonment in accordance with the law. To that period, had to be added two years and six days, during which period the applicant had been under house arrest. In total, the applicant had served six years, four months and six days’ imprisonment. Consequently, the remaining sentence to be served by the applicant was three months and twenty-four days’ imprisonment.
On 18 March 2013 the District Court, having regard to the applicant’s good conduct, reduced his sentence by 70 days.
On 19 March 2013 the applicant was released from prison, having served the remainder of his sentence.
The relevant part of the Constitution reads as follows:
“Article 131
The Constitutional Court shall determine: ... (f) complaints by individuals alleging a violation of their constitutional rights to a fair hearing, provided all legal remedies for the protection of those rights have been exhausted.”
Article 75 (b) provides that the Supreme Court hears as a first-instance court cases concerning criminal offences committed by, inter alia, a Member of Parliament and a Cabinet Minister.
Under the CCP, personal security measures (masat e sigurimit personal) include restraint measures (masat shtrënguese) and prohibitive measures (masat ndaluese). Restraint measures include, inter alia, house arrest and detention (Article 232). A restraint measure is initially ordered by the prosecutor, to be subsequently approved by a court decision within forty-eight hours (Articles 244 and 258). Within ten days, the accused, his representative or the prosecutor may appeal against a restraint measure to a higher court (Articles 249 and 259).
The CCP distinguishes amongst three types of detention: the first being “pending the investigation”, that is, while the prosecutor’s office investigates the case. This period of detention runs from the accused’s arrest to the date the file is transferred to the first-instance court (or “the District Court”) (Article 263 § 1); the second being “pending trial” (or “during the trial”), that is, while the case is being tried by the first-instance court. This period of detention runs from the date the case file is registered with the first-instance court until the delivery of the first-instance court’s decision (Article 263 § 2); the third being “pending appeal” (or “during appeal”), that is, while the case is being heard on appeal. This detention period runs from the delivery of the first-instance court’s decision to the delivery of the appellate court’s decision (Article 263 § 3). In the event of a quashing of a final decision by a higher court, the time-limits, for the type of detention to which the case was remitted, start running (Article 263 § 4).
For the purpose of the present case, the period of detention “pending trial” ends if, from the date of the registration of the case with the first-instance court, twelve months expire without a decision being taken by the first-instance court, when criminal proceedings relate to offences which are liable to a punishment of between ten years’ and life imprisonment (Article 262 § 2 (c)).
Article 262 § 1 lays down that at the expiry of the detention, the court shall order the immediate release of the suspect or accused. However, the court may impose other security measures on an accused who has been released on account of the expiry of the time-limits, if the reasons for which pre-trial detention was ordered still exist (Article 266 § 1).
Article 265 provides for the staying of the running of time-limits for detention by court decision, which is appealable. A stay of the running of time-limits takes place when the judicial examination has been stayed or adjourned (a) on account of unjust actions or requests of the accused or his lawyer or (b) on account of non-appearance or departure of the accused’s lawyer (Article 265).
On 11 November 2003 the Supreme Court Joint Benches ruled that the overall length of pre-trial detention did not include the period during which the running of time-limits was stayed. In so far as relevant, according to the Supreme Court, the stay of the running of time-limits was to be decided by reason of the conduct of the accused and his representative and not on account of the conduct of the prosecutor or that of the court. The stay of the running of time-limits was to be explicitly reasoned in the interlocutory decision, which was open to appeal within a period of 10 days from its delivery or notification to the accused. The appeal did not stay the continuation of the trial.
Article 263 § 6 states that the overall length of pre-trial detention should not exceed three years when the proceedings relate to offences which are liable to a punishment of between ten years’ and life imprisonment.
Under Article 268 § 2 of the CCP a person who has been in pre-trial detention is entitled to compensation if, by way of a final decision, the decision ordering his detention did not comply with the requirements laid down in the CCP. According to Article 269 of the CCP a request for compensation must be made within three years from the date of the final decision.
The amount of compensation and its calculation are governed by the Compensation for Unlawful Detention Act (law no. 9381 of 28 April 2005).
On 24 March, 4 November and 22 November 2010 the Tirana District Court granted the claimants’ request for compensation for unjust imprisonment from the moment of their arrest until release (decisions nos. 2332, 8260 and 8841). In those cases, the claimants’ conviction and sentence were quashed by the Supreme Court, which further decided to discontinue the proceedings against them (pushimin e çështjes penale).