The case originated in three applications (nos. 3427/13, 74569/13 and 7157/14) against Bosnia and Herzegovina lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ms Zuhra Hadžimejlić, Mr Marcel Crepulja and Mr Esad Busovača (“the applicants”), on 5 September 2012, 12 October and 23 December 2013, respectively.
The applicants were represented by Vaša Prava, a local non-governmental organisation. The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Government”) were represented by their Deputy Agent, Ms Z. Ibrahimović.
The applicants complained of the lawfulness and lack of judicial review of their detention in the Drin social care home.
On 12 May 2014 the applications were communicated to the Government.
Third-party comments were received by the civil-society partnership PERSON project (Partnership to Ensure Reforms of Support in other Nations), which had been granted leave by the President to make written submissions to the Court (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
The applicants were born in 1959, 1978 and 1958, respectively, and are currently in the Drin social care home (“Drin”).
On 23 November 2006, at the request of the Visoko Social Work Centre, the Visoko Municipal Court deprived the applicant of legal capacity. It was established that she had been diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and that placement in a social care home would be in her best interest.
On 26 December 2006 the Visoko Social Work Centre placed the applicant under the guardianship of her sister.
On 23 January 2007 the Visoko Social Work Centre placed the applicant in Drin in accordance with the social care legislation.
On 13 June 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal concerning the lawfulness of her detention.
On 25 April 2013 the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Constitutional Court”) held that the applicant’s deprivation of liberty had not been “in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law” within the meaning of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention as she had been held in psychiatric detention without a decision of the competent civil court. It also found that Article 5 § 4 of the Convention had been breached because of lack of judicial review of the lawfulness of the applicant’s detention. The Constitutional Court ordered the Visoko Social Work Centre to take measures to ensure respect for the applicant’s rights under Article 5 §§ 1 and 4 of the Convention. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“27. The Constitutional Court recalls that it examined the same factual and legal situation in the decision no. AP 2472/11[...]. Therefore, instead of a separate legal analysis in this case, it refers to the reasoning set out in that decision...
As regards Article 5 § 1 of the European Convention...the Constitutional Court concluded that the appellant was placed in the social care home under the social care legislation of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the [Zenica-Doboj] Canton, which do not regulate the procedure for compulsory admission of mentally ill persons to social care homes. That procedure is regulated in the sections 22-42 of the Mental Health Act 2001. Section 41 of that Act prescribes that a mentally ill person released from a hospital, who is incapable of living on his/her own and has no relatives or others who are required by law to care for him/her, shall be placed in a social care home under the social care legislation of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, in that case, a hospital is under a duty to inform the competent court of such placement immediately... [I]t is evident from the case-file that the appellant was detained without a decision of the competent civil court...thus her initial deprivation of liberty was not in accordance with the Mental Health Act 2001... [T]herefore the court concludes that the deprivation of liberty in the appellant’s case was unlawful and thus in violation of Article 5 § 1(e) of the Convention.
...
In the above-mentioned decision, the Constitutional Court noted that the Federal and the Cantonal social care legislation, under which the appellant was placed in a social care home, do not envisage mandatory judicial control of the lawfulness of such placement...
...
There has been a violation of Article 5 § 1(e) of the Convention in the present case because the appellant was placed in the social care home under the Federal and Cantonal social care legislation, whereas the compulsory placement of mentally ill persons is regulated by the Mental Health Act 2001 which was not applied in this case. In view of that, her placement was not ‘lawful’. There has also been a violation of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention because the appellant’s placement and the prolongation of that placement was never examined by the competent court...”
On 3 June 2014 the Visoko Social Work Centre asked the Kiseljak Municipal Court to examine the necessity of the applicantʼs placement in Drin in accordance with the Mental Health Act 2001 and the Constitutional Courtʼs decision of 25 April 2013.
On 8 September 2014 the Kiseljak Municipal Court concluded, on the basis of the expert medical report, that the applicantʼs current state of health did not warrant continued confinment in Drin. That decision became final on 26 September 2014.
The applicant has not yet been released from Drin.
At the recommendation of the Psychiatric Clinic in Sarajevo where the applicant was treated for schizophrenia, on 15 September 2004 the Vareš Social Work Centre placed him in Drin in accordance with the social care legislation. It was established that his illness rendered him incapable of living on his own and that his family circumstances did not allow proper care at home.
On 25 March 2005 the Visoko Municipal Court deprived the applicant of his legal capacity.
On 21 April 2011 the applicant was placed under the guardianship of N.G., a director of the Vareš Social Work Centre.
On 2 September 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal concerning the lawfulness of his detention.
On 25 June 2013 the Constitutional Court held that the applicant’s deprivation of liberty had not been “in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law” within the meaning of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention as he had been held in psychiatric detention without a decision of the competent civil court. It also found that Article 5 § 4 of the Convention had been breached because of lack of judicial review of the lawfulness of the applicant’s detention. The Constitutional Court ordered the Vareš Social Work Centre to take measures to ensure respect for the applicant’s rights under Article 5 §§ 1 and 4 of the Convention and awarded him 3,000 convertible marks (BAM). The relevant part of the decision reads:
“34. The Constitutional Court recalls that it examined the same factual and legal situation in the decision no. AP 2472/11 [...]. Therefore, instead of a separate legal analysis in this case, it refers to the reasoning set out in that decision...
As regards Article 5 § 1 of the European Convention...the Constitutional Court concluded that the appellant was placed in the social care home under the social care legislation of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the [Zenica-Doboj] Canton, which do not regulate the procedure for compulsory admission of mentally ill persons to social care homes. That procedure is regulated in the sections 22-42 of the Mental Health Act 2001. Section 41 of that Act prescribes that a mentally ill person released from a hospital, who is incapable to live on his/her own and has no relatives or others who are required by law to care for him/her, shall be placed in a social care home under the social care legislation of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, in that case, a hospital is under a duty to inform the competent court of such placement immediately ... [I]t is evident from the case-file that the appellant was detained without a decision of the competent civil court...thus his initial deprivation of liberty had not been in accordance with the Mental Health Act 2001..[T]herefore the court concludes that the deprivation of liberty in the appellant’s case was unlawful and thus in violation of Article 5 § 1(e) of the Convention.
.. In the above-mentioned decision, the Constitutional Court noted that the Federal and the Cantonal social care legislation, under which the appellant was placed in a social care home, do not envisage mandatory judicial control of the lawfulness of such placement...
 37. Turning to the present case, the Constitutional Court notes that the appellant was placed in the social care home at the recommendation of the Psychiatric Clinic in Sarajevo...It was established that he had been diagnosed with SCH, F23, a condition which requires constant supervision and regular therapy which he cannot have at home in view of his family’s circumstances (a mother was also deprived of her legal capacity due to mental illness, a father’s whereabouts are unknown, and his sister is placed under guardianship)...The court further notes that since 2004, when the appellant was placed in the social care home, the Social Work Centre revised his placement on three occasions, at the recommendation of the relevant Ministry and with the consent of his guardian Ms N.G. However, those revisions were focused on the financial aspect of the appellant’s placement without any consideration for his health condition and a potential release. The fact that the Social Work Centre was the only domestic body which ever examined the appellant’s placement...raises issues under Article 5 §§ 1(e) and 4 of the Convention.
Furthemore, although under the Mental Health Act 2001 a decision about compulsory admission of mentally ill persons must be made by a court, the appellant’s case has never been examined by the competent court...
Accordingly, as regards “deprivation of liberty”, the placement in the social care home and the review of the lawfulness of such placement, the court concludes, in view of the facts of the case and the reasons set out in the decision no. AP 2472/11 of 31 January 2013, that there had been a violation of Article 5 §§ 1(e) and 4 of the Convention in the present case.”
On 25 September 2013 the applicant received BAM 3,000 awarded to him by the Constitutional Court.
On 29 November 2013 the Kiseljak Municipal Court concluded, on the basis of the expert medical report, that the applicantʼs current state of health did not warrant continued confinment in Drin.
On 18 March 2014 the Novi Travnik Cantonal Court upheld the decision of 29 November 2013 and it thus became final.
On 6 May 2014 the Vareš Social Work Centre informed the Visoko Municipal Court that it considered that the applicant’s continued placement in Drin was in his best interest for reasons of social protection.
 24.  The applicant had not yet been released from Drin.
In different intervals in 1997, 1998 and 1999 the applicant was treated for schizophrenia at the Psychiatric Clinic in Tuzla.
On 8 October 1999 the Tuzla Municipal Court deprived the applicant of his legal capacity.
On 8 December 1999 the Tuzla Social Work Centre placed him in Drin.
On 2 March 2000 the applicant was placed under the guardianship of A.B., his cousin. On 10 June 2010 he was placed under the guardianship of S.P., his sister.
Under the social care legislation of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, placement in a social care home is a social benefit attributed to mentally ill persons (Zakon o osnovama socijalne zaštite, zaštite civilnih žrtava rata i zaštite porodice sa djecom, Official Gazette of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (OG FBH) nos. 36/99, 54/04, 39/06 and 14/09, and Zakon o socijalnoj zaštiti, zaštiti civilnih žrtava rata i zaštiti porodice sa djecom, Official Gazette of the Zenica-Doboj Canton nos. 13/07 and 13/11). If the competent social work centre considers that the basic needs of a mentally ill person cannot otherwise be satisfied, it may place that person in a social care home. It may do so either of its own motion or at the request of the person concerned or his or her guardian. The decision is subject to appeal, but a legally incapable adult may lodge an appeal only through his or her guardian (see section 52 of the Administrative Procedure Act 1998, Zakon o upravnom postupku, OG FBH nos. 2/98 and 48/99). Persons placed in social care homes under the social care legislation of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina do not benefit from the procedural safeguards applicable to compulsory admission.
As regards compulsory admission, section 45 of the Non-contentious Proceedings Act 1998 (Zakon o vanparničnom postupku, OG FBH nos. 2/98, 39/04 and 73/05), prescribes that a court shall make a decision to detain a person with mental disorder in a health care institution if due to the nature of his or her illness it is necessary to restrict the freedom of movement or contacts with the outside world of such a person; the court will also decide to release such a person when the reasons for his or her confinement cease to exist. The psychiatric institution to which a person with a mental disorder was involuntarily admitted shall immediately, or within a maximum of 24 hours after the adoption of the decision on involuntary admission, directly or by means of electronic communication, inform the competent court about the involuntary admission and shall forward to that court the records of the medical examination together with the reasons for the involuntary admission. In its decision the court shall determine the duration of the involuntary admission which may not exceed one year (sections 27 and 33 of the Mental Health Act 2001; Zakon o zaštiti osoba sa duševnim smetnjama, OG FBH nos. 37/01 and 40/02).
.  The relevant part of the report on the visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina carried out from 19 to 30 March 2007 reads as follows:
“128. The placement of a resident in a social care home is proposed by the guardian of the person concerned (either the social work centre in which the resident is registered or a family member). A social work centre may request to place a resident in any of the social care homes in the country, whether they be in the Federation or the Republika Srpska. The determining factors are the availability of places and cost, as each social work centre must pay a monthly fee per resident.
The prerequisites for placing a resident in a social care home is that the person be deprived of their legal capacity (that is, declared mentally incompetent), as well as having a psychiatric disorder and/or mental disability and having completed any hospital treatment.
If these requirements (and certain others) are met, an internal commission of the social care home examines the application and decides whether or not to accept the person. This process does not involve any on-site investigation or interviews by the social care home. Upon admission, the social work centre or the family (whichever is the guardian), signs a contract with the social care home whereby, in return for a monthly fee, the home will care for and treat the resident. The social care home also undertakes to submit a yearly report to the guardian.
In the context of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the CPT considers that all decisions to place a person in a social care home involuntarily or at the instigation of a guardian should be notified to a court, with a view to seeking the court’s approval for the placement. Such a safeguard will represent a necessary element in the elaboration of a comprehensive legislative framework (see paragraph 110 above). The CPT recommends that the relevant authorities take the necessary steps to ensure that such a safeguard is introduced in respect of all new placements in social care homes in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The CPT is also concerned by the apparent lack of appropriate safeguards in place for persons who have been deprived of their legal capacity and subsequently placed in a social care home. The delegation met a number of residents in both homes, but particularly at ‘Drin’, who gave the impression of being competent. Yet there seemed to be no concerted efforts by the guardian or the relevant social work centre to find an alternative solution for these residents in the community. An independent review of each resident’s placement should be carried out at regular intervals, at which the resident should be offered the opportunity of expressing his/her views. The CPT recommends that the relevant authorities institute regular automatic reviews for residents placed in social care homes.
The yearly two-page reports drawn up for each resident at ‘Drin’ provided minimal information, although staff stated that they were always willing to draw up ad hoc reports on demand and to meet with the guardians, if requested. At Višegrad, even such reports were not produced. It was evident from interviews with staff, social workers and the director of a social work centre that, once a person was placed in a social care home, there was generally no further interest in their care and treatment. Consequently, it appeared that few family members or guardians from social work centres ever wrote, visited or manifested an interest in their wards. The CPT recommends that the relevant authorities encourage the social work centres to fulfil their supervisory duties properly.
Civil society can play a very important role in the lives of residents in social care homes, not least through their regular visits, which increase residents’ contact with the outside world. The CPT noted that at ‘Drin’, contacts with the outside world were being developed, whereas at Višegrad there appeared to be no contacts with non-governmental organisations. The CPT encourages both institutions to develop their links with outside organisations.
In this context, the CPT would also emphasise the importance it attaches to social care homes being visited on a frequent basis by an independent outside body empowered to formulate recommendations to the authorities on ways to improve the care and conditions afforded to residents. Visits by such a body - which could also be competent to receive complaints from residents, their families or their guardians - would, in the Committee’s view, constitute an important safeguard for residents at both social care homes. The CPT recommends that the relevant authorities explore the possibility of instituting such a system of visits by an independent body.
...
It would appear that no written information on residents’ rights was provided to residents or their guardians at either home, although preparations were underway at ‘Drin’ to produce an introductory brochure and a website.
The CPT recommends that an introductory brochure for residents and guardians be provided at all social care homes in Bosnia and Herzegovina, setting out each establishment’s routine and residents’ rights, including information about their right to lodge formal complaints and the modalities for doing so.
The delegation noted that all persons admitted to social care homes had their legal capacity removed by a court decision, and had a legal guardian appointed by the social work centre where they were registered. Most of the residents in the two social care homes visited were accommodated in locked wards or could apparently be restrained by the staff of the institution whenever it was considered necessary.
The procedures for the removal of legal capacity are the same in both Entities. The family of the person concerned or the relevant social work centre applies to the court for a decision on removal. A medical opinion on the person concerned is drawn up by a psychiatrist and submitted to the court, which holds a hearing to decide whether the legal capacity should be removed indefinitely or for a limited time period. The hearing is conducted in the presence of the initiator (family member or social work centre), a temporary guardian appointed by the social work centre and a representative of the social work centre, as well as the person concerned, if he or she is considered capable of understanding the proceedings. Further to a decision by the court, one of the parties may appeal the ruling within three days.
The CPT recommends that the relevant authorities take the necessary steps to ensure that all persons who are the subject of proceedings with a view to being deprived of their legal capacity are systematically:
- heard in person by the court;
- given a copy of the court decision;
- informed, verbally and in writing, of the possibility and modalities for appealing against a decision to deprive them of their legal capacity.
Within 30 days of the court’s decision, the social work centre should designate a permanent guardian, whose role should be to assist the person in regaining his/her mental capacity. It should be noted that once a person has had their legal capacity removed indefinitely by a court, there are no automatic reviews. The court may, upon its own motion or upon that of the person who initiated proceedings to have the legal capacity removed originally, examine whether to revoke its decision. However, cases involving indefinite removal of legal capacity were apparently never reconsidered in practice, and the delegation heard that discharge from a social care home occurred rarely and usually in the face of opposition from the social work centre concerned.
Moreover, it appeared that guardians frequently neglected their responsibilities towards their wards once they had signed a contract with a social care home, effectively granting blanket consent for all treatment and measures applied by the home. Further, the guardians, in general, made little effort to visit their wards or to scrutinise the care being offered.
The CPT recommends that the relevant authorities take the necessary steps to ensure that legal guardians fulfil their duties responsibly and in the interests of their wards.
In this context, the CPT would like to remind the relevant authorities of Recommendation Rec(99)4 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe to member States on Principles concerning the Legal Protection of Incapable Adults. This Recommendation contains 28 governing principles concerning guardianship. The CPT considers that an institute of guardianship based upon these principles would be balanced, fair and, above all, proportionate. The CPT recommends that the authorities incorporate the Council of Europe’s Principles concerning the Legal Protection of Incapable Adults into the national legal norms governing guardianship.”
.  In its subsequent visit, in 2011, the CPT noted that the procedures for the placement of a resident in a social care home remained unchanged (see document no. CPT/Inf (2012) 15, §§ 125-127). It particularly noted that recommendations concerning the introduction of judicial review of placement and of regular automatic reviews, from 2007 report, had not been implemented.
This Convention entered into force on 3 May 2008. Bosnia and Herzegovina signed in on 29 July 2009 and ratified on 12 March 2010. In its relevant parts, it provides:
Article 14
Liberty and security of person
“1. States Parties shall ensure that persons with disabilities, on an equal basis with others:
a) Enjoy the right to liberty and security of person;
b) Are not deprived of their liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily, and that any deprivation of liberty is in conformity with the law, and that the existence of a disability shall in no case justify a deprivation of liberty.
States Parties shall ensure that if persons with disabilities are deprived of their liberty through any process, they are, on an equal basis with others, entitled to guarantees in accordance with international human rights law and shall be treated in compliance with the objectives and principles of the present Convention, including by provision of reasonable accommodation.”
Article 19
Living independently and being included in the community
States Parties to the present Convention recognize the equal right of all persons with disabilities to live in the community, with choices equal to others, and shall take effective and appropriate measures to facilitate full enjoyment by persons with disabilities of this right and their full inclusion and participation in the community, including by ensuring that:
a) Persons with disabilities have the opportunity to choose their place of residence and where and with whom they live on an equal basis with others and are not obliged to live in a particular living arrangement;
b) Persons with disabilities have access to a range of in-home, residential and other community support services, including personal assistance necessary to support living and inclusion in the community, and to prevent isolation or segregation from the community;
c) Community services and facilities for the general population are available on an equal basis to persons with disabilities and are responsive to their needs.”
.  The relevant part of this Recommendation reads as follows:
“1. A person may be subject to involuntary placement only if all the following conditions are met:
the person has a mental disorder;
the person’s condition represents a significant risk of serious harm to his or her health or to other persons;
the placement includes a therapeutic purpose;
no less restrictive means of providing appropriate care are available;
the opinion of the person concerned has been taken into consideration.
...”