Following the final hearing in the criminal case concerning the mass disorder at Bolotnaya Square, some public gatherings took place in Moscow and St Petersburg in support of the persons convicted in that criminal case. The applicants participated in such gatherings. As a result, they were apprehended and convicted of administrative offences.
The applicants’ details are set out in the appended table.
The Government were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, then by Mr A. Fedorov, Head of the Office of the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 24 February 2014 the final hearing in the criminal case concerning the mass disorder at Bolotnaya Square in Moscow on 6 May 2012 took place at the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow. Seven participants in those events were sentenced to prison terms of two and a half years and four years. Those criminal proceedings were considered by many to be driven by political reasons. They attracted a lot of public and media attention. In the evening of 24 February 2014 public gatherings in support of the convicted activists took place at Tverskaya Street in Moscow and at Malaya Sadovaya Street in St Petersburg. The meetings had been advertised on social media. The authorities had not been notified of the gatherings.
The applicants took part in those public meetings. There is no information that the meetings turned violent. It follows from the available material that the protesters shouted political slogans, while the police warned them through megaphones that the gatherings had not been authorised and instructed them to disperse.
The applicants were apprehended and transferred to various police stations. On the dates stipulated in the appended table the applicants were convicted under Article 20.2 § 5 of the Code of Administrative Offences for breaching the procedure for the organisation or conduct of public gatherings. They were sentenced to fines ranging between 10,000 Russian roubles (RUB) and RUB 20,000 (see the appended table).
The applicant in application no. 3093/15 was convicted under Article 19.3 § 1 of the CAO for a refusal to obey a lawful order of a police officer, and was ordered to pay RUB 1,000. The domestic courts relied on the administrative record, the reports and explanations of the police officers. In particular, the courts considered it unlawful that the applicant in application no. 3093/15 shouted slogans and refused to stop participating in a public assembly in respect of which no advance notification had been submitted to the authorities.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law see Navalnyy v. Russia [GC] (nos. 29580/12 and 4 others, §§ 46-47, 15 November 2018).
The domestic legal provisions governing administrative transfer (escorting) and detention are also set out in the case of Butkevich v. Russia (see no. 5865/07, §§ 33-36, 13 February 2018).
According to Article 31.9 of the Code of Administrative Offences, if a decision imposing an administrative punishment is not enforced during two years from its entry into force, it can no longer be executed. The time when the enforcement of such a decision is suspended or stayed is excluded from the aforementioned period.
Appendix