The case originated in an application (no. 3094/09) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Ms Kadriye Özgüç (“the applicant”), on 7 January 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Erbil, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 19 November 2013 the Government were given notice of the complaint under Article 5 § 4 of the Convention about the non-communication of the public prosecutor’s written opinion to the applicant during the review proceedings of 18 June 2008 concerning her continued detention, as well as that under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (d) about the domestic court’s use of the statements made by an anonymous witness. The complaints under Articles 5 § 3 and 6 § 1 of the Convention concerning the length of the applicant’s continued detention and the criminal proceedings against her, as well as those under Article 5 § 4 of the Convention about the review proceedings of 24 March 2008 and the lack of a hearing during the review proceedings of 18 June 2008 were declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1985 and is detained in Kocaeli.
On 15 February 2007 a demonstration was held in Istanbul to protest the tenth anniversary of the arrest of Abdullah Öcalan, the leader of the PKK (the Workers’ Party of Kurdistan), an illegal organisation. During the demonstration, a bus got damaged. The report drawn up the same day noted that the windows of the bus had been broken by the stones and the Molotov cocktails thrown at it, and that there was broken glass in the bus due to the explosion.
The day after the demonstration, on 16 February 2007, an informant told the police that he had known two of the people who had taken part in the demonstration. He identified the applicant and a certain S.S. from the photographs shown to him by the police and noted that he had seen both of them throwing Molotov cocktails at a bus.
On 19 February 2007 a person, whose identity was kept confidential, made submissions to the police. He stated that he occasionally went to the local office of the DTP (Party for a Democratic Society) and had recognised the applicant, whom he had known by the name Kader, and S.S. when he had seen them at the demonstration held on 15 February 2007. He maintained that the two had held Molotov cocktails, which they had eventually thrown at the bus, and that the applicant had led the group of people involved in that event. On 5 March 2007 the same witness repeated his previous statements before the public prosecutor, noting that he had been the one who had initially informed the police about these two people. He also noted that the applicant and S.S., whom he had known from his neighbourhood and who were part of DTP’s youth branch, had asked him to join the demonstration.
On 8 March 2007 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of having organised an illegal demonstration and having caused damage to public property by throwing Molotov cocktails.
On 10 March 2007 the applicant was questioned by the Istanbul public prosecutor. She maintained that she had indeed taken part in the demonstration, however; denied any involvement in the subsequent events. She also challenged the statements of the anonymous witness.
On 10 March 2007 her statements were taken by the Istanbul Assize Court. During the hearing, the applicant and her co-accused, S.S., were read out their previous statements, as well as the statements given to the police by the anonymous witness. On the same day the applicant was placed in detention on remand.
On 26 March 2007 the Istanbul public prosecutor filed an indictment with the Assize Court, accusing the applicant of membership of an illegal organisation, namely the PKK. The applicant was also charged with two counts of possessing explosives, causing damage to public property, and contravening the Meetings and Demonstration Marches Act (Law no. 2911), in relation to her acts during the demonstrations held on 22 January 2006 and 15 February 2007, respectively.
At a hearing held on 4 July 2007 the applicant’s lawyer argued that the applicant was being charged solely on the basis of the statements made by the anonymous witness, which, according to him, was contrary to the principle of equality of arms. He requested the trial court to call the driver of the bus that got damaged on 15 February 2007 as a witness. The court granted that request.
During the hearing held on 31 October 2007 the Assize Court heard four witnesses, comprising three police officers and the bus driver concerned. The police officers stated that the anonymous witness had identified the applicant and S.S. from the photographs of the demonstrations. The bus driver noted that on the day of the events, several people had thrown stones at the bus, as a result of which its windows had got broken. He stated, however, that he could not identify any of the persons involved.
At the same hearing the applicant reiterated her statements before the public prosecutor. Her lawyer requested that the anonymous witness be heard in order for the applicant to cross-examine him. The court rejected that request.
At the next hearing held on 7 March 2008 the applicant’s lawyer challenged the accuracy of the anonymous witness’ statements again, arguing that the statements of the bus driver had refuted them.
On 16 May 2008 a certain R.S., described by the domestic authorities as a member of the PKK, made certain submissions to the police, stating the he knew the applicant as Kader and that she organised and actively took place in the illegal demonstrations held in support of the illegal organisation. He identified the applicant from the photographs shown to him by the police.
At a hearing held on 13 June 2008 the applicant’s lawyer stated that the applicant had attended the demonstration but that there was no evidence regarding her involvement in the ensuing events, except for the statements of the anonymous witness.
At the end of the hearing the Assize Court decided to hear the anonymous witness. The trial court noted that in the absence of the technical system foreseen under Article 58 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271), and in view of the anonymous witness’ concerns about his security, it would hear him during a closed hearing to be held on an unspecified date.
In that connection, the Assize Court invited the applicant and her co-accused to inform the court, within ten days, of the questions they would like to put to the anonymous witness, taking into account that the accused already knew the content of his previous statements. The applicant did not submit any questions.
On 2 September 2008 the Assize Court heard the anonymous witness. The trial court noted that after having had the witness sworn in, it put the information regarding the witness in a sealed envelope to be kept at the safe of the courthouse.
The witness stated that he was acquainted with the applicant and S.S. from his visits to the DTP’s local office. He maintained that when he had approached the group, who had been carrying out a demonstration on 15 February 2007, he had seen the applicant, whom he knew as Kader, and S.S. with their faces covered and with Molotov cocktails in their hands. He added that several people from the crowd, who had been led by the applicant, had thrown stones and Molotov cocktails at the bus. However, the bus had not got burned and only had had its windows broken. He noted that he had called the police when the group had dispersed.
The witness also identified the applicant and S.S. in the photographs shown to him.
In response to the seven questions prepared by S.S., put to the witness by the trial court, the witness responded, inter alia, that he wanted to keep his identity confidential for personal security reasons and that he had given his statements of his free will. He stated that the applicant and S.S. had covered only their mouths and noses with scarfs and that he could easily identify them as he knew them. The witness added that he thought he had noticed some other people he had been acquainted with but he could not identify them with certainty, as they had been further away.
The public prosecutor did not put any questions to the witness.
At the subsequent hearing on 12 November 2008 the statements of the anonymous witness were read out. The applicant and her lawyer contested those statements and their use by the trial court, arguing that the witness had made contradictory submissions and that they could not put questions to him as he had not been heard in their presence.
On 12 June 2009 the Istanbul Assize Court found the applicant guilty of membership of the PKK and causing damage to public property by using explosives during the events of both 22 January 2006 and 15 February 2007.
The domestic court sentenced her to seven years and six months’ imprisonment under Article 174(1) and (2) of the Criminal Code (Law no. 5237) for two counts of possessing explosives in relation to the activities of an illegal organisation, and five years’ imprisonment under Article 152(1)(a) for two counts of causing damage to public property. Lastly, it sentenced the applicant to six years and three months’ imprisonment on account of membership of an illegal organisation under Article 314(2) of Law no. 5237.
In finding the applicant guilty of the charges in relation to the demonstration held on 15 February 2007, the Assize Court relied on the scene-of-incident report regarding the events of that day (olay yeri görgü tespit tutanağı); the statements of the anonymous witness which it found to be consistent at all stages of the proceedings; the statements of R.S. identifying the applicant; the statements of the police officers and those of the bus driver. In response to the applicant’s arguments regarding the alleged contradiction between the statements of the anonymous witness and those of the bus driver, who had mentioned that stones had been thrown at the bus, the domestic court referred to the scene-of-incident report, which noted that a Molotov cocktail had exploded inside the bus, breaking its windows. It then found that the bus driver might not have noticed the Molotov cocktail in the heat of the events.
As for the events of 22 January 2006, the Assize Court relied on the statements of R.S. and the reports held by the police.
Lastly, in view of its previous findings, the court went on to sentence the applicant of being a member of the PKK.
On 25 September 2009 the applicant appealed against the judgment, arguing mainly that the Assize Court must have provided audio and video transmission while the anonymous witness made statements, as provided by Article 58 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. She contended that putting questions to the anonymous witness prior to giving oral evidence did not constitute a safeguard that could substitute the guarantees provided by the cross-examination of the witness. Lastly, she stated that the anonymous witness had made contradictory submissions.
On 10 May 2011 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment in so far as it concerned the applicant’s conviction of membership of an illegal organisation and possessing explosives on 15 February 2007. It upheld the sentence regarding the damage caused to public property by Molotov cocktails on that day with an amendment, reducing the sentence from imprisonment of two years and six months to one year and three months, as the bus had not got burned.
The appellate court quashed the sentence regarding the events of 22 January 2006, finding that there had not been sufficient evidence to prove that the applicant had possessed explosives or caused damage to public property on that day.
On 14 July 2011 three committal orders were issued by the public prosecutor’s office concerning the execution of the applicant’s sentence, which noted that she was sentenced to a total of eleven years and three months’ imprisonment.
On 7 October 2011 the Istanbul Assize Court acquitted the applicant of the charges related to the demonstration held on 22 January 2006.
At the end of each hearing, the Istanbul Assize Court considered the applicant’s pre-trial detention and ordered her continued detention pending trial, having regard to the nature of the offence with which she was charged, the existence of a strong suspicion that she had committed the offence and the state of the evidence. The court also examined the lawfulness of the detention between the hearings, of its own motion, on 25 September 2007, 10 February 2008, 7 April 2008, and 11 August 2008, respectively. In so doing, it did not hear either the applicant or her lawyer, but decided in the presence of the public prosecutor, after having examined his written opinions.
On two occasions the applicant objected to the Assize Court’s decisions regarding the applicant’s continued detention, which were given at the end of the hearings dated 7 March 2008 and 13 June 2008. In filing her objections, the applicant requested to have a copy of the public prosecutor’s written opinion served on her.
On 24 March 2008 and 18 June 2008, respectively, the Assize Court rejected the applicant’s objections on the basis of the grounds it had relied on previously. It examined the objections on the basis of the case-file and in the light of the public prosecutor’s written opinions, which were not served on the applicant or her lawyer.
A description of the relevant domestic law and practice regarding pre-trial detention can be found in Altınok v. Turkey (no. 31610/08, §§ 2832, 29 November 2011) and Ruşen Bayar v. Turkey (no. 25253/08, §§ 48-52, 19 February 2019).
A description of the provisions on witness protection and the use of anonymous witnesses can be found in Balta and Demir v. Turkey (no. 48628/12, §§ 24-5, 23 June 2015).