The case originated in an application (no. 56920/10) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Vitaliy Andreyevich Chenchevik (“the applicant”), on 30 September 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr G. Tokarev, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
On 7 December 2016 the Government were notified of the applicant’s complaints concerning his alleged ill-treatment in police custody and the lack of an effective investigation in that connection, his questioning by the investigator on 1 April 2010 and his handcuffing while at the hospital, the unlawful detention between 4 p.m. on 31 March 2010 and 1 a.m. on 1 April 2010, and the complaint concerning his absence from the court’s hearing on 2 and 9 April 2010. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 §3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
The applicant was born in 1975 and is detained in Kharkiv. He had had a number of criminal convictions in the past, including for drugs-related offences, and at the time of the events had been released on probation.
At about 2.30 p.m. on 31 March 2010 on the basis of information that the applicant had still been engaged in criminal activity, the police conducted a sting operation. In the course of the purchase, the applicant sold a psychotropic drug to a police agent. Following that, according to the applicant, he was approached by police officers and “invited” to follow them to the Zhovtnevy district police station in Kharkiv (“the police station”). The fact of the applicant’s selling the drug and his “arrest” in the course of the test purchase was reported by a police officer to the head of the police station, and an entry had been made in the police station logbook attesting that the applicant had been delivered to the police station at 3 p.m.
Following the applicant’s arrival at the police station a visual examination was performed in the presence of attesting witnesses, from 3 to3.15 p.m. according to the relevant records; money, which had been allegedly used as payment for the drugs was seized from the applicant. From 3.15 p.m. to 3.30 p.m. swabs of the applicant’s hands were taken, to reveal if he had touched the marked banknotes. The relevant records do not contain any entry suggesting that the applicant had any visible injuries at the time. Following that, when there was nobody in the room, the applicant left the police station, and took a taxi home. According to him, he did so as he had realised that the police officers had been falsifying evidence against him.
At about 4.30 p.m., according to the applicant, he was caught by the police near his place of residence and forcefully taken back to the police station. The relevant entry in the police station logbook, as referred to in the court’s decision of 23 April 2010 (see paragraph 24 below), suggests that the applicant arrived back to the police station at 7.30 p.m.
On the same day “explanations” were obtained from him in which he confessed to several episodes of drug trafficking and provided the details. He also stated in that document that he had no complaints against the police and that no physical or psychological coercion had been applied to him during his questioning. Neither the applicant’s formal status nor the time when the “explanations” were given is indicated in the document.
The applicant states that, once he had been brought to the police station for the second time, three police officers had firstly handcuffed him to a chair and beaten him. They had then made him lie down on the floor with his face down and for about ten minutes, kicking and beating him severely in an attempt to force him to confess to having manufactured and sold drugs and as a punishment for his escape. As a result, he had sustained serious injuries which had been later recorded at the hospital (see paragraph 14 below). As he had been unable to bear the pain, the applicant had signed documents attesting to his involvement in drug trafficking, including the “explanations” referred to in the preceding paragraph.
At an unspecified time on the same day criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant in connection with the manufacture and sale of drugs. No copy of the relevant decision has been made available to the Court.
From 12.25 to 12.45 a.m. on 1 April 2010 the police drew up an arrest report according to which the applicant had been arrested by an investigator at 12.25 a.m. on 1 April 2010 on the basis of Article 115 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1960 (“the CCP”) and that he was suspected of having sold drugs. When signing the report, the applicant stated in writing that he had not committed any crime and that he wished to be assisted by a lawyer. The case file further suggests that the applicant refused to give any evidence in the absence of a lawyer.
Following that, the applicant was transferred to a temporary detention facility (“the ITT”) but his admission was refused by the ITT administration and he was returned to the police station. According to the applicant, his admission was refused because of his injuries. The authorities suggested that this had been because the applicant had complained about his state of health.
At about 5 a.m. on 1 April 2010 police officers on duty called an ambulance, and at around 6 a.m. the applicant was taken to the Kharkiv emergency hospital (“the hospital”). According to the available medical records, the applicant complained both to the emergency team and at the hospital that he had been beaten by the police some twelve hours before his arrival there. His medical examination at the hospital established that he had a fracture of his ninth and tenth ribs on the left side, chest trauma, and a head injury. He was also diagnosed with pneumothorax, for which he twice underwent surgery that same morning. The applicant remained in hospital for inpatient treatment until 13 April 2010. According to him, he was handcuffed to his bed at almost all times and was constantly guarded by three police officers.
Still on 1 April 2010, within several hours of surgery the applicant was visited by the investigator in the criminal case against him and from 4.40 to 6.10 p.m. he was questioned as a suspect. Before the questioning he had been apprised of his procedural rights and waived his right to legal assistance as he wished to defend himself in person. During questioning, the applicant confirmed his self-incriminating statements made earlier to the police. He further submitted that his injuries had been caused by accidently falling on the stairs next to a pharmacy while being drunk, apparently on 31 March 2010. According to the applicant, he was forced to make all the above statements and to waive his right to legal assistance, as earlier on that day he had been visited by a police officer who had ill-treated him. The officer had demanded that the applicant confirm his self-incriminating statements to the investigator and threatened him with further physical harm in the event of his refusal to “cooperate” with the police.
On 2 April 2010 the applicant made a written statement to the head of the police station attesting that he had no complaints against the police officers as the injury for which he had been taken to the hospital had been self-inflicted following “a fall”. He provided no details in this connection and submitted that neither physical force nor psychological pressure had been applied to him by the police. In his subsequent complaint to the prosecutor’s office and in his submissions to the Court the applicant asserted that he had been forced to make such a statement by the same police officer who had visited him the day before.
On the same date the police applied to the Oktyabrskiy District Court in Kharkiv (“the District Court”) for the applicant’s continued detention for two months. The District Court examined the application on the same day and decided not to apply a preventive measure at that stage. It noted that further information about the applicant and the relevant circumstances were necessary in order to duly decide on the investigator’s request. In view of this, and given the fact that the applicant was undergoing medical treatment in hospital, the District Court extended the applicant’s police custody to ten days.
On 9 April 2010, while the applicant was still in hospital, he was questioned by the investigator as an accused. The applicant denied his guilt and refused to give any evidence unless represented by a lawyer. Having noted that the applicant was undergoing post-traumatic treatment and was unable to adequately judge reality, the investigator allowed the applicant’s request for legal assistance. On the same day a lawyer, V., was admitted to the proceedings.
Also on the same date, the investigator applied to the District Court for the applicant’s detention to be ordered as a preventive measure. The applicant informed the District Court in writing that he was still undergoing inpatient treatment at the hospital and requested that the term of his police custody be extended. Later on the same date, in the presence of the prosecutor and his lawyer, V., the District Court decided not to apply a preventive measure but extended the term of the applicant’s police custody to fifteen days. This decision was not subject to appeal.
According to the applicant’s submissions, shortly after his admission to the proceedings, V. visited him in hospital. He took pictures of the applicant showing him handcuffed to his bed and that he had a number of injuries, including large bruises on his hip and arms. Those pictures were made available to the investigating authorities during their examination of the applicant’s complaint of ill-treatment (see paragraph 30 below) and to the Court.
On 15 April 2010, in the presence of the prosecutor, the applicant and his lawyer, the District Court ordered the applicant’s detention on the grounds that he posed a danger to society and was liable to reoffend.
On 17 April 2010 the applicant was taken to the temporary detention centre (“the SIZO”) in Kharkiv.
On 19 April 2010 the applicant’s lawyer complained to the District Court that the applicant’s detention from the moment of his actual arrest until the drawing up the arrest report by the investigator had been unlawful.
On 23 April 2010 the District Court rejected the above complaint as unsubstantiated. It established, inter alia, that at about 3 p.m. on 31 March 2010 the applicant had been taken to the police station with a view to obtaining his “explanations” with regard to his selling drugs. Once the necessary checks had been conducted, the investigator concluded at 12.25 a.m. on 1 April 2010 that there were grounds for the applicant’s formal arrest as a suspect. The District Court noted that it was the investigator’s right and not obligation to arrest a person, and that he had the right to do so also after the necessary investigative steps had been performed and the relevant circumstances clarified, provided that there were grounds set forth in Article 106 of the CCP for taking such a decision. It was further established by the District Court, on the basis of the police station logbook, that the applicant had arrived at the police premises at 3 p.m. on 31 March 2010 to give a statement; that he had deliberately left the police premises; and that on 7.30 p.m. had again been taken to the police station with a view to obtaining the “explanations”. It thus concluded that starting from 3.30 p.m. his freedom of movement had not been limited in any way, and that he had been effectively deprived of his liberty at 12.25 a.m. on 1 April 2010 by the investigator’s decision. The applicant did not appeal against that decision.
Since 27 August 2010 the applicant has been represented by Mr G. Tokarev, who replaced V.
On 18 October 2011 the applicant was released from detention under an undertaking not to abscond.
On 4 November 2013, after the applicant’s criminal case had been returned to the investigator several times for additional investigation, the proceedings against him were terminated. Because changes had been made to the official list of substances whose circulation was restricted, the applicant was no longer considered to have committed a crime.
On 12 April 2010 the applicant’s lawyer, V., complained to the Kharkiv regional police force of the unlawful detention of the applicant on 31 March 2010 and his ill-treatment by the police on the same date. He requested, inter alia, that the applicant be given a forensic medical examination in order to record his injuries and establish their origin and that the material relevant to those allegations be separated from the case file with a view to their examination by a prosecutor.
On 14 April 2010 the investigator granted the lawyer’s request in the part which concerned ordering the forensic medical examination of the applicant and rejected the reminder of his claim, having noted that no data as to the circumstances in which the applicant had sustained the injuries had been available to the investigating authorities because the applicant had refused to give any evidence.
On 15 and 16 April 2010 the applicant’s mother and his lawyer, acting on his behalf, lodged a criminal complaint with the Oktyabrskiy district prosecutor’s office in respect of the applicant’s ill-treatment by the police on 31 March 2010. The photos of the applicant’s injuries, taken at the hospital by his lawyer, were enclosed with the lawyer’s complaint.
On 30 April 2010 the investigator in the applicant’s criminal case ordered a forensic medical examination of the applicant following his request (see paragraph 28 above) and put the following questions before the expert: did the applicant sustain any injuries and, if so, what were their nature, place and origin? What was the date of infliction of the injuries? Could the injuries have been sustained as a result of a traffic accident? Could the injuries have been self-inflicted by falling on the stairs? What had been the applicant’s body position when he sustained the injuries? How serious had the injuries been? The applicant’s medical file and his criminal case file were made available to the expert.
On 5 May 2010 the prosecutor ordered a forensic medical examination of the applicant aimed at answering the following questions: Had the applicant sustained any injury? If so, how serious had the injuries been and what had been their nature, location, date of infliction and origin? Could the injuries have been sustained in the circumstances and in the period indicated by the applicant?
The forensic medical examination under the above-mentioned investigator’s and prosecutor’s orders was performed by the expert on the basis of the case file and lasted from 25 to 28 May 2010 (see paragraph 36 below).
In the meantime, the prosecutor questioned the applicant, the police officers involved in the alleged ill-treatment and those on duty on 31 March, and an attesting witness who had been present at the police station during the visual inspection of the applicant and the sample-taking (see paragraph 7 above). The applicant maintained that he had been ill-treated by the police. He provided his account of events, and submitted that all his statements to the contrary had been given under police duress. The officers denied any use of physical force or psychological pressure against the applicant at the police station. Two officers submitted that, when apprehending the applicant after his escape from the police station, one of them had applied a combat technic, an armlock, and had put handcuffs on the applicant. The attesting witness submitted that the applicant had not raised any complaint in respect of his state of health during his inspection at the police station.
On 14 May 2010 the prosecutor refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers in view of the lack of constituent elements of a crime in their actions. He cited the testimonies of the police officers and the attesting witness, and the written statement which the applicant had made to the police on 2 April 2010 (see paragraph 16 above). The prosecutor’s also noted that no information had been available as to the applicant’s injuries as the forensic medical examination was pending.
On 28 May 2010 the expert D. delivered two reports (no. 2283-aя/10 and no. 2284-aя/10) in which he submitted that he had not been in a position to answer the investigator’s and prosecutor’s questions (see paragraphs 31 and 32 above) on the basis of the available material. According to him, the applicant’s medical file did not suggest that he had any visible injury; the existence of the head injury recorded at the hospital was not confirmed by objective forensic medical data; it appeared impossible to make any conclusion as to the chest injury as the available X-ray scans were of low quality and could not be assessed. The expert suggested that it would be possible to answer the relevant questions once a control X-ray examination of the applicant’s chest had been performed.
On the same date the applicant underwent an X-ray examination and another forensic medical examination was ordered by the investigator in the applicant’s criminal case to answer the same questions as those which had been put in her order of 30 April 2010 (see paragraph 31 above).
On 6 July 2010 the expert D. issued a report (2604-ая/10) in which, on the basis of the X-ray image of the applicant’s chest of 28 May 2010, he diagnosed the applicant with a healed fracture of the ninth rib. The tenth rib area had not been covered by the picture and no assessment in this connection had been made by the expert accordingly. The expert concluded that the rib fracture could have originated from a blunt firm object on the date referred to in the investigator’s request. He stated that the possibility that the injury had been caused by falling on the stairs could not be excluded. The expert further reiterated that the existence of the applicant’s head injury had not been confirmed in the course of his examination and that he had been prevented by the low quality of the available X-ray scans from assessing whether the applicant had had a chest trauma, as recorded at the hospital. Lastly, he submitted that it had been impossible to reply to the second and fourth questions of the investigator (see paragraph 31 above) because of the lack of objective forensic medical data.
On 29 March 2011, following the applicant’s complaint, the prosecutor’s decision of 14 May 2010 not to institute criminal proceedings was annulled by a senior prosecutor as premature and incomplete.
On 5 April 2011 the prosecutor again refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers. In addition to the police officers’ statements, he referred to a statement of a taxi driver who had allegedly driven the applicant home after he had left the police station on 31 March 2010. According to the prosecutor, the driver submitted that before getting into the taxi the applicant had fallen down on the road and hit the left side of his chest. He further cited the conclusions of the forensic report of 28 May 2010 (see paragraph 36 above).
On 2 September 2011, the District Court annulled the above decision of the prosecutor as premature and ordered that an additional forensic medical examination be conducted, which had to include an examination of the applicant in person and a control X-ray being performed.
On 6 October 2011, following the District Court’s instructions, the prosecutor ordered an additional forensic medical examination. The expert was required to answer the question of what the nature and degree of severity of the applicant’s bodily injuries had been. The examination was carried out from 13 to 19 October 2011 on the basis of the applicant’s medical file, without the applicant’s participation (see paragraph 44 below).
In the meantime, on 7 October 2011, the prosecutor again refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers on similar grounds to those in his decision of 5 April 2011.
On 19 October 2011 an additional forensic medical report (5194ая/11) was delivered by the expert D., which to a major extent reiterated the conclusions of the report of 6 July 2010 (see paragraph 38 above).
On 19 December 2011 the supervising prosecutor quashed the prosecutor’s decision of 7 October 2011 as premature and unlawful. He ordered that the expert’s conclusion regarding the nature and degree of severity of the applicant’s injuries be obtained and joined to the case file. On the same day the prosecutor put an additional question to the forensic medical expert, specifically whether the applicant could have sustained his injuries as a result of his falling down the concrete stairs while being drunk as he had stated to the investigator on 1 April 2010 (see paragraph 15 above). The additional forensic examination was conducted from 30 December 2011 to 30 January 2012 (see paragraph 47 below).
In the meantime, on 29 December 2011, the prosecutor again refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers on the same grounds as before.
On 30 January 2012 the forensic expert D. issued an additional report (no. 6688-ая/11) in which he reiterated his previous conclusion that the applicant had suffered a fracture on the left-side ninth rib and that this injury could have been caused by a blunt firm object at the time indicated in the prosecutor’s request for additional examination. The expert submitted that the location of the ninth-rib fracture could not exclude the possibility that the injury could have resulted from a fall on the stairs.
On 2 March 2012 the prosecutor’s refusal of 29 December 2011 to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers was quashed by the supervising prosecutor. He found the investigation that had been conducted incomprehensive and its conclusions premature. Additional questioning of possible witnesses was ordered.
On 12 March 2012 having noted that it appeared impossible to question witnesses because of their failure to appear, the prosecutor delivered another refusal to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers. This decision was quashed on 28 May 2012 as premature and illfounded.
On 7 June 2012, having additionally questioned several police officers and having noted that it appeared impossible to question other witnesses, the prosecutor refused to institute the criminal proceedings against the police officers. This decision was not appealed against by the applicant.
The relevant part of Article 29 of the Constitution reads:
“... In the event of an urgent necessity to prevent or stop a crime, bodies authorised by law may hold a person in custody as a temporary preventive measure, the reasonable grounds for which shall be verified by a court within seventy-two hours. The detained person shall be released immediately if, within seventy-two hours of the moment of detention, he or she has not been provided with a reasoned court decision in respect of the detention. ...
Everyone who has been detained has the right to challenge his or her detention in court at any time. ...”
Relevant provisions of this Code provided:
Article 106. Arrest of a suspect by a body of inquiry
“The body of inquiry shall only be entitled to arrest a person suspected of a criminal offence for which a penalty in the form of deprivation of liberty may be imposed on one of the following grounds:
(1)  if the person is discovered whilst or immediately after committing an offence;
(2)  if eyewitnesses, including victims, directly identify this person as the one who committed the offence;
(3)  if clear traces of the offence are found either on the body of the suspect, or on his clothing, or with him, or in his home.
If there is other information giving rise to grounds for suspecting a person of a criminal offence, a body of inquiry may arrest that person if the latter attempts to flee, or does not have a permanent place of residence, or if the identity of that person has not been established. ...”
Article 115. Arrest of a suspect by an investigator
“An investigator may arrest ... a person suspected of having committed a crime in accordance with the procedure provided for in [Article] 106 ... of the Code. ...”