The case originated in an application (no. 16761/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Wieńczysław Mamełka (“the applicant”), on 10 April 2007.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained about a delay of seven days in his release from prison following the domestic court’s decision granting him conditional release.
On 15 June 2009 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Łódź.
The applicant was serving a prison sentence in Potulice Prison. The overall term of his imprisonment was due to come to an end on 26 May 2007.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Criminal Code, applicable to persons found guilty of offences committed while acting as members of an organised criminal group, the applicant became eligible for early conditional release (warunkowe przedterminowe zwolnienie) after having served threequarters of the overall term of his imprisonment, namely on 12 July 2006. After that date, the applicant requested a court on several occasions to grant him conditional release. However, his requests were denied.
On 11 January 2007 the  (Sąd Okręgowy) gave a decision ordering the applicant’s early conditional release for a two-year probationary period. It placed the applicant under the supervision of a court officer and imposed certain other obligations on him.
On 19 February 2007 the Gdańsk Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) upheld the decision of the .
On 20 February 2007 the applicant was served with a copy of the Gdańsk Court of Appeal’s decision.
According to the official release certificate, the applicant was released on 26 February 2007.
Article 41 § 1 of the Polish Constitution provides as follows:
“Inviolability and liberty of the person shall be afforded to everyone. Any deprivation or limitation of liberty may be imposed only in accordance with the principles and procedures laid down by statute.”
Article 77 § 1 of the 1997 Criminal Code reads as follows:
“The court may conditionally release a person serving a prison sentence from serving the remainder of that sentence only when his/her behaviour, characteristics, personal circumstances and way of life prior to the commission of the offence, the circumstances in which the offence was committed and his/her behaviour following the commission of the offence and while serving a sentence, would justify a conclusion that, following [conditional] release, the person would abide by the law and, in particular, would not re-offend.”
Article 78 §§ 1-3 of the Criminal Code prescribes the minimum prison term, depending on the type of sentence and offender, which must be served before a convicted person may apply for conditional release. However, the decision to grant conditional release is left to the discretion of the court, which must be satisfied that the conditions laid down in Article 77 § 1 of the Criminal Code are met.
When conditional release is granted, a convicted person should be released on completion of the necessary administrative formalities as specified in the Ordinance (Zarządzenie) of the Minister of Justice of 27 August 1998 on Administrative Acts concerning Execution of Pre-Trial Detention and Sentences and Coercive Measures resulting in Deprivation of Liberty.
Paragraph 3 of that Ordinance states, in so far as relevant:
“All administrative formalities shall be carried out without delay (niezwłocznie) ... This concerns in particular (...) transmission of information and official notifications ... and releasing.”
Paragraph 104.2 of the Ordinance provides that the convicted person should be released upon receipt of a copy of the enforceable decision granting him or her conditional release. The release should be effected on the day of the receipt of the relevant documents by the prison (§ 104.3 of the Ordinance).
The Ordinance does not prescribe any specific time-frame for the execution of the decisions granting conditional release.
In its decision of 4 October 2011 setting out its observations on the lacunae in the Regulation of 13 January 2004 on Administrative Acts concerning Execution of Pre-Trial Detention and Sentences and Coercive Measures resulting in Deprivation of Liberty, the Constitutional Court indicated the need to take appropriate legislative measures to tackle the problem of delay in the release of detainees from custody.
 The  considered that the existing regulations did not guarantee the prompt release of a detainee following a court decision. In particular, it maintained that the obligation to deliver to the penitentiary facility the original of a court warrant in respect of a detainee’s release from custody was no longer justified in the light of the development of information and communications technologies.
 The  further observed that the current situation was incompatible both with the provisions of the Constitution and the European Convention on Human Rights. In particular, the Constitutional Court made reference to the Court’s judgments in the cases of Gębura v. Poland, no. 63131/00, 6 March 2007 and Ladent v. Poland, no. 11036/03, 18 March 2008, where the Court underlined that the right to liberty imposes on the authorities a duty to eliminate organisational shortcomings attributable to the State which may give rise to unjustified deprivation of liberty.