The case originated in an application (no. 33529/11) against the Republic of Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Gábor Nagy (“the applicant”), on 27 May 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Varga, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicant complained in particular that his detention on remand had been unjustified and lasted an unreasonably long time. He relied on Article 5 § 1 and Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (b) and (c) of the Convention. Furthermore, he complained under Article 5 § 4 that the principle of “equality of arms” had not been respected when he had been challenging his detention.
On 21 November 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1990 and lives in Budapest.
On 4 December 2010 the applicant and his alleged accomplice were apprehended by the police.
On 6 December 2010 the applicant’s pre-trial detention was ordered by the Pest Central District Court on charges of multiple thefts by breaking into three cars and attempting to break in a fourth (all committed in one day, in the approximate value of altogether 400 euros), for fear of repetition of crime under section 129 (2) of the Criminal Procedure Code. In its reasoning the court noted that the applicant did not have a job or any other income and that the criminal acts allegedly committed were of serial nature.
The applicant was present at this hearing without his public defender attending.
On 14 December 2010 the Budapest Regional Court, acting as a second-instance court, dismissed his appeal, reiterating that the applicant was unemployed without income and adding that no less restrictive measure could be applied.
On 20 December 2010 the applicant applied for release, arguing that the courts had not specified any facts supporting the perceived risk of repetition of crime. He submitted documents showing that he was about to be employed and that his mother was willing to pay for his living expenses until his salary became available. He also referred to the fact that he had no criminal record.
On 12 January 2011 the Pest Central District Court refused the release application, without hearing the applicant or refuting the applicant’s arguments for his release. It repeated, in a rather stereotyped manner, that the serial nature of the crimes allegedly committed by the applicant and his financial circumstances gave rise to the risk of repetition of crime.
On 22 February 2011 the Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal, without holding a hearing.
All these proceedings took place entirely in writing.
Meanwhile the prosecution requested the prolongation of the applicant’s detention but did not inform his lawyer of this motion. On 28 December 2010 the prolongation was ordered until 6 March 2011, without hearing the applicant. In these proceedings the findings of the court remained the same, namely that the applicant not having either an employment or any income would reoffend, that is, continue with the serial crime he was accused of. Simultaneously, a further application for release submitted by the applicant’s alleged accomplice was dismissed.
On 19 January 2011 the Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the prolongation order, without the applicant attending; the court was satisfied that the applicant’s unemployment and the serial nature of the alleged criminal acts justified his continued detention on remand.
A further prolongation request was processed by the District Court on 3 March 2011. Although this time the defence had been notified, the court did not await its observations on prolongation, and maintained the applicant’s detention, in essence relying on the grounds previously quoted.
However, the applicant successfully appealed and was released on 13 April 2011. The Regional Court noted that the applicant’s financial situation was secured, pointed out that the mere fact that a suspect was unemployed did not establish the risk of repetition of crime, especially since he had no previous criminal record, and, moreover, that several counts of larceny committed in one day did not qualify as serial crime.
Act no. XIX of 1998 on the Code of Criminal Procedure provides as follows:
“(2) Pre-trial detention of a defendant may take place in a procedure related to a criminal offence punishable by imprisonment, and only under the following conditions: ...
b) if, owing to the risk of escaping or absconding, or for other reasons, there is reasonable cause to believe that the presence of the defendant in procedural actions cannot be otherwise ensured,
c) if there is reasonable cause to believe that if left at liberty, the defendant would frustrate, obstruct or jeopardise the taking of evidence, especially by means of influencing or intimidating witnesses, or by the destruction, falsification or secretion of physical evidence or documents, ...
d) if there is reasonable cause to believe that if left at liberty, the defendant would accomplish the attempted or planned criminal offence or commit another criminal offence punishable by imprisonment.”
“(2) Instead of pre-trial detention, the court may impose a home detention, house arrest or restriction order.”
“(1) Pre-trial detention ordered prior to filing the indictment may continue up to the decision of the court of first instance during the preparations for the trial, but may never be longer than one month. The pre-trial detention may be extended by the investigating judge by three months at the most on each occasion, but the overall period may still not exceed one year after the order of pre-trial detention. Thereafter, pre-trial detention may be extended by the county court acting as a single judge by two months at the most on each occasion, in compliance with the procedural rules pertaining to investigating judges.”
“(1) The court shall examine the motion to terminate the pre-trial detention in its merit, and deliver a reasoned decision thereon. Repeated motions may be rejected by the court without substantial justification, unless the defendant or the counsel for the defendant invokes new circumstances.”
“(3) At the [court] session, the [prosecution] having submitted the motion [on ordering or prolonging pre-trial detention] shall present the evidence substantiating the motion in writing or orally. Those present shall be granted the opportunity to examine – within the limits set forth in section 186 – the evidence ... If a notified party does not attend the session but submitted observations in writing, this document shall be presented by the investigating judge.
(4) The investigating judge shall examine whether the statutory requirements related to the motion have been met, whether there are any obstacles to the criminal proceedings and whether the motion is substantiated beyond reasonable doubt. In the cases specified in Sections 210 (1) a) to d) this examination shall also extend to the personal circumstances of the suspect.”
“(1) Unless provided otherwise in this Act, the investigating judge shall deliver a ruling with the explanation of the reasons within three days following the submission of the motion, in which he consents – either wholly or partially – to the motion or rejects the motion. The explanation shall include the substance of the motion, the brief description and classification of the criminal offence underlying the procedure and state whether the statutory requirements related to the motion exist or are absent. If the investigating judge rejects the motion, the motion may not be repeated on identical grounds.”
“(1) A decision of the investigating judge may be appealed by all those parties who have been notified thereof. Any appeal against a decision notified by way of oral pronouncement shall be lodged [orally] immediately after the pronouncement. ...
(5) Regardless of an appeal, the order for a coercive measure entailing the restriction on deprivation of personal freedom may be executed [at once].”