On the dates indicated in the appended table the applicants participated in political demonstrations. They were arrested at the venue of the demonstrations and subsequently convicted of an administrative offence.
The applicants’ details are set out in the appended table.
The Government were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, then by Mr A. Fedorov, Head of the Office of the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On the dates indicated in the appended table the applicants participated in political demonstrations. They were apprehended at the venue of the demonstrations and transferred to the police stations in Moscow where the relevant administrative records were drawn up. The administrative offence records were based on the reports and explanations of the police officers who had arrested the applicants. The first applicant (Mr Akhunov) was released several hours later, while the second applicant (Mr Nemuchinskiy) remained in detention until the court hearing the next day.
On the dates stipulated in the appended table the applicants were convicted under the Code of Administrative Offences (the CAO). The first applicant (Mr Akhunov) was convicted under Article 20.2 § 5 of the CAO (violating the established procedure for the conduct of a public assembly) and ordered to pay a fine of 10,000 Russian roubles. The second applicant (Mr Nemuchinskiy) was convicted under Article 19.3 § 1 of the CAO (refusal to obey the lawful order of a police officer). He was sentenced to administrative imprisonment of fifteen days (see the appended table). The domestic courts relied on the administrative records and the reports and explanations of the police officers. In particular, the courts considered unlawful that the applicants had shouted slogans and had participated in a public assembly in respect of which no advance notification had been submitted to the authorities.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law see Navalnyy v. Russia [GC] (nos. 29580/12 and 4 others, §§ 46-47, 15 November 2018).
The domestic legal provisions governing administrative transfer (escorting) and detention are also set out in the case of Butkevich v. Russia (see no. 5865/07, §§ 33-36, 13 February 2018).
According to Article 31.9 of the Code of Administrative Offences, if a decision imposing an administrative punishment is not enforced within two years from its entry into force, it can no longer be executed. The time when enforcement of such a decision is suspended or stayed is excluded from the aforementioned period.