The case originated in two applications (nos. 33707/14 and 3762/15) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Russian nationals, Mr Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Rubtsov and Mr Gagik Borikovich Balayan (“the applicants”), on 21 April 2014 and 18 February 2015 respectively.
The applicants were represented by lawyers practising in Moscow, Mr F.S. Shishov and Mr D.R. Kevorkov respectively. The Russian Government ("the Government") were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicants complained under Article 5 § 1 of the Convention that their detention had been unlawful. The first applicant also complained under Article 5 § 3 of the Convention that he had been held in pre-trial detention and under house arrest without relevant and sufficient reasons.
On 2 June 2016 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remaining parts of the applications were declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants were born in 1965 and 1966 respectively and live in Moscow.
The applicant, who was one of the indirect beneficial owners of a company, arranged for it to be sold to another company. On 1 October 2013 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of fraud through the execution of a sham sales contract. It was alleged, in particular, that the company purchasing the applicant’s company also belonged to the applicant and the price it paid had been unrealistically low. On 3 October 2013 the Taganskiy District Court of Moscow (“the Taganskiy District Court”) held a hearing to determine a preventive measure in respect of the applicant. The latter argued that he should not be detained by reliance on Article 108 § 1.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”), which prohibits the remanding in custody of people suspected or accused of offences committed within the sphere of their business activities. The Taganskiy District Court dismissed that argument in the following terms:
“... [the applicant] is suspected of having committed a serious offence aimed at making a profit which was unconnected to any business activity and had been organised by a group of people; [the offence being] punishable with up to ten years’ imprisonment, some of the accomplices have not yet been identified and arrested.”
On 21 October 2013 the Moscow City Court upheld the detention order.
On 28 November 2013 and 27 January 2014 the Taganskiy District Court extended the applicant’s detention, repeating its previous findings. On 27 December 2013 and 18 April 2014 respectively the Moscow City Court upheld the above detention extensions on appeal.
On 28 March 2014 the Ostankinskiy District Court of Moscow (“the Ostankinskiy District Court”) further extended the applicant’s detention. As regards Article 108 § 1.1 of the CCrP, the District Court stated as follows:
“The court dismisses the arguments of the defence and of [the applicant] himself that the offence of which he is accused was committed within the sphere of his business activity because, according to the current bill of indictment, he is accused of having committed an offence motivated by profit with the aim of misappropriating another’s property by way of deception or abuse of trust, using an organised group, and on a particularly large scale. The court therefore concludes that the offence imputed to [the applicant] was not connected to the carrying out of a business activity, which is an independent activity undertaken at one’s own risk with the aim of obtaining regular revenues from the use of possessions, the sale of goods, or the performance of works or services by people registered in such a capacity in accordance with the law.”
On 14 May 2014 the Moscow City Court upheld on appeal the detention extension order of 28 March 2014. It held that the first-instance court had examined and dismissed with proper substantiation the applicant’s argument that his alleged offence had been committed within the sphere of his business activity.
On 10 April 2015 the Moscow City Court granted bail to the applicant. Upon deposit of the bail sum on 17 April 2015 the applicant was released.
On 15 September 2014 a criminal investigation was opened into the misappropriation of the funds of an insolvent bank. On 23 September 2014 the applicant, who owned the bank, was arrested on suspicion of having transferred money out of the bank’s account by acquiring unsecured promissory notes.
On 25 September 2014 the Tverskoy District Court of Moscow (“the Tverskoy District Court”) authorised the applicant’s detention. The applicant argued that he should not be detained, inter alia, because he was suspected of an offence committed within the sphere of his business activity. The Tverskoy District Court rejected the argument as follows:
“... the court takes the view that, as can be seen from the evidence in the case, the method and circumstances described in the decision to initiate the criminal investigation, and the actions of [the applicant] in misappropriating the funds in this case are not related to [a business] activity as defined in Article 2 § 1 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation”.
On 10 November 2014 the Moscow City Court upheld the detention order on appeal. The Moscow City Court dismissed the applicant’s argument that his alleged offences had been committed within the sphere of his business activity. In particular, the Moscow City Court held as follows:
“... the action of committing an offence by using another’s funds and taking on obligations to the Bank’s clients without any intention to comply with them, cannot be considered to be a business activity.”
Under Article 108 § 1, detention on remand could be ordered by a court in respect of people suspected or accused of having committed a criminal offence punishable by more than three years’ imprisonment, provided that it was not possible to apply a less restrictive preventive measure. People suspected or accused of having committed a criminal offence punishable by shorter terms of imprisonment could still be remanded in custody in exceptional circumstances, notably if they had no permanent place of residence, if their identity had not been established, or if they had breached a previously imposed preventive measure or had absconded.
On 9 April 2010 a new Article 108 § 1.1 entered into force:
 “1.1. The preventive measure of detention on remand shall not be applied to a person suspected or accused of having committed offences set down in Articles 159 [fraud], 160 [misappropriation of funds], 165 [causing of pecuniary damage by way of deception or abuse of trust] [of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation], if these offences have been committed within the sphere of that person’s business activity, [...] and none of the [exceptional] circumstances indicated in [...Article 108] § 1 [...] is present.”
Since 29 November 2012 an amendment to Article 108 § 1.1 has been in force which also includes people suspected or accused of the various types of fraud introduced by new Articles 159.1-159.6 of the Criminal Code.
By Ruling no. 15 of 10 June 2010 the Plenary of the Supreme Court of Russia amended its earlier Ruling no. 22 of 29 October 2009 “On the Practice of the Application by the Courts of Preventive Measures in the Form of Detention on Remand, Bail and House Arrest”. In particular, it added the following paragraph:
“4.1. [...] the offences laid down by Articles 159, 160 and 165 of the Criminal Code of Russia should be considered as having been committed within the sphere of business activity if they were committed by people carrying out a business activity or participating in a business activity and the offences were directly related to that activity.
In determining whether an activity is a business activity, the courts should be guided by Article 2 § 1 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, according to which a business activity is an independent activity carried out at one’s own risk with the aim of obtaining regular revenues from the use of possessions, the sale of goods, or the performance of works or services by people registered in such a capacity in accordance with the law.”
On 19 December 2013 the Plenary of the Supreme Court issued a new ruling (no. 41) “On the Practice of the Application by the Courts of Preventive Measures in the Form of Detention on Remand, Bail and House Arrest”. The new ruling repealed the previous ones (see paragraph 18 above) and held as follows:
“7.  ... when deciding on the question of the detention on remand of a person suspected or accused of offences set down in Articles 159-159.6, 160 and 165 of the CCRF, a court should always establish the sphere of activity in which the offence was committed. [...]
In determining whether an activity is a business activity, the courts should be guided by Article 2 § 1 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, according to which a business activity is an independent activity carried out at one’s own risk with the aim of obtaining regular revenues from the use of possessions, the sale of goods, or the performance of works or services by people registered in such a capacity in accordance with the law.
[...] the offences set down in Articles 159-159.6, 160 and 165 of the CCRF should be considered as having been committed within the sphere of a business activity if they have been committed by a person carrying out a business activity independently or participating in the business activity of a legal entity, and the offences are directly connected with the said activity. Such people include individual businessmen who commit the offences while carrying out their business activity or managing their possessions used for the performance of the business activity, as well as members of the management of a commercial company while using their powers to direct the company or while the company is carrying out its business activity.”
On 15 November 2016 the Plenary of the Supreme Court issued Ruling no. 48 “On the Practice of the Application by the Courts of Legal Provisions Regulating Criminal Liability for Offences Committed in the Sphere of Business and Economic Activities”. The Plenary of the Supreme Court reiterated that when the national courts were to rule on the detention on remand of a person suspected or accused of offences set down in Articles 159 §§1-4, 159.1-159.3, 159.5, 159.6, 160 and 165 of the CCRF, they should always have determined whether or not the offence had been committed within the sphere of a business activity.
In its review of 18 January 2017 of the national courts’ practice as regards the application of preventive measures, the Plenary of the Supreme Court stressed the courts’ obligation to establish whether or not the offence had been committed within the sphere of a business activity. The Plenary of the Supreme Court noted that the national courts had not always provided reasons for their finding that a particular offence had not been committed within the sphere of a business activity. The Plenary of the Supreme Court further mentioned that sometimes the national courts had ignored the defence arguments on the matter, which had led to the unlawful placement in custody of people who should not have been detained and even to extensions of the detention of such people.
By its Ruling no. 33 of 3 October 2017, the Plenary of the Supreme Court again brought to the attention of the national courts the need to assess in detail all the arguments and supporting evidence relating to offences allegedly committed in the business sphere and the applicability of Article 108 § 1.1 of the CCrP.