The case originated in an application (no. 10914/11) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Birol Güner (“the applicant”), on 8 November 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr H.H. Erdoğan, a lawyer practising in Ankara. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 12 March 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in Istanbul.
.  The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
.  On 22 December 2009 the Ankara Magistrates’ Court decided to restrict access to the investigation file in accordance with Article 153 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (the “CCP”), Law no. 5271
.  On 9 February 2010 the applicant was arrested and taken into custody on suspicion of forming a criminal organisation and fraudulent use of credit cards.
.  On 11 February 2010 the applicant’s statement was taken by the police in the presence of his lawyer and he was questioned at length about his telephone conversations that had been intercepted. The police read out the transcripts of the intercepted conversations, and the applicant did not deny that he had had these conversations but claimed that they did not prove that he was guilty.
.  On 12 February 2010 the investigating judge questioned the applicant in the presence of his lawyer. The applicant denied that he was involved in a criminal organisation and submitted that the intercepted calls did not prove that he was guilty. The investigating judge ordered the applicant’s detention on remand taking into account the strong suspicion that he had committed the alleged offence, the risk of absconding and tampering with evidence as well as the risk of coercing some of the witnesses and victims.
On various dates the applicant requested his release pending trial. These requests were dismissed by the courts, having regard to the nature of the offence with which the applicant was charged, the existence of a strong suspicion that the applicant had committed the offence in question, the state of the evidence, the risk of absconding and tampering with evidence as well as the time spent in detention. The applicant objected to these decisions. By decisions of 22 April 2010 and 20 October 2010 the appeal courts, without holding a hearing, rejected the applicant’s objections based on the information contained in the case file.
.  Upon his application, on 19 January 2011, the 26th Chamber of Ankara Criminal Court ordered the applicant’s release having regard to the time he spent in detention.
.  Article 153 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271) reads:
“1.  The defence counsel may examine the full content of the investigation file and may take copies of the documents free of charge.
Upon the request of the public prosecutor, the judge may order a restriction on access to the investigation file, should he considers that the outcome of the ongoing investigation could be jeopardised.”
Under Articles 5 § 3 and 6 of the Convention, the applicant complained of not being able to appear before the courts when his pretrial detention was reviewed and lack of an effective remedy to challenge the lawfulness of his detention on account of the restriction placed on his access to the investigation file.