The case originated in an application (no. 46196/11) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Ms Viktoriya Gennadiyevna Smilyanskaya (“the applicant”), on 15 July 2011.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was initially represented by Ms Y. Zaikina, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. She was succeeded by Ms N. Okhotnikova, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, under Article 3 of the Convention, that the material conditions of her detention had been poor and that adequate medical treatment had not been available to her in detention. She also complained, under Article 5 of the Convention, that her pre-trial detention had been arbitrary, that the relevant court decisions had lacked reasoning, and that there had been no effective procedure available to her to challenge the lawfulness of her detention and receive compensation for the above violations.
On 4 April 2018 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Kharkiv.
On 13 January 2011 a criminal investigation was instituted against the applicant, who was suspected of being involved in the illegal purchase, storage, and trafficking of drugs.
On 17 January 2011 she was arrested within the framework of the above investigation and placed in police custody. The investigator drew up a report on her arrest, making a general reference to Article 106 § 2 and Article 115 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 20 January 2011 the Kyivskyi District Court of Kharkiv (“the District Court”) extended the applicant’s police custody to ten days with a view to obtaining an assessment of her personality.
On 27 January 2011 it ordered her detention for two months. The decision stated that she had been accused of a serious crime and could otherwise escape and hinder the investigation or continue with her criminal activity. No further details about those reasons were provided by the court.
On 16 March, 27 April, and 16 May 2011 the applicant applied for release. The District Court further extended her detention for three, four, and five months respectively. Its decisions stated that she had been accused of a serious crime and that no other reasons which could justify changing the preventive measure had been presented to the court.
On 16 March and 27 April 2011 the District Court, when considering whether to extend the applicant’s detention, dismissed her requests for release. No explanation was provided in its decisions. According to the applicant, her request for release of 16 May 2011 remained unanswered by the court.
On an unspecified date (presumably in June 2011) the criminal case against the applicant, together with the relevant bill of indictment, was transferred to the District Court for consideration on the merits.
On 1 November 2011 the court, having regard to the applicant’s state of health, released her on an undertaking not to abscond. In the course of the proceedings the District Court found that the applicant needed treatment at a specialist medical facility.
According to the Government, the criminal case against the applicant is currently ongoing before the trial court.
According to the applicant, on 2 February 2011 she was placed in the Kharkiv Pre-trial Detention Centre (“the SIZO”).
She was kept in cell no. 412 (from 2 February to 27 July 2011 and from 12 August to 1 November 2011) and in cell no. 409 (from 1 to 12 August 2011). Cell no. 412 measured 52.1 sq. m in total and housed twelve detainees, while cell no. 409 measured 18.1 sq. m in total and housed twenty-two detainees.
The cells were damp and lacked ventilation. Most detainees smoked and the applicant, an asthma sufferer, experienced breathing difficulties. Outside walks lasted between ten to thirty minutes per day in a small yard measuring between 7 and 10 sq. m. The sanitary facilities were in the same space as the living area, and were not fully partitioned. Nutrition was poor and hygiene conditions were inadequate. Detainees did not have sufficient access to hot water and were allowed to shower only once or sometimes twice per week. An artificial light was switched on in the cells day and night.
Despite numerous requests to the SIZO and prosecution authorities, the applicant’s conditions of detention did not improve and she was not transferred to a cell with non-smokers. Similarly, she was not provided with appropriate nutrition. In written complaints of 10 and 21 February, 5 March, 4 and 10 August 2011 the applicant informed the SIZO authorities about the continued deterioration of her health, in particular that she was suffering from breathlessness, headaches, weakness and a persistent cough. She asked to be transferred to a cell with non-smokers.
The applicant submitted copies of written statements given by Ms Sh., a former detainee who had allegedly shared cell no. 412 with her between 11 May and 24 June 2011, and by Ms T., a former SIZO officer. They both confirmed the applicant’s description of the conditions of her detention.
According to the material in the case file, the applicant has suffered from asthma since 1980.
On the morning of 17 January 2011, while still at liberty, she suffered a major asthma attack and was admitted to the Kharkiv City Hospital for treatment. That evening, after her state of health had improved, she was discharged and left the hospital accompanied by police officers, who then arrested her.
On 20 February 2011 the applicant complained to the Prosecutor General’s Office that she had not been receiving asthma treatment in the SIZO.
On 17 March 2011 the investigator dealing with the applicant’s criminal case ordered a forensic examination with a view to establishing her state of health and the possibility of her being provided with the relevant medical treatment at the SIZO.
According to the results of the forensic examination of 6 April 2011, the applicant suffered from step 4 asthma (the most severe form), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema, pulmonary insufficiency, pneumonosclerosis and chronic cor pulmonale. The forensic expert concluded that she should be examined at a specialist lung clinic outside the SIZO.
On 4 and 10 August and 5, 8, 15, 18 and 28 October 2011 the applicant asked the SIZO administration to provide her with asthma treatment.
According to the applicant, she was not given a medical examination or treatment while in custody and her applications sent to the Prosecutor General’s Office and SIZO administration remained unanswered.
The Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Punishment or Treatment (CPT) from 29 November to 6 December 2011 (CPT/Inf (2012) 30) reads as follows:
“43. The delegation gained a generally positive impression of the material conditions in the units for juveniles at the [SIZO] in ... Kharkiv.
However, conditions of detention were quite simply appalling in many of the other detention units of the [SIZO]. Numerous cells were in a poor state of repair and had only very limited access to natural light. In addition, the CPT is concerned about the severe overcrowding observed in a number of detention units of [the facility]. At the time of the visit, the ... Kharkiv SIZO [accommodated] 3,415 prisoners (official capacity: 2,808 places).”