The case concerns inadequate medical aid in detention, handcuffing, conditions of detention and transport, unlawful and unjustified pre-trial detention, review of detention, length of proceedings and restricted access to a lawyer.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lived, before his arrest, in Krasnoyarsk.
The Government were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 5 August 2007 the applicant was arrested in Krasnoyarsk on suspicion of drug trafficking and detained in Krasnoyarsk remand prison no. 1 (IZ-24/1).
On an unspecified date eight individuals, including the applicant, were charged with thirteen counts of drug trafficking in an organised group.
On 22 September 2008 the investigation was completed and the prosecution submitted the case for trial to the Sovetskiy District Court of Krasnoyarsk (the “District Court”).
Between 28 September 2008 and 2 October 2009 the Sovetskiy District Court held several hearings in the criminal case.
On seven occasions (15 October 2009, 25, 26 and 30 November 2009 and 1, 2 and 3 December 2009) the applicant was transferred from the remand prison to the District Court, in order to ensure his participation in hearings.
On 15 April 2010 the District Court studied the evidence collected in the criminal case. The defence asked the court to call several experts and witnesses and to order an additional chemical examination. The court rejected the requests.
On 27 April 2010 the applicant was again transferred from the remand prison to the courthouse. He was not called to the courtroom. It is unclear whether a hearing took place on that date.
On 4 June 2010 the District Court held a hearing.
After 16 August 2010 several hearings were scheduled and then adjourned, because the applicant was ill.
On 30 September 2010 proceedings against the applicant were suspended until his recovery.
On 30 November 2010 the District Court held a hearing but had to interrupt it because the applicant was suffering from a hypertensive crisis. The trial was adjourned, on account of the applicant’s inability to take part in the proceedings.
On 12 January 2011 the District Court found that the applicant was unfit to stand trial and decided to adjourn the trial until his state of health improved.
On 21 January 2011 the District Court resumed the examination of the criminal case with reference to a medical certificate of 18 January 2011 by which the applicant was declared fit to stand trial.
On 24, 26 and 28 January and 8, 10 and 28 February 2011 the hearings were adjourned because the applicant was unable to participate owing to his medical condition.
On 3 March 2011 the District Court held a hearing in the applicant’s presence.
On 14 March 2011 the examination of the case was adjourned because the applicant’s health had deteriorated.
On 18 April 2011 the District Court convicted the applicant as charged.
On 28 February 2012 the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court upheld the conviction on appeal.
On 7 August 2012 the Presidium of the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court quashed the conviction by way of a supervisory review at the applicant’s request. The court remitted the case to the trial court for a fresh examination and ordered the applicant’s release from detention against an undertaking not to leave the town.
The applicant remained in detention from 7 to 16 August 2012 when he was released.
On 21 August 2012 the applicant’s case was remitted to the trial court.
On 16 March 2015 the District Court convicted the applicant of several drug offences and sentenced him to ten years and six months’ imprisonment. The measure of restraint in respect of the applicant was accordingly changed to detention. On the same date he was placed in remand prison IZ-24/1.
On 18 June 2015 the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court upheld the conviction on appeal.
On 2 November 2015 the applicant claimed compensation for the excessive length of the criminal proceedings against him.
On 25 February 2016 a single judge of the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court dismissed the claim. The applicant appealed, arguing that the court had failed to assess his submissions and had incorrectly applied domestic law and the Convention.
On 22 June 2016 the Administrative Chamber of the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court upheld the decision on appeal. The court established that the proceedings had begun on 5 August 2007 and ended on 18 June 2015; they had thus lasted seven years, six months and fifteen days. The case had been complex, had involved several co-accused, had concerned multiple counts of drug deals and had required the examination of numerous witnesses. Several hearings had been adjourned either owing to the applicant’s poor state of health or at the request of the defence, because the defendants or lawyers had fallen ill, they had been participating in different proceedings, or on other grounds. There had been no significant periods of inaction attributable to the authorities.
On 10 October 2016 the applicant lodged a cassation appeal with the Presidium of the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court.
On 8 November 2016 a judge of the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court rejected the application, having found no grounds to reopen the case.
It follows from a medical certificate of 11 October 2007 issued by the medical unit of the Krasnoyarsk Regional Department of the State Service for Drug Control that in 2004 the applicant had suffered from eye contusion. Since 2003 he had suffered from “hypertonic type neurocirculatory dystonia”. In 2004 he was diagnosed with chronic cholecystitis.
In August 2007 he developed hypertonic disease in addition to the previously diagnosed illnesses.
On 4 June 2010 the applicant attended a hearing. He was handcuffed to a steel wire. At 5.55 p.m. he lost consciousness in the courtroom and collapsed on the floor. He rapidly developed cyanosis and oedema. His pupils were fairly dilated and there was no light reflex. His heartbeat became irregular and his breathing difficult.
The public asked the judge to remove the handcuffs from the applicant. The judge left the courtroom without giving any instructions to the escorting officers and was absent for about twenty minutes. An ambulance was called in the meantime. A doctor sitting in the public gallery rushed to help the applicant. Throughout that time the applicant remained handcuffed.
Twenty minutes later an ambulance arrived. The escorting officers did not allow the applicant to be transferred to a civilian hospital, arguing that he had to be examined first by prison doctors. After about forty minutes of negotiation with the head of the security department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the applicant was placed in the ambulance.
The ambulance took the applicant to the remand prison and remained at the entrance to the remand prison for about one hour. The prison authorities refused to accept the applicant on account of his serious condition and insisted on his urgent transfer to a hospital. He was then transferred to the town hospital.
At 8.05 p.m. on 4 June 2010 the applicant arrived at the town hospital. He had to walk from the ambulance to the admissions room. He was handcuffed to a wheel chair during examination.
From 4 to 8 June 2010 the escorting officers had restricted the doctors’ and his lawyer’s access to him. On those dates he was constantly handcuffed to a radiator or a bed. The escorting officers were present during all medical examinations except for invasive procedures.
On 7 June 2010 the applicant was diagnosed with a subarachnoidtype cerebral haemorrhage.
On 8 June 2010 the applicant had a meeting with his lawyer.
On 10 June 2010 doctors at the town hospital examined the applicant and found that he ran a risk of suffering a repeated stroke. His condition required brain surgery. The doctors concluded that the required medical treatment could not be ensured in IZ-24/1.
On 15 June 2010 the applicant underwent brain surgery. Afterwards he was placed in the hospital convalescence unit and for several hours received artificial respiration.
An escorting officer was constantly present at the unit, and the applicant remained handcuffed until his discharge from the hospital. He submitted photographs depicting him handcuffed to a radiator in a hospital room.
On 17 June 2010 the hospital doctors informed the applicant’s lawyer that the applicant was suffering from a cerebral aneurism. The experts described his condition as severe and specified that he would need three to four weeks of post-operational rehabilitation treatment in a specialised institution.
According to an extract from the applicant’s medical record of 9 July 2010 issued by the town hospital at the request of the applicant’s lawyer, during the post-operation period the applicant suffered from complications but the doctors assessed the applicant’s state of health as “satisfactory”.
On 9 July 2010 the applicant was discharged from the hospital.
On 9 July 2010 the applicant was transferred from the town hospital to the prison hospital in an ordinary prison van, not in an ambulance, and he was not accompanied by a doctor. He had to walk from the town hospital to the prison van and carry his belongings. He did not receive any assistance from the escorting officers.
From 9 July 2010 until an unspecified date, the applicant received inpatient treatment in the prison hospital.
On 28 July 2010 the applicant was additionally diagnosed with leftside “pyramid” insufficiency.
On 16 August 2010 the applicant was discharged from the prison hospital and sent back to remand prison IZ-24/1.
As from 16 August 2010 the applicant received medical treatment in the medical unit of remand prison.
During a hearing on 20 September 2010 the applicant’s condition worsened. On 27 September 2010 the remand prison officers informed the District Court that the applicant was unable to attend the hearings on account of his poor state of health.
From 27 September to 12 October 2010 the applicant received neurological treatment in the prison hospital.
On 30 November 2010 the applicant was transferred to the courthouse to participate in a hearing. He suffered from a hypertensive crisis at the courtroom and was taken back to the remand prison.
On 2 December 2010 the applicant was admitted to the prison hospital for examination and neurological treatment.
On 3 December 2010 the head of the remand prison sent the trial court a certificate which read as follows:
“In view of the hypertensive crises [the applicant has had] during the court hearings despite his relatively stable state of health in the remand prison, and taking into account that there is a significant risk of his developing complications following those hypertensive crises, possibly a repeated stroke and death, [the applicant] will no longer be transferred for the hearings.”
On an unspecified date a medical panel found that the applicant had a disability of an unspecified category.
On 18 January 2011 the prison hospital informed the District Court that the applicant’s medical condition had stabilised as a result of inpatient treatment and that he was again able to participate in the examination of the case.
On 20 January 2011 the applicant was sent back to the remand prison.
By a separate decision of 3 March 2011 the Sovetskiy District Court rejected the lawyer’s request for the applicant’s specialist examination. Referring to certificates sent by the medical unit of the remand prison, it found that the applicant’s condition had “normalised”, no complaints had been received from him and his blood pressure was normal.
According to the latest medical certificate issued by the remand prison medical unit dated 3 March 2011, the applicant was suffering from a cerebral aneurism and third-degree hypertension. He was able to stand trial on condition that “the duration of hearings and the psycho emotional burden on the applicant were limited”.
On 20 April 2011, after in-patient treatment, the applicant was examined by a medical commission which concluded that there were no medical grounds for his release from the prison.
Since then, the applicant has been subjected to various medical examinations and treatments, including, neurological treatment, blood tests and magnetic resonance imaging.
The applicant was handcuffed to a steel wire in the courtroom during public hearings of his case at the Sovetskiy District Court.
The applicant was usually taken out of the remand prison to attend court hearings early in the morning, before 6 a.m., and was taken back after midnight. No warm food was provided during the transfers. While the detainees were being transferred, he was kept with several other persons in a small space in a prison van. The prison vans were unsuitable for transporting prisoners because of overcrowding and the lack of artificial and natural ventilation or toilet facilities. It was extremely cold in the vans in winter. On several occasions the applicant shared the space in the van with other detainees suffering from tuberculosis.
The transfers usually took about four hours a day: two for delivery of the detainees and two for collection and the return journey. The distance between remand prison IZ-24/1 and the District Court was about 7 kilometres.
While waiting for a hearing, between court sessions or while waiting for other detainees after the hearing, the applicant was kept for hours in an unventilated cell in the courthouse together with up to twenty other prisoners and five to seven escorting officers. On several occasions he was detained in the same cell as Ms T., who suffered from tuberculosis. On several occasions the applicant was put in a tight cell measuring less than 2 square metres, where he had to await being called to the judge. No warm food or toilet facilities were provided in the holding cells.
The applicant was transported to the District Court in adequately lit vans with natural ventilation. At the court he was held in a cell measuring 5.25 square metres without windows or a toilet and with artificial lighting and compulsory ventilation.
On 9 July 2010 the applicant was transferred from the town hospital to the prison hospital.
He was transported in an ordinary prison van and not in an ambulance. He was not accompanied by a doctor. He had to walk from the town hospital to the prison van and carry his belongings. He received no assistance from the escorting officers.
The applicant’s transfer from the town hospital to the prison hospital was carried out in line with legal requirements and the applicant did not complain of any violations of his rights during the transfer.
Between 16 March and 6 June 2015 the applicant was detained in overcrowded cells in IZ-24/1. During that period, the inmates had only 1.5 square metres of personal space. His cell was situated near a kennel and the inmates had to listen to dogs barking twenty-four hours a day and were unable to sleep. They were allowed to take a shower once a week. Sometimes they were unable to shower, as they could not regulate the temperature of the water in the shower room. There was no ventilation or access to fresh air. There was no water at night. The food was of poor quality.
The applicant was detained from 17 March to 6 July 2015 in IZ 24/1 in cell no. 79 measuring 19.2 square metres with one or four inmates; there was a table, benches and other furniture in the cell, artificial and natural ventilation, and adequate sanitary facilities. The applicant had daily onehour walks.
Between 6 July and 8 August 2015 the applicant underwent inpatient treatment in the prison hospital. He had to share a room measuring 20 square metres with eleven inmates. Two of them were allegedly suffering from acute schizophrenia and three from epilepsy. The room, which was not equipped with a toilet, was constantly locked, and the applicant was able to leave it only two or three times a day.
On 8 August 2015 the applicant was transferred to Irkutsk correctional colony no. IK-3.
The applicant was detained together with three other inmates in the prison hospital between 6 July and 8 August 2015 in room no. 5, measuring 20.8 square metres. There were four sleeping places in the room; the room was equipped with artificial and natural ventilation, lighting and heating devices. There was a sanitary facility with five toilet bowls, which was separated from the main hospital premises. The inmates had three meals a day and access to a shower every week. The hospital premises were in line with the sanitary standards.
On 5 August 2007 the applicant was arrested and the Kirovskiy District Court of Krasnoyarsk ordered his pre-trial detention pending investigation.
Thereafter the applicant’s pre-trial detention was extended several times. He applied for early release but his applications were dismissed by the courts. The courts used the same stereotyped formula when extending his detention, stating in particular that the applicant (1) was suspected of serious crimes, (2) might abscond, (3) might put pressure on witnesses, or (4) might interfere with the investigation.
On 20 September 2010 at the request of the prosecution the Sovetskiy District Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 21 December 2010. The applicant was not present, but his lawyer attended the hearing.
On 14 October 2010 the applicant received a copy of the decision of 20 September 2010. On an unspecified date the applicant’s lawyer appealed against the extension. He argued, in particular, that the first-instance court had decided on the extension in the applicant’s absence, the applicant had not been notified of the examination of his case in a timely manner, and he had been unable to study the court decision until 14 October 2010.
On 23 November 2010 the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court, by a single decision, upheld the extension order in respect of the applicant and another co-accused, Mr K. The applicant’s lawyer was present at the hearing. The appellate court considered that the extension orders had been issued in accordance with law. As regards the applicant’s absence from the courtroom, the appellate court noted, with reference to medical documents, that he was unable to attend the hearing on account of his poor state of health. A copy of the decision was sent to him once his condition had improved.
Appeals lodged by the applicant against the detention orders were rejected on the following dates:
The relevant general provisions of domestic and international law governing the general healthcare of detainees are set out in Ivko v. Russia (no. 30575/08, §§ 55-62, 15 December 2015).
The provisions of domestic law establishing legal avenues for complaints about the quality of medical services are cited in the following judgments: Patranin v. Russia (no. 12983/14, §§ 86-88, 23 July 2015); Reshetnyak v. Russia (no. 56027/10, §§ 35-46, 8 January 2013); Dirdizov v. Russia (no. 41461/10, §§ 47-61, 27 November); and Koryak v. Russia (no. 24677/10, §§ 46-57, 13 November 2012).
According to paragraph 332 of the Instruction on Service approved by Decree No. 140-dsp of the Ministry for Internal Affairs of 7 March 2006, a senior escorting officer must remain constantly in the hospital room with the suspect or accused. He or she must escort the suspect or accused when moving about the hospital and must constantly supervise the escorted person during medical examinations and questioning.
As to the provisions on handcuffing, under section 14 of the Federal Law “On Police” of 18 April 1991 no. 1026-1 and section 30 of the Federal Law “On Penal Institutions”, no. 5473-1of 21 July 1993, police and prison officers may use handcuffs in the event of resistance, in order to apprehend on the crime scene a person trying to escape if the person is threatening to harm someone’s life, health or property, or for escorting apprehended persons to the police station. Officers may also use handcuffs if there are grounds to believe that a detainee may abscond or cause damage to others or himself or resist the officers; and for the suppression of riots in prisons.