The case originated in an application (no. 2592/17) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Uzbek national, Mr R.A. (“the applicant”), on 7 February 2017.
The applicant was represented by Ms D. Trenina and Ms E. Davidyan (“the representatives”), lawyers practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by his successor in that office Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant complained under Articles 3, 5, 13 and 34 of the Convention.
On 10 January 2017 the applicant’s request for interim measures preventing his removal from Russia to Uzbekistan was granted by the Court under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. On the same date notice of the application was given to the Government.
The application was further granted priority (Rule 47) and confidentiality (Rule 33) and the applicant was granted anonymity (Rule 47 § 4).
The applicant is a national of Uzbekistan, born on 19 June 1991. He currently resides in Poloson, Fergana Region, Uzbekistan.
On 6 February 2015 the applicant was charged in Uzbekistan with religious and politically motivated crimes, his pre-trial detention was ordered in absentia, and an international search warrant was issued by the authorities.
On 3 November 2015 the applicant was arrested and subsequently detained by the Russian authorities until 19 October 2016.
On 18 November 2015 the Uzbek authorities requested his extradition, which was authorised by the Deputy Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation on 15 September 2016. The applicant claimed in the relevant proceedings that in the event of removal he would face a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention. Despite these claims the above authorisation was upheld by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation on 12 January 2017.
The applicant’s request of 9 January 2017 for an interim measure under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court was granted by the Court on 10 January 2017 and his removal was stayed for the duration of the proceedings before the Court. The Russian Government were immediately informed about the measure. They were also informed that failure by a Contracting State to comply with a measure indicated under Rule 39 might entail a breach of Article 34 of the Convention.
On 12 January 2018 the applicant was arrested and administratively fined for violation of the rules on presence of foreigners on a territory with restricted access. The police records indicated that he had resisted arrest and that force, inter alia handcuffing, had been used by the arresting officers.
Early in the morning on 13 January 2018 the applicant boarded Uzbekistan Airways flight for Tashkent and left Russia.
On 14 June 2018 the applicant’s representative informed the Court about the events alleging that that the applicant had been forcibly removed to Uzbekistan by the Russian authorities. She stated that on 12 June 2018 FSB officers apprehended the applicant and took him to a police station, where he was held overnight. In the morning of 13 January 2018 FSB officers allegedly took the applicant to the airport and controlled his departure from Russia. She notes that the removal had been carried out in violation of the interim measure indicated by the Court and that the applicant’s lawyers took every effort to notify the airport police, border control services, the FSB and the General Prosecutor’s Office of the ongoing removal.
In support of her allegation of forcible removal the representative referred to the followings facts. According to the information obtained from Uzbekistan Airways the applicant’s ticket was bought in Uzbekistan at the request of “the competent authorities of the Republic of Uzbekistan and the passenger’s relatives”. The ticket was bought using the applicant’s passport, which had expired in 2016, and apparently the same passport should have been used for crossing the Russian border. According to the statement by the applicant’s father, he was informed about his son’s transfer to Uzbekistan by the law-enforcement agents on 13 June 2018, who also demanded the costs of the ticket to be covered. The applicant was arrested immediately after his arrival to Uzbekistan and transferred to a pre-trial detention facility. The representatives’ allegations were supported by letters from the applicant, his father, his lawyer in Uzbekistan and the office of the Uzbekistan Airways.
In the representative’s opinion the sequence of events and the above facts indicate that the applicant’s transfer had been facilitated through covert cooperation of the Russian and the Uzbek law-enforcement agencies.
The Government contested these allegations and stated that the applicant returned to Uzbekistan on his own following a phone call from his father. They maintained that the applicant himself bought the ticket and voluntarily flew to Tashkent. They provided no documents in support of their position.
Upon his arrival in Uzbekistan on 13 June 2018 the applicant was immediately arrested and transported to a pre-trial detention centre in Fergana.
On 27 August 2018 the applicant’s representatives informed the Court that they were in contact with the applicant through his relatives and the lawyer representing him in Uzbekistan, and that the applicant wished to maintain his application. They provided the following evidence:
(a) a handwritten note (in Russian) from the applicant’s father dated 8 August 2018 and addressed to Ms Trenina, which stated that the applicant and his relatives expressed the wish to maintain the application;
(b) a handwritten note (in Russian) from the applicant dated 14 August 2018 and addressed to Ms Trenina, which stated that he wished to maintain his application and provided his account of removal from Russia;
(c) a letter from Ms Matmusayeva, the applicant’s lawyer in Uzbekistan, dated 28 August 2018 and addressed to Ms Trenina, which stated that during a meeting with the applicant the latter claimed to have been subjected to ill-treatment by Russian security services. She further informed that the applicant refused to comment whether he was subject to illtreatment in detention in Uzbekistan.
On 8 September 2018 the applicant pled guilty. He was sentenced to a suspended term of 2 years and 9 months and released on probation. He currently resides in Poloson, Fergana Region, Uzbekistan.
A summary of the domestic law and practice concerning extraditions was provided in the case of Mukhitdinov v. Russia (no. 20999/14, §§ 29-31, 21 May 2015, with further references).
References to relevant reports by UN agencies and international NGOs on the situation in Uzbekistan were cited in the cases of Kholmurodov v. Russia (no. 58923/14, §§ 46-50, 1 March 2016) and T.M. and Others v. Russia (no. 31189/15, § 28, 7 November 2017).
In respect of Uzbekistan 2019 World Report by Human Rights Watch indicated that there were certain promising steps to reform the country’s human rights record; however, many reforms are yet to be implemented. It further stated that a limited number of persons imprisoned on politically motivated charges had been released in 2016-2018. Furthermore, isolated incidents of security agency officers sentenced for torture and death in custody were cited. Amnesty International Report 2017/2018 reflected similar trends, including judicial independence and effectiveness as the priorities set by the authorities for the systemic reform. At the same time the report stressed that the authorities continued to secure forcible returns, including through extradition proceedings, of Uzbekistani nationals identified as threats to the “constitutional order” or national security.