The case concerns the applicant’s complaint that his detention in Ukraine in the context of the examination of the Turkish authorities’ request for his extradition had been in breach of Article 5 § 1 (f) of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Mykolayiv. The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr O. Ovchynnykov, a lawyer practising in Strasbourg.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In September 1998 the applicant left Turkey for an unspecified country. In 2004 he arrived in Ukraine and on 23 March 2011 he was granted refugee status.
On 18 October 2012 the State Migration Service revoked his refugee status on the grounds that he had provided false information. The applicant had stated that he had been persecuted in Turkey on political grounds, concealing the fact that he had been wanted by the law-enforcement authorities on suspicion of a criminal offence.
The Ukrainian courts at three levels of jurisdiction rejected the applicant’s claim challenging the revocation decision. The final decision was handed down by the High Administrative Court on 3 April 2013.
Meanwhile, on 14 March 2013 the applicant applied to the immigration authorities for subsidiary protection.
On 13 August 2013 the Kharkiv regional department of the State Migration Service rejected his application as inadmissible on the grounds that his refugee status had been revoked.
On 27 February 2014 the Odessa Circuit Administrative Court quashed that decision following an administrative claim by the applicant and directed the immigration authorities to examine his application for subsidiary protection on the merits.
The migration service appealed. There is no information in the case file on subsequent developments.
On 25 September 2012 the applicant was detained on suspicion of using documents he knew to be forged (no further details are available in the case file). On an unspecified date he was released, subject to an undertaking not to abscond.
On 14 March 2013 the Kharkiv Leninsky District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to two months’ imprisonment.
The applicant appealed. There is no information in the case file on the outcome of those proceedings.
On 20 June 2011 the Istanbul 13th Higher Criminal Court (“the Istanbul Court”) issued a warrant for the applicant’s arrest on suspicion of participation in terrorist and separatist activities on 5 August 1998.
On 3 October 2012 the Istanbul Court sent a request to “the authorised judicial authorities of Ukraine”, seeking the applicant’s extradition to Turkey in connection with the criminal proceedings against him. It was specified in the request that the criminal charge in question was to become time-barred on 15 August 2013. The Turkish court assured the Ukrainian authorities that the applicant’s rights and freedoms under the Convention would be respected.
On 14 November 2012 the applicant was detained by the State Security Service of Ukraine with a view to his extradition.
On 15 November 2012 the Mykolaiv regional department of the State Migration Service informed the State Security Service that the applicant had not applied for Ukrainian nationality (Ukrainian law bars the extradition of Ukrainian nationals).
On 16 November 2012 the Mykolaiv Tsentralny District Court, following an application from the prosecution authorities, placed the applicant in detention pending his extradition.
On 17 June 2013 the Istanbul Court issued another warrant for the applicant’s arrest on the same criminal charge as before.
The applicant was transferred from Mykolaiv to Kharkiv in connection with the criminal proceedings against him in Ukraine (see paragraphs 12 and 13 above), making the Kharkiv Zhovtnevy District Court (“the Zhovtnevy Court”) the competent court in matters of his detention.
On 17 July 2013 the Zhovtnevy Court examined the matter of the applicant’s detention and held that his continued detention was justified. The court referred to the two arrest warrants and the extradition request issued by the Istanbul Court. The Kharkiv regional prosecutor’s office had received the documents in question from the Ministry of Justice of Ukraine. Furthermore, the prosecution authorities had carried out an extradition inquiry (екстрадиційна перевірка) and had concluded that there were no impediments to the applicant’s extradition. The court also noted the applicant’s conviction by the judgment of 14 March 2013, but specified that it had not yet become final.
On 30 August 2013 the Zhovtnevy Court released the applicant. It noted that the limitation period in respect of the criminal offences of which the applicant was accused had expired on 15 August 2013. The court referred in this connection to Article 10 of the European Convention on Extradition, pursuant to which extradition could not be granted in such circumstances (see paragraph 29 below).
On 23 September 2013 the Ministry of Justice of Ukraine rejected the extradition request of 3 October 2012.
The relevant provisions of the Code are quoted in the Court’s judgment in Molotchko v. Ukraine (no. 12275/10, § 91, 26 April 2012).
Article 584 of the 2012 Code of Criminal Procedure provides that a request to detain a person pending extradition must be submitted by a prosecutor after receipt of an extradition request from the competent authority of a foreign State. Detention pending extradition is imposed for such time as is necessary to take a decision on the person’s extradition and for the extradition itself; however, the period must not exceed twelve months (Article 584 § 10). If there is a complaint by a detainee or his or her lawyer, the investigating judge must check whether there are any grounds for the person’s release (Article 584 § 12), but this may not happen more than once a month.
Article 589 § 2 provides that extradition of a refugee or a person under subsidiary or temporary protection is prohibited.
Under Article 590 § 4, no decision on a person’s extradition can be taken if that person has applied for refugee status or for subsidiary protection and there has been no final decision in that regard.
The 1957 European Convention on Extradition entered into force in respect of Turkey on 18 April 1960 and in respect of Ukraine on 9 June 1998. Its Article 10 reads as follows:
Lapse of time
“Extradition shall not be granted when the person claimed has, according to the law of either the requesting or the requested Party, become immune by reason of lapse of time from prosecution or punishment.”