The case originated in an application (no. 19177/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Hari Schmalz (“the applicant”), on 2 June 2003.
The Polish Government were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the length of his detention on remand had been unreasonable.
On 26 September 2005 the President of the Fourth Section decided to communicate to the Government the applicant's complaints concerning the length of his detention on remand and the fairness of the criminal proceedings against him. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in .
On 27 November 2002 the pre-trial detention of the applicant and 14 other persons was further extended. The  considered the risk of the accused tampering with evidence high, basing itself on the fact that they had been charged with being members of an organised criminal gang.
The applicant appealed against this decision but on 8 January 2003 the Katowice Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) dismissed his appeal.
As the length of the applicant's detention had reached the statutory timelimit of 2 years laid down in Article 263 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Kodeks postępowania karnego) the District Court made several applications to the Katowice Court of Appeal for the applicant's detention to be prolonged beyond that term. On 8 January 2003 the Court of Appeal granted the application. The court justified its decision with reference to the reasonable suspicion that the accused had committed the offences and the complexity of the case which concerned an organised criminal gang. The court also held that the measure was justified by the severity of the sentence to which the accused were liable and by the risk that they would interfere with the course of the proceedings.
On 6 August 2003 the Court of Appeal prolonged the applicant's detention on remand. The court noted, however, that although the bill of indictment had been lodged eight months previously, the trial court had not yet started to examine the merits of the case. As regards the need to prolong the applicant's detention, the court noted as follows:
“...The [Regional Court] rightly pointed to Articles 249 § 1 and 258 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to justify the continuation of the detention on remand in order to secure the proper conduct of the proceedings, and there is no need to discuss that further.
It should be underlined that, given the number of co-accused and the type of offences they had been charged with, the present case is particularly complex. Therefore, it is necessary to prolong further the detention in order to carry out the proceedings, in particular to take evidence from 16 accused and 11 witnesses...
It should also be noted that, as the proceedings advance, the  should consider whether it was still necessary to extend the [detention on remand] with respect to all the accused.”
The Code of Criminal Procedure of 1997, which entered into force on 1 September 1998, defines detention on remand as one of the socalled “preventive measures” (środki zapobiegawcze).
A more detailed rendition of the relevant domestic law provisions is set out in the Court's judgment in Kudła v. Poland [GC], no. 30210/96, § 75, ECHR 2000XI, Celejewski v. Poland, no. 17584/04, §§ 22 and 23, 4 May 2006.