The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 24 November 1998, within the three-month period laid down by former Articles 32 § 1 and 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 32819/96) against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland lodged with the Commission under former Article 25 by a Jamaican citizen, Mr Clive Caballero, on 28 June 1996. The applicant was represented by Mr P. Leach and, subsequently, by Ms M. Cunneen, both lawyers with Liberty, a civil liberties non-governmental organisation based in London. The Government of the United Kingdom (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr H. Llewellyn, of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
The Commission’s request referred to former Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby the United Kingdom recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (former Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 5 §§ 3 and 5 of the Convention taken both alone and in conjunction with Article 13 and under Article 14 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Article 5 § 3.
Having been designated before the Commission by the initials C.C., the applicant subsequently agreed to the disclosure of his name by the Court.
In accordance with the provisions of Article 5 § 4 of Protocol No. 11 taken together with Rules 100 § 1 and 24 § 6 of the Rules of Court, a panel of the Grand Chamber decided on 14 January 1999 that the case would be examined by the Grand Chamber of the Court. The Grand Chamber included ex officio Sir Nicolas Bratza, the judge elected in respect of the United Kingdom (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 24 § 4), Mr L. Wildhaber, the President of the Court, Mrs E. Palm, Vice-President of the Court, and Mr J.-P. Costa and Mr M. Fischbach, Vice-Presidents of Sections (Article 27 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 24 §§ 3 and 5 (a)). The other members appointed to complete the Grand Chamber were Mr A. Pastor Ridruejo, Mr J. Makarczyk, Mr P. Kūris, Mr R. Türmen, Mrs F. Tulkens, Mrs V. Strážnická, Mr V. Butkevych, Mr J. Casadevall, Mrs H.S. Greve, Mr A.B. Baka, Mr R. Maruste and Mrs S. Botoucharova (Rule 24 § 3).
Subsequently Sir Nicolas Bratza, who had taken part in the Commission’s examination of the case, withdrew from sitting in the Grand Chamber (Rule 28). The Government accordingly appointed Sir Robert Carnwath to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1). Later Mr G. Bonello, substitute judge, replaced Mr Türmen, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 24 § 5 (b)).
After consulting the Agent of the Government and the applicant’s representative, the Grand Chamber decided to dispense with a hearing in the case, being of the opinion that the discharging of its functions under Article 38 § 1 (a) of the Convention did not require one to be held (Rule 59 § 2).
On 17 May, 3 June, 19 August and 10 September 1999 the applicant and the Government variously produced a number of documents, either at the President’s request or of their own accord.
In 1987 the applicant, who was born in 1926, was convicted of manslaughter by the Central Criminal Court, London. His record sheet read “manslaughter – heavy drinking session with female. In bed, during which he sexually interferes with her. Struggle ensues during which she dies”. The naked body of the victim, a neighbour of the applicant, was discovered outside the door of her flat wrapped in a bedspread. The applicant was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment. He was released in August 1988.
On 2 January 1996 the applicant was arrested by the police on suspicion of attempted rape of his next-door neighbour. He maintained that he had had sexual intercourse with the woman with her consent and the woman claimed that the incident had taken place after she had blacked out from drinking. He was brought before the Magistrates’ Court on 4 January 1996. While the applicant instructed his solicitor to apply for bail on his behalf, no bail application was or could have been made in view of section 25 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994. The record of the hearing of 4 January 1996 refers to section 25 of the 1994 Act as the reason for the refusal of bail. The applicant was remanded in custody by the Magistrate on 4 and 11 January 1996, the second appearance being necessary in view of the possibility (later abandoned) of the prosecution amending the charge against the applicant.
The applicant was convicted of attempted rape and of assault occasioning actual bodily harm in October 1996. On 17 January 1997 he was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment for the assault conviction and to life imprisonment for the attempted rape conviction. The trial court deducted the period of his pre-trial detention from the sentence imposed pursuant to section 67 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967. On 11 July 1997 the Court of Appeal rejected his appeal against sentence.
Section 4 of the Bail Act 1976 as amended (“the 1976 Act”) provided that a person accused of a criminal offence should be granted bail except as stated in Schedule 1 to the Act. Paragraph 2 of Schedule 1 provided that a defendant need not be granted bail if the court was satisfied that there were substantial grounds for believing that the defendant, if released on bail, would fail to surrender to custody, commit an offence while on bail or
Under paragraph 9 of Schedule 1 to the 1976 Act, in taking the above decision, the court was to have regard to such of the following considerations, as well as to any other considerations, as appeared to that court to be relevant:
–  the nature and seriousness of the offence or default (and the probable method of dealing with the defendant for it);
–  the character, antecedents, associations and community ties of the defendant;
–  the defendant’s record as regards the fulfilment of his obligations under previous grants of bail in criminal proceedings; and
–  except in the case of a defendant whose case was adjourned for inquiries or a report, the strength of the evidence of his having committed the offence or having defaulted.
According to paragraph 9A of Schedule 1 to the 1976 Act, if a defendant (who had been charged with murder, manslaughter, rape, attempted murder or attempted rape) was granted bail and representations had been made as regards the matters mentioned in paragraph 2 of Schedule 1, the court had to state its reasons for granting bail and cause those reasons to be included in the record of the proceedings.
Section 25 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (“the 1994 Act”) came into force on 10 April 1995 and provided as follows:
“(1)  A person who in any proceedings has been charged with or convicted of an offence to which this section applies and in circumstances to which it applies shall not be granted bail in those proceedings.
(2)  This section applies, subject to subsection (3) below, to the following offences, ... –
(a)  murder;
(b)  attempted murder;
(c)  manslaughter;
(d)  rape; or
(e)  attempted rape.
(3)  This section applies to a person charged with or convicted of any such offence only if he has been previously convicted by or before a court in any part of the United Kingdom of any such offence or of culpable homicide and, in the case of a previous conviction of manslaughter or culpable homicide, if he was then sentenced to imprisonment or, if he was then a child or young person, to long-term detention under any of the relevant enactments.
…”
Section 25 of the 1994 Act has been amended by section 56 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, which entered into force on 30 September 1998. Section 56 of the 1998 Act reads as follows:
“In subsection (1) of section 25 of the 1994 Act (no bail for defendants charged with or convicted of homicide or rape after previous conviction of such offences), for the words ‘shall not be granted bail in those proceedings’ there shall be substituted the words ‘shall be granted bail in those proceedings only if the court or, as the case may be, the constable considering the grant of bail is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances which justify it’.”
Mr Caballero applied to the Commission on 28 June 1996. He alleged that the automatic denial of bail prior to his trial constituted a violation of Article 5 §§ 3 and 5 of the Convention both taken alone and in conjunction with Article 13. He also claimed that there had been a violation of Article 14 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Article 5 § 3.
The Commission declared the application (no. 32819/96) admissible on 1 December 1997. In its report of 30 June 1998 (former Article 31 of the Convention), it expressed the opinion, by nineteen votes to twelve, that there had been a violation of Article 5 §§ 3 and 5 and that it was not necessary also to consider the complaint under Article 14 taken in conjunction with Article 5 § 3. It also expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been no violation of Article 13. The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the two separate opinions contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
The Government in their memorial conceded that there had been a violation of Article 5 §§ 3 and 5 of the Convention. The Government also submitted that, for the reasons set out in the Commission’s report, they considered that there had been no violation of Article 13 of the Convention and that no separate issue arose under Article 14.
The applicant maintained his complaints under Article 5 §§ 3 and 5 of the Convention and under Article 14 taken in conjunction with Article 5 § 3. He did not pursue his complaint under Article 13 before the Court.