The case concerns the alleged unlawfulness and lack of reasoning of the judicial decisions ordering the applicants’ arrest and continued detention, the allegedly unreasonable duration of their detention on remand, the alleged absence of a meaningful review of the lawfulness of their detention, the alleged absence of an enforceable right to compensation for arbitrary detention, and the allegedly unreasonable duration of the criminal proceedings in breach of Article 5 §§ 1, 3, 4, 5 and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The applicants’ details are set out in the appended table.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On various dates the applicants were arrested in the context of criminal investigations against them. Shortly afterwards the courts ordered their pre-trial detention. The relevant judicial decisions stated that the applicants had been accused of serious crimes and might otherwise escape and hinder the investigation or continue their criminal activity. The courts did not provide specific details explaining the persistence of the above-mentioned reasons.
In the course of the proceedings, the courts extended the applicants’ detention a number of times, referring to the reasons stated in the initial decisions on the applicants’ detention. The courts furthermore noted that there were no reasons for the applicants to be released, since no new circumstances warranting release had been identified or the circumstances that had led to the decision to place the applicants in detention pending trial persisted.
In the course of the applicant’s detention – which had been extended by the court until 27 January 2012 – the criminal case against him, together with the relevant bill of indictment, was submitted to the trial court, which on 9 February 2012 extended the applicant’s detention and remitted the case for additional pre-trial investigation.
The applicant remained in detention until 17 December 2012, when he was released on bail.
In the course of the applicant’s detention – which had been extended by the court until 25 May 2013 – the criminal case against him, together with the relevant bill of indictment, was submitted to the trial court, which on 10 June 2013 extended the applicant’s detention and committed him for trial.
On 22 July 2014 the trial court convicted the applicant and sentenced him to four years and six months’ imprisonment.
On 22 December 2015 the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Court of Appeal quashed the decision of the first-instance court of 8 October 2015 and remitted the case for retrial. The Regional Court of Appeal did not rule on the question of the further pre-trial detention of the applicant, who was then taken back to the pre-trial detention centre.
On 5 January 2016 the Regional Court of Appeal acknowledged that it had not addressed the issue of the applicant’s pre-trial detention and extended it for a further sixty days.
The applicant remained in detention pending retrial until 23 December 2016, when his detention was changed to house arrest.
The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 28 December 1960 concerning pre-trial detention can be found in Shavel v. Ukraine ((dec.), no. 25486/03, 8 January 2007).
The 1960 Code of Criminal Procedure was repealed with effect from 19 November 2012, when the 2012 Code of Criminal Procedure came into force. The relevant provisions of the new Code concerning pre-trial detention can be found in Ignatov v. Ukraine (no. 40583/15, § 25, 15 December 2016).
Article 419 § 1 (3) of the 2012 Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the ruling of the court of appeal contains, inter alia, the decisions on the preventive measure in respect of the accused.