The case originated in an application (no. 10816/10) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Ivorian nationals, Mr Paul Thibaut Lokpo and Mr Ousmane Touré (“the applicants”), on 18 February 2010.
The applicants were represented by Mr T. Fazekas, a lawyer practising in . The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr L. Höltzl, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicants alleged that their detention between 9 April and 10 September 2009 had been unlawful, a situation not remedied by judicial supervision. They relied on Articles 5 §§ 1 and 4 and 13 of the Convention.
On 25 August 2010 the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time
The applicants were born in 1990 and 1984 respectively. At the time of introducing the application, they lived in  and Nyírbátor respectively.
The applicants entered  illegally and were intercepted and arrested by the police on 10 March 2009. On the next day their expulsion was ordered but suspended because of practical difficulties. Their detention under immigration law was ordered until 20 March, with a view to their eventual expulsion. However, on 18 March they applied for asylum, claiming that they were persecuted in their home country for being homosexual.
The asylum proceedings started on 25 March and, on 9 April, the applicants were interviewed by the refugee authority, an agency belonging under the jurisdiction of the Office of Immigration and Nationality. On the same day their case was admitted to the in-merit phase. Under section 55(3) of the Asylum Act (see below in Chapter II), once a case reaches this stage, the alien administration authority (another agency of the Office of Immigration and Nationality) shall, at the initiative of the refugee authority, terminate the detention of the asylum-seeker. Nevertheless, the applicants’ detention continued. After another interview on 28 May, on 19 June their asylum requests were dismissed. The applicants’ action to challenge this decision in court was unsuccessful.
Relying on section 55(3), the applicants’ lawyer then requested their release. However, since the refugee authority had not initiated their release, the request was denied by the alien administration authority. On 20 July 2009 the applicants’ lawyer requested judicial review of their detention. This motion was rejected by the Nyírbátor District Court on 19 August 2009 with the formal reasoning that since the refugee authority had not initiated the applicant’s release, the alien administration authority had been under no obligation to order their release and that therefore their detention was lawful.
The applicants were released only on 10 September 2009, after the maximum period of detention in such cases had expired.
Section 13
“(2) This Act applies to ... (c) proceedings related to the admission and residence of persons entitled to the right of free movement and admission, and third-country nationals, and also to asylum procedures; ... if the act pertaining to the type of case in question does not provide otherwise.”
Section 20
“(2) In the event of an authority’s failure to comply with the obligation described above within the relevant administrative time-limit, the supervisory organ shall take prompt action to investigate the reason within five working days from the time of receipt of the request to this effect or upon gaining knowledge of the fact, and shall order the authority affected to conclude the proceedings within the time-limit prescribed, consistently with the case-type in question and considering the progress in the decision-making process...
(6) [...I]f in the case in question there is no supervisory organ or the supervisory organ fails to execute its vested authority, the court of jurisdiction for administrative actions shall, at the client’s request, order the authority to conclude the procedure...”
Section 51
“(2) Any third country national whose application for refugee status is pending may be turned back or expelled only if his or her application has been refused by a final and enforceable decision of the refugee authority.”
Section 54
“(4) Detention ordered under the immigration laws shall be terminated immediately:
a) if the conditions for carrying out expulsion are secured;
b) if it becomes evident that expulsion cannot be executed; or
c) after six months from the date when the detention was ordered.”
Section 51
“(1) Where the Dublin Regulations cannot be applied, the decision to determine as to whether an application is considered inadmissible lies with the refugee authority.
(2) An application shall be considered inadmissible if:
Section 55
“(1) If the refugee authority finds an application admissible, it shall proceed to the substantive examination of the application ...
(3) If the refugee authority proceeds to the substantive examination of the application and the applicant is detained by order of the immigration authority, the immigration authority shall release the applicant at the initiative of the refugee authority.”
Section 56 (The in-merit procedure)
“(1) In the order admitting the request to the in-merit phase, the refugee authority shall assign the asylum seeker – upon the latter’s request – to a private accommodation or, in the absence of such, to a dedicated facility or another accommodation, unless the asylum-seeker is subjected to a ... measure restraining personal liberty. ...
(2) During the in-merit examination and the eventual judicial review of the decision adopted therein, the asylum seeker is obliged to stay at the designated accommodation.
(3) The in-merit procedure shall be completed within two months from the adoption of the decision ordering it.”
Article 18 (Detention)
“1. Member States shall not hold a person in detention for the sole reason that he/she is an applicant for asylum.”