The case originated in an application (no. 75524/13) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Ms Olga Cașu (“the applicant”), on 21 November 2013.
The applicant was represented by Ms N. Pruteanu, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents at the time, Mr L. Apostol and Mr M. Gurin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that her detention on remand was not based on relevant and sufficient reasons and that the conditions of her detention amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment, in violation of Articles 5 § 3 and 3 of the Convention, respectively.
On 17 June 2015 notice of the above complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
On 9 April 2019 the Court declared inadmissible the complaint under Article 3 of the Convention.
On 3 February 2012, the applicant (15 years and 7 months old at that time) was arrested on suspicion of having participated in a group assault of a person which led to death.
On 4 February 2012, the prosecutor applied to the Râșcani District Court for a warrant for the applicant’s remand in custody. The reasons relied upon by the prosecutor were generally that the applicant, who was not married and had no permanent occupation, could abscond from prosecution and interfere with the criminal investigation.
On the same day, the Râșcani District Court issued a warrant for thirty days detention, relying on the reasons provided by the prosecutor. In court, the applicant argued that she had no intention of absconding and was willing to cooperate with the prosecution. She asked to be placed under house arrest rather than being detained in prison. Nevertheless, the court, citing the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code entitling it to remand a person because of the risk of absconding and of interfering with a criminal investigation, concluded that the applicant presented such risks because she was charged with an extremely serious offence. The applicant was subsequently placed in pre-trial detention in prison no. 13 in Chișinău.
The prosecutor applied for the extension of the applicant’s detention pending investigation on several occasions, reiterating the same reasons. By final decisions of 4 and 29 March and 27 April 2012, the Râșcani District Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention, each time by thirty days, relying on the same grounds as before and re-using the same text in their decisions.
On 17 May 2012, the case was referred to the Centru District Court for trial. In the bill of indictment the applicant was charged with robbery.
On different dates, the prosecutor applied for the extension of the applicant’s detention pending trial, each time for ninety days. The courts allowed those applications and extended the applicant’s detention each time by ninety days, on the same grounds as in the previous decisions. Appeals by the applicant were rejected by the Chişinău Court of Appeal. The applicant was released from detention on 24 November 2013.
By a judgment of 30 June 2014 the applicant was found guilty as charged and sentenced to six years and eight months’ imprisonment. The criminal proceedings are pending to date.
The relevant domestic law concerning detention on remand has been set out in the Court’s judgment in Buzadji v. the Republic of Moldova ([GC] no. 23755/07, §§ 42-43, ECHR 2016 (extracts)).
According to Article 186 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the material time, pre-trial detention of minors could not last longer than four months.