The case originated in an application (no. 45559/06) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Mr Gundars Davidovs (“the applicant”), on 16 October 2006.
The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs K. Līce.
On 14 October 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
Written observations were received from the Government and just satisfaction claim was received from the applicant.
The applicant was born in 1969 and is detained in Valmiera prison.
On 31 May 2005 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of having commuted a theft.
On 3 June 2005 by a decision of the Valmiera District Court the applicant was detained on remand until 3 August 2005. In substantiating the decision, the judge referred to numerous previous convictions of the applicant. The applicant did not appeal against the decision.
At the applicant’s request to lift the detention order, on 29 June 2005 he was informed that adjudication of the criminal case would commence on 31 August 2005, when the judge would also examine the request for change of the preventive measure.
On 31 August 2005 by a judgment of the lower court the applicant was convicted and sentenced to nearly three years’ imprisonment. He was maintained in detention until the judgment came into force.
On 16 September 2005 the Vidzeme Regional Court decided to schedule for 10 January 2006 the appeal in the applicant’s criminal case. It also decided, without any reasoning, that the applicant should remain in detention. It appears that in 2006 the scheduled trials where postponed twice upon the request raised by the defence.
On 21 August 2006 the Vidzeme Regional Court adopted a decision by which the lower court’s judgment was set aside and remitted once again to examination on the merits. No mention was made of the preventive measure. The applicant remained in detention.
On 24 August 2006 the applicant asked the Vidzeme Regional Court to lift the detention order. On 28 August 2006 he was informed by a judge Ā. that, since the request has not been raised before or during the appeal hearing, the Vidzeme Regional Court at this stage was no longer authorised to change the preventive measure.
On 12 and 16 September 2006 the applicant addressed an identical request to the Valmiera District Court.
On 13 September 2006 a judge of the Valmiera District Court decided to schedule for 17 October 2006 the appeal in the applicant’s criminal case. It was also decided, without any reasoning, that the applicant should remain in detention. The applicant appealed against the decision to keep him in detention, to which on 5 October 2006 Valmiera District Court informed him that the request to lift the preventive measure would be examined during the trial on 17 October 2006.
On 3 October 2006 in response to the applicant’s complaint about the lawfulness of his pre-trial detention the Ministry of Justice referred to sections 276 and 277 of the CPL (see paragraphs 22 - 23 below).
On 17 October 2006 the Valmiera District Court lifted the applicant’s detention order and changed it to police surveillance. The prosecution supported the applicant’s request, noting that the applicant’s health condition had deteriorated, and that the applicant had to undergo a forensic medical expertise.
On 12 January 2007 by a decision of the Valmiera District Court the applicant was detained on remand in other criminal proceedings on suspicion of having committed a theft and burning on 11 January 2007. It was applied on the grounds that the applicant might influence witnesses.
The forensic examination, carried out from 25 April to 24 May 2007, concluded that at the time of committing the thefts the applicant fully understood and led his actions, notwithstanding the fact that he had personality and behavior disorders, as well as an addiction to alcohol.
On 27 August 2008 the applicant was convicted and sentenced to two years and nine months’ imprisonment. The appeal court upheld the judgment, by reducing the final sentence to two years and seven months’. The applicant did not appeal against the judgment.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (in force until 1 October 2005) applicable at the material time have been cited in, amongst others, Shannon v. Latvia, no. 32214/03, §§ 28-35, 24 November 2009.
In addition, Section 77 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provided that during the pre-trial investigation detention on remand must not exceed two months. In certain circumstances by a decision of a judge the detention on remand could be prolonged up to 18 months, not exceeding two months in one decision. Further prolongation in principle was allowed in exceptional circumstances. Part 7 of section 77 provided that from the day the criminal case had been remitted to trial until the termination of its adjudication by the first instance the maximum length of pre-trial detention must not exceed one year and six months.
Section 276 of the Criminal Procedure Law (in force from 1 October 2005; further referred to as CPL) provides that during the adjudication of the criminal case the detention shall be ordered by the adjudicating court upon its own initiative or upon initiative of the prosecutor.
Section 277 provides that the term of detention with regard to persons charged with serious crimes (such as the applicant) shall not exceed 12 months, of which the person shall be permitted to be held in detention during the preliminary investigation stage no longer than 6 months. Both an investigating judge during the preliminary investigation stage and a higher-level court judge during a trial may extend a term by three more months, if there have been no unjustifiable delays attributable to the person directing the proceedings, or if the person who performs defence has intentionally delayed the progress of proceedings, or if a faster completion of proceedings has not been possible due to the particular complexity thereof.
Section 281 sets out a procedure of control over the application of detention. It provides, in particular, that a detained person may at any time ask the investigation judge or court to assess the necessity of subsequent application of detention. Such a request may be refused if less than four weeks have passed since the last assessment and no new arguments have been submitted. Such an assessment is automatic if a detained person has not submitted a request within a term of two months after the detention.
Section 286 provides that if a preventive measure related to deprivation of liberty is applied to a person after the beginning of the adjudication on the merits, and the next trial is not scheduled for during the next 14 days, an appeal against the decision, may be submitted to a higher-level court.
Pursuant to Section 287 of the CPL a judge of a higher-level court shall examine a complaint regarding the application of a compulsory measure related to deprivation of liberty, or regarding a refusal to apply such compulsory measure, in a closed court session within a term of seven days from the day of the receipt of the relevant decision and complaint.