The case originated in two applications against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Bulgarian nationals, Mr Stanislav Dimitrov Petkov (“the first applicant”) and Mr Petko Yankov Profirov (“the second applicant”). Application no. 50027/08 was lodged on 24 September 2008 by both applicants, and application no. 50781/09 was lodged on 8 September 2009 solely by the first applicant.
The applicants were represented by Mr S. Karov, a lawyer practising in Burgas. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Radkova, from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that their twenty-four-hour detention by the police had violated their right to liberty.
On 23 November 2012 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1981 and 1980 respectively and live in Burgas.
On the morning of 4 March 2007, while the applicants and a third person, Mr V., were in a hotel in Stara Zagora, the police entered their room and arrested Mr V., whose name was on a national list of wanted persons.
At around 4 p.m. on the same day, when the two applicants were back in their hotel room, several police officers entered and searched the room. The applicants were taken to a police station, where they were questioned for about ten minutes on what business had brought them to Stara Zagora. No records were taken of the interviews.
At around 6 p.m. the applicants were presented with written orders for their twenty-four-hour detention, drawn up under section 63(1)(1) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs Act (“the MIAA”, see paragraph 25 below). The orders merely referred to section 63(1)(1) and to the Criminal Code provision concerning theft. They did not mention any factual grounds justifying a suspicion that the applicants had committed an offence.
Upon being presented with the orders, the applicants stated that they wished to telephone a lawyer. The first applicant indicated the name and telephone number of his lawyer. According to the applicants, their lawyers were not contacted by the police and when, nonetheless, their relatives contacted another lawyer and he arrived at the police station the following morning, he was not allowed to see them.
While in custody, the applicants were not questioned further or summoned for any other reason. They were released at 5.15 p.m. on 5 March 2007.
On 9 August 2007 the applicants applied for judicial review of the detention orders of 4 March 2007, pointing out that the orders did not refer to any factual circumstances justifying a suspicion against them.
In the course of the ensuing two sets of proceedings the police stated that the applicants had been arrested because they had been with Mr V., whose name was on a list of wanted persons and who, during his initial questioning, had not explained in a satisfactory manner what the three of them had been doing in Stara Zagora. In addition, on unspecified dates there had been several thefts in the city, which appeared to have been committed by persons coming from elsewhere. The applicants had already been suspected of having committed other thefts. Accordingly, it had been necessary to question them in order to verify what they had been doing in Stara Zagora and whether they had alibis. In addition, the police explained that it had been necessary to check “in detail” the applicants’ involvement in the thefts, because they had been behaving “rudely, arrogantly and in manifest disrespect of the set rules”.
In two judgments dated 31 October 2007, containing largely identical reasoning, the Stara Zagora Administrative Court found that the detention orders were lawful. It considered that the reference to the Criminal Code provision on theft amounted to an indication of the relevant factual circumstances, and that the police had held sufficient information to justify a suspicion of a criminal offence. Moreover, the detention had served the legitimate purpose of “facilitating the carrying out of a police check-up unhindered”.
In addition, the Administrative Court found that the applicants’ complaints that they had not had access to a lawyer were irrelevant, as they did not concern the lawfulness of the detention orders but merely their enforcement.
Following appeals by the applicants, in two final judgments – of 24 April 2008 in the case of the first applicant and 3 July 2008 in the case of the second applicant – the Supreme Administrative Court (“the SAC”) upheld the lower court’s judgments, confirming its findings.
At around 3 a.m. on 6 December 2007 the first applicant and a friend of his, Mr D., were arrested on a street in Burgas and taken to a police station, where the police issued orders for their twenty-four-hour detention. The order concerning the first applicant indicated that it had been issued on the basis of section 63(1) of the MIAA (see paragraph 25 below) and that he was suspected of having committed an offence. It mentioned no factual grounds justifying such a suspicion.
Upon receipt of the detention order the applicant stated that he wished to contact a lawyer. However, he contended that he had not been allowed to do so and had only managed to call secretly from his mobile phone; the lawyer arrived at the police station and was allowed to meet him briefly.
While in custody the first applicant was not questioned or summoned for any reason. He was kept at the police station until 2 a.m. on the next day, 7 December 2007, when he was released.
On the day of his release the first applicant applied for judicial review of the detention order, pointing out that it contained no reasoning and that it had been unclear why he had been detained.
In the course of the ensuing proceedings the police explained that the applicant and Mr D. had been seen by a police patrol carrying a plastic bag, which, on seeing the police, they had discarded in a nearby yard. When checked by the police, the bag had contained a pair of pliers. The officers had also found a pair of gloves close by. The first applicant and Mr D. had been suspected of several earlier thefts.
The objects mentioned by the police – a pair of pliers and gloves – were apparently never seized for the purposes of a criminal investigation.
In a judgment of 18 February 2008 the Burgas Administrative Court found the disputed detention order lawful, noting that the police’s explanations showed that there had been a reasonable suspicion that the first applicant had committed theft. Following an appeal lodged by the applicant, in a final judgment of 9 March 2009 the SAC upheld the lower court’s judgment.
In a judgment of 20 March 2008, which entered into force on an unspecified date, the Burgas Administrative Court allowed Mr D.’s application for judicial review of his detention order and the order was subsequently quashed. The domestic court considered that it had been unclear what offence Mr D. had been suspected of, that there were no data in that regard and that no attempts to gather such data had been made during the detention. The circumstances of Mr D.’s detention were identical to those of the applicant.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of 1991 read as follows:
“3.  The State authorities shall be free to detain citizens only in the urgent circumstances expressly stipulated by law, and shall immediately advise the judicial authorities accordingly. The judicial authorities shall rule on the legality of a detention within the next 24 hours.
Everyone shall be entitled to legal counsel from the moment of detention or from the moment of being charged”.
Under the Ministry of Internal Affairs Act (“the MIAA”) of 2006 the police can, on the basis of a written order to that effect (section 65(1)), arrest an individual suspected of having committed a criminal offence (section 63(1)(1)). An individual taken into police custody is entitled to be assisted by counsel (section 63(5)). Under section 63(1)(1) police detention cannot exceed twentyfour hours (section 64 in fine) and cannot entail the restriction of any personal rights other than the right to free movement (section 64).
The SAC has systematically accepted that detention under section 63(1)(1) of the Act is a measure of administrative compulsion (принудителна административна мярка) which could only be imposed with the purpose of preventing the commission or the continued commission of an offence by the arrestee, or his absconding. It has observed that the application of section 63(1)(1) is a matter of the police’s “operational freedom”, “with a view to establishing a possible link between the person arrested and the offence committed” and bearing in mind the police’s task to prevent and investigate crime (Решение № 4453 от 28.03.2012 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 5390/2011 г., III о.). The SAC has in addition held that when making an order under section 63(1) of the Act the police are not under an obligation to specify the offence which the arrestee is suspected of having committed (Решение № 3475 от 09.03.2012 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 5290/2011 г., V о.; Решение № 4453 от 28.03.2012 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 5390/2011 г., III о.). In some cases it has required that the detention order under section 63(1)(1) of the Act should mention the factual grounds substantiating the suspicion required (Решение № 4410 от 02.04.2009 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 6839/2008 г., III о.), but in another case it has held that the order did not necessarily have to refer to the relevant factual circumstances (Решение № 5651 от 15.05.2008 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 9712/2007 г., III о.).
Section 63(4) of the MIAA provides that the arrestee can contest the legality of his detention and that the courts are obliged to examine the application for judicial review “immediately”. That provision has not been construed by the domestic courts as allowing the arrestee to apply for release prior to the expiry of the statutory limit of twenty-four hours, but only as permitting subsequent judicial review of the respective detention order, carried out in accordance with the standard rules of administrative procedure. Arrestees taken into police custody have attempted to seek to obtain immediate release relying on Article 250 of the Code of Administrative Procedure, which provides that everyone can seek the cessation of the unlawful actions of an administrative body (Определение № 13420 от 16.10.2013 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 13132/2013 г., V о.). However, in one case the SAC found such an application for release inadmissible, on the ground that there was a written detention order, which precluded the applicability of Article 250 of the Code of Administrative Procedure. Moreover, the SAC noted that at the time of examination of the application for release, the actions complained of, namely the claimant’s detention by the police, had already ended. It observed further that as the detention order was subject to judicial review, this would also include a review of the lawfulness of the police’s actions taken in its implementation (Определение № 12313 от 21.10.2010 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 12343/ 2010 г., I о.).
The State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act 1988 (“the SMRDA”), as worded at the relevant time, provided in section 1(1) that the State and the municipalities were liable for damage caused to private individuals and legal entities as a result of unlawful decisions, acts or omissions on the part of their authorities or officials while discharging their administrative duties.
The national courts have systematically accepted that detention orders under section 63(1) of the MIAA are administrative decisions within the meaning of section 1(1) of the SMRDA and that their setting aside gives rise to entitlement for the persons affected by them to seek damages from the State (Решение № 14976 от 8.12.2010 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 3969/2010 г., III о.; Решение № 11974 от 1.10.2012 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 1808/2012 г., III о.; Решение № 7915 от 10.06.2013 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 11237/2012 г., III о.).