The case originated in an application (no. 71092/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Mr Kaspars Zandbergs (“the applicant”), on 18 May 2001.
The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs I. Reine.
On 1 March 2005 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1971 and currently lives in .
On 23 November 1993 the applicant was arrested by the police and taken into custody on suspicion of having organised and paid the murder of his former business partner; the murder actually took place several days before his arrest. According to the prosecution, the applicant had paid two accomplices to strangle the victim in his car. Then, together with two other accomplices, he had driven the car with the victim’s body to another district, faked a road accident and set the car ablaze. Interrogated as a suspect, the applicant pleaded not guilty.
Three days after the applicant’s arrest, on 26 November 1993, another set of criminal proceedings was initiated against the applicant on the fact of a large-scale contraband of sugar in the Riga Free Port. On the same date, the preventive measure taken with regard to the applicant in the first criminal proceedings (concerning murder) was altered; he was released upon a written undertaking not to change his place of residence. However, three days later, on 29 November 1993, the competent prosecutor ordered the applicant’s detention on remand in the contraband case.
On 6 December 1993 the preventive measure in the murder case was revoked by the prosecutor because of the lack of evidence against the applicant. On the same date the applicant was charged with committing an aggravated contraband. On 10 February 1994 the preventive measure in the criminal proceedings concerning the contraband was also altered into a written undertaking not to change his place of residence. In March 1994 the applicant was officially indicted on a charge of aggravated contraband and forgery.
In January 1994 one of two persons having allegedly strangled the applicant’s business partner was found dead. On 1 June 1994, the other, V.Ķ., was arrested and detained on remand. Later, in September of the same year, he was released upon a written undertaking not to change his place of residence.
On 17 July 1994, in spite of his undertaking not to leave his residence, the applicant left Latvia for the .
On 5 September 1994 the Supreme Court committed the applicant to trial in the contraband case. On 21 September 1994, the prosecutor charged him with aggravated murder and ordered his detention on remand.
On 3 October 1994 the Supreme Court, examining the contraband case as a court of first instance according to the law then in force, opened the hearing on the merits of this case. As the applicant failed to appear, the preventive measure against him was changed into a detention on remand, he was placed on the wanted list, and the proceedings against him were suspended. In January 1995 the prosecutor sanctioned a search operation in order to locate the applicant’s whereabouts.
In January and February 1995 some investigative measures were taken in the murder case; namely, V.Ķ. was interrogated. The prosecutor also terminated criminal proceedings against one of the applicant’s accomplices who had allegedly helped him to dispose of the victim’s body; he was subsequently charged with concealment of a crime and intentional destruction of property.
On 11 February 1995 the pre-trial investigation of the whole case was suspended. Two days later the Prosecutor’s Office ordered the applicant’s search via the Interpol information channels. On 28 February 1995 the competent prosecutor ordered the applicant to be detained on remand.
On 28 June 1995 the Criminal Police informed the prosecutor that the applicant’s whereabouts were unknown. Consequently, on 3 July 1995 the case against him was disjoined from the rest of the murder case into a separate case file. Shortly thereafter, V.Ķ. and the other presumed accomplice disappeared and were placed on the wanted list.
On 1 September 1997 the prosecutor charged the applicant with a complicity in murder. On 2 September, the prosecutor applied to the Latgale District Court of Riga for a detention order in respect of the applicant, given the fact that under the relevant amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure a detention on remand could not anymore be applied by a prosecutor. On 3 September 1997 the order was granted, without specifying its temporal limit.
On 12 December 1997 the Prosecutor General’s Office ordered the responsible prosecutor to redefine the charges against the applicant into an aggravated murder and unauthorised possession of a gas pistol with ammunition. On 16 February 1998 the prosecutor resumed the investigation in respect of the applicant’s three presumed accomplices, who had been located in the meantime. On the same day, the proceedings against them were partly discontinued as time-barred.
On an unspecified date, the Latvian authorities learned of the applicant’s stay in the . Accordingly, on 24 February 1998 the Prosecutor General’s Office asked the U.S. Department of Justice for assistance in legal matters, namely, to locate and to extradite the applicant in accordance with the Latvian-American Extradition Treaty of 1923. On 26 September 1998 the  authorities took the applicant into custody pending extradition proceedings.
On 22 October 1999 the competent U.S. Magistrate Judge granted an order allowing the applicant’s extradition to  on the charge of aggravated murder. The applicant appealed requesting a stay of the extradition order.
On 16 December 1999 the Interpol Office of the Latvian Ministry of Interior informed the Prosecutor General’s Office that the applicant was currently held in custody in California, and that the U.S. authorities had consented to his extradition to  on the charge of aggravated murder. On 17 December 1999 the acting Secretary of State of the  signed a written document approving the applicant’s deportation order. On 20 December 1999 the U.S. Marshals Service convoyed the applicant to the Frankfurt Airport (), where he was handed over to the Latvian authorities. On the same date he was brought to  and placed in the Central Prison. On the next day, on 21 December, the Prosecutor General’s Office was notified of this fact.
On the very day of the applicant’s extradition, on 20 December 1999 the Central District Court of California stayed the extradition order of 22 October 1999.
On 22 December 1999 the competent prosecutor decided to resume the pre-trial investigation regarding the applicant. On the same date, the detention order of the Latgale District Court of 3 September 1997 was notified to the applicant, who attested it with his signature.
On 27 December 1999 the applicant’s lawyer appealed against this detention order, stating that the latter had been taken in the applicant’s absence, that the judge who had taken it had no time to acquaint himself with the criminal case file, and that the detention was authorised for an indefinite period of time. By a final decision of 18 January 2000 the  rejected the appeal, declaring that the applicable domestic law allowed for such order when the accused person was absconding from justice, and that in this case, precisely, the applicant was hiding.
On 10 February 2000 the Latgale District Court, acting upon the prosecutor’s request, extended the applicant’s detention on remand until 30 April 2000, with the following reasoning:
“Taking into account the gravity of the crime committed, as well as the fact that K. Zandbergs could abscond from investigation and trial, and hinder the establishment of truth in the case...”
The applicant appealed, stating that the time he had spent in custody in the United States had to be counted as a part of the overall time of his pre-trial detention and that, consequently, this detention had exceeded the maximum time-limit set by the Code of Criminal Procedure. On 6 March 2000 the  rejected the appeal, refusing to subscribe to the applicant’s interpretation. According to the court, the time of his detention on remand should be counted from the 20 December 1999 when he was surrendered to the jurisdiction of the .
On 14 February 2000 the charges against the applicant were amended. As the  authorities had extradited the applicant on the condition that he would stand trial for murder, the charges regarding intentional destruction of property and illegal possession of a gas pistol were dropped.
By an order of the Latgale District Court of 25 April 2000, reasoned in terms identical to the one of 10 February 2000, the applicant’s detention on remand was extended until 31 July 2000. The applicant’s appeal was dismissed on 19 May 2000, repeating in substance the reasoning of the previous appeal decision.
On 4 May 2000 the Ziemeļu District Court of Riga dismissed the charges against the applicant in the contraband case, as there was no consent from the authorities of the extraditing State (i.e., the ) to try him for the respective offences.
On 27 June 2000 the applicant’s detention on remand was extended until 31 September 2000, with an almost identical motivation as before; however, the Latgale District Court added that the applicant had no registered domicile in . On 11 July 2000, the applicant’s appeal was dismissed. On 16 August 2000 the criminal cases against the applicant, V.Ķ. and the two other presumed accomplices were joined again in a single case-file. However, shortly thereafter the case against these two latter persons was disjoined from the common case file.
On 18 September and 21 December 2000, the applicant’s detention on remand was extended, respectively, until 31 December 2000 and 28 February 2001. On 17 October 2000 and 9 January 2001 respectively, the  rejected the applicant’s appeals. The reasoning of all these orders and decisions was the same as before.
On 18 December 2000 the applicant was officially charged with organising an aggravated murder. On 21 December 2000 the prosecutor notified all the accused persons that the pre-trial investigation was completed and that they would now be able to acquaint themselves with the case file. On the same date, the applicant and V.Ķ. received the file, which consisted of 20 volumes. On 19 January 2001 they both finished reading it; the applicant then requested the prosecutor to terminate the proceedings against him. On 5 February 2001, this request was rejected.
On 23 February 2001 the final bill of indictment was notified to the applicant. On 27 February 2001, the case file was sent to the Riga Criminal Court.
On 28 February 2001 the competent judge of the , without hearing the parties, took a decision to commit the applicant and the co-accused for trial and fixed a hearing for the period of time running between 30 April and 6 May 2002. The judge also decided that the applicant’s detention on remand “sh[ould] remain unchanged”. No term for that detention was specified. The applicant did not appeal against this decision.
On 5 and 7 March 2001 the applicant submitted two requests to the  to decide on the lawfulness of his detention on remand, alleging that the consent from the  to prosecute him had not been properly obtained. He also asked the court to order an additional pre-trial investigation and to alter the preventive measure applied to him. On 14 March 2001 the court rejected all these requests.
On 19 March 2001 the applicant requested a separate hearing on the question whether the time he had spent in custody in the United States had to be counted as a part of his pre-trial detention for the purpose of the current proceedings against him and therefore, whether the maximum time-limit of a detention set by the Code of Criminal Procedure had been exceeded. On 26 March 2001 the court rejected this request.
On 3 April 2001 the applicant asked the  to alter the preventive measure and to liberate him. On 30 April 2001, the court held a special hearing whereby both the applicant’s defence counsel and the prosecutor were heard. The court finally decided to reject the applicant’s request and to keep him in detention for basically the same reasons as before, i.e., the gravity of the crime for which he was accused, the risk of absconding and the lack of a fixed domicile. The court added that there was a risk that the applicant could commit new crimes, without developing this point.
The applicant appealed. On 21 May 2001 the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court found the appeal admissible and scheduled the hearing on this procedural issue to take place on 28 May 2001. On the latter date, it held a hearing and dismissed the applicant’s appeal, upholding the ’s decision. The Chamber noted, inter alia, that in 1994 the applicant had already breached the preventive measure applied to him and had fled to .
On 31 August and 17 September 2001 respectively, the applicant applied to the Governor of the Matīsa Prison, requesting permission to make copies of two prosecutors’ replies to his complaints in order to submit them to the Court. His requests were refused by the Deputy Governor of that prison. It appears that the applicant did not appeal against the refusals.
On 30 April 2002 the  commenced the hearings on the merits of the case. However, as the applicant’s co-accused V.Ķ. failed to appear, the hearing was postponed until 2 May 2002. The court also ordered the police to ensure V.Ķ.’s appearance. However, on 2 May 2002, the police informed the court that the latter had fled to . The court then decided to put him on the wanted list and to adjourn the proceedings sine die.
On 3 and 20 May 2002 the applicant asked the court to alter the preventive measure applied to him. On 14 and 23 May respectively, this request was dismissed.
On 29 May 2002 the applicant asked the case against V.Ķ. to be disjoined from his into a separate file, in order to be able to proceed more speedily. On 26 June 2002 the court rejected this request and affirmed that the applicant would stay in pre-trial detention.
On 1 November 2002 a new wording of Article 77 (7) of the Code of Criminal Procedure entered into force. According to this new provision, a detention in remand should not exceed one year and six months upon committal to trial, and an extension thereto could only be granted by the Senate of the Supreme Court on an exceptional basis. Consequently, on 10 October 2002 the competent judge of the  requested the Senate to grant such an extension because the applicant “[had] committed the serious offence”. On 1 November 2002 the Senate, without summoning the applicant and his defence counsel, decided to extend the applicant’s detention until 30 April 2003. The only reason mentioned by the Senate was that the applicant was accused of committing a serious and violent crime.
On 25 November 2002 the applicant applied to the  requesting either to obtain an appropriate permission from the  to try and sentence him for a criminal offence or discontinue the criminal proceedings. On 6 December 2002 the  informed the applicant that his requests will be examined at the hearing on the merits of the case. On 23 December 2002 the applicant repeatedly requested the  to take an express decision on this issue, but to no avail. On 7 January 2003 the court informed the applicant that all his requests should have been decided at the preparatory hearing, according to the relevant Article of the Code of Criminal Procedure. However, as they had been submitted after the preparatory hearing, they were not subject to any other review at this stage of proceedings.
On 3 March 2003 the  commenced the hearing on the merits of the case. The applicant immediately tried to discharge the prosecutor, accusing him of committing a criminal offence and of forging evidence. The court rejected the applicant’s requests. On 11 March 2003, it resumed the hearing. The applicant tried to have the whole panel of three judges discharged because of their alleged impartiality in addressing the issue of the prosecutor. The court, again, dismissed the applicant’s requests. It also ordered the police to ensure the presence of some summoned witnesses who had failed to appear. On the next day, the witnesses failed to appear again. The court, again, ordered the police to bring them under constraint.
At the hearings of 14 and 17 March 2003 the applicant attempted again to have both the prosecutor and the judges dismissed, but in vain. The court also ordered the police to ensure the appearance of one remaining witness who had failed to appear.
At the same hearings, referring to Article 487 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the applicant also requested the court either to obtain an appropriate permission from the  to try him or to terminate the proceedings. His request was dismissed.
On 4 April 2003 the  found the applicant guilty of organising the murder and sentenced him to nine years of imprisonment. The time he had spent in pre-trial detention or custody both in Latvia and in the  was counted as a part of the sentence. As to V.Ķ., he was acquitted of murder, but found guilty of wilful destruction of property and sentenced to five years of imprisonment.
The applicant appealed the judgment. He stated, inter alia, that he had been convicted in breach of Article 487 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as the consent from the extraditing state to try and sentence him had not been obtained. On the other hand, he did not repeat his grievances in respect of the alleged partiality of the trial court in his appeal.
On 26 June 2003 the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court found the applicant’s appeal admissible. On 15 October 2003 it held its first hearing, whereby the applicant requested a series of investigative measures in order to verify several pieces of evidence. His requests were granted, and the hearing was adjourned. On 3 November and 23 December 2003 and on 21 January, 3 March and 25 May 2004 the applicant filed additional observations to supplement his appeal. Moreover, on 15 December 2003 the American lawyer who had represented the applicant in the extradition proceedings in the United States sent a letter to “the Latvian High Court Criminal Division” (sic), stating that the applicant had been deported from the  while the extradition proceedings had been pending.
On 16 January 2004 the applicant filed a complaint with the Prosecutor General’s Office complaining about undue delays in the appeal proceedings. The complaint was transmitted to the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court. On 12 February 2004 the President of the Criminal Chamber found that the proceedings were postponed lawfully. The applicant sent an essentially identical complaint to the Ministry of Justice, which also forwarded it to the Criminal Chamber. In reply, the latter informed the applicant that a hearing in his case was fixed for 2 June 2004.
By a judgment of 3 June 2004 the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It upheld the evaluation of the evidence by the first instance court in full. It also noted that the consent from the extraditing state to try him for the criminal offence had been lawfully obtained; in this respect the Chamber referred to a document signed by the  acting Secretary of State on 17 December 1999 approving the applicant’s deportation order.
The applicant filed a cassation appeal, reiterating his argument based on Article 487 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. On 3 September 2004 the Senate of the Supreme Court declared the cassation appeal inadmissible for lack of arguable points of law. It considered inter alia that the document signed by the acting Secretary of State of the  on 17 December 1999 had never been quashed and therefore the consent of the extraditing state to try the applicant had been lawfully obtained.
In 2007, having served his sentence, the applicant was released from prison.
The relevant provisions of domestic law are summarised in Svipsta v. Latvia (no. 66820/01, §§ 52-66, ECHR 2006III).
In addition, other relevant provisions of the former Code of Criminal Procedure in force at the material time read as follows:
Article 23-5
“A person who is extradited from a foreign state shall not, without a consent of the extraditing state, be charged with committing an offence and subsequently tried or surrendered to a third state for an offence he has committed prior to the extradition and in respect of which he has not been extradited.
...
(3rd paragraph added on 9 December 1999) The time period spent in detention in a foreign state shall not be counted as a part of the overall length of detention on remand, but it shall be included in the imprisonment term to be served.”
Article 487 (added on 20 June 2002)
“A person may only be indicted and tried for the criminal offence for which he had been extradited.
These conditions do not apply to the cases where:
1) a consent from the extraditing state to indict and to try the person for other offences committed before the extradition has been received;
2) the offence was committed after the person had been surrendered to ;
3) the person has not left  within 45 days after his liberation, although he had had such possibility;
4) the person had left  after the extradition and had returned therein. ...”
Article IV of the Treaty of Extradition of 16 October 1923 between Latvia and the , in force until 2009, read as follows:
“No person shall be tried for any crime or offense other than that for which he was surrendered.”