The case originated in an application (no. 21786/15) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Péter Lakatos (“the applicant”), on 24 April 2015.
The applicant was represented by Mr G.T. Takács, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained in particular that his detention on remand had lasted an unreasonably long time. He relied on Article 5 § 3 of the Convention.
On 10 April 2017 the application was communicated to the Government. The Court furthermore decided to inform the parties that it was considering the suitability of applying a pilot judgment procedure in the case (see Broniowski v. Poland [GC], 31443/96, §§ 189-194 and the operative part, ECHR 2004-V, and Hutten-Czapska v. Poland [GC], no. 35014/97, ECHR 2006-VII, §§ 231-239 and the operative part) and requested the parties’ observations on the matter.
On 29 June 2017, under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court, the President of the Section granted the Hungarian Helsinki Committee and the Human Rights Litigation Foundation leave to intervene jointly as a third party in the proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1986 and lives in Gyál.
On 26 February 2011 the Pest Central District Court remanded the applicant in custody under Article 129 § 2 (b) and (c) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, on suspicion of aggravated murder within the meaning of Article 166 § 1 of the Criminal Code. It summarised the suspicions against him, referred to police reports, an autopsy report, the victim’s medical documents, examinations of various exhibits and witness testimonies, and concluded that there was a reasonable suspicion that the applicant had poisoned the victim on 8 April 2010. The court found it established that there was a need for the applicant’s detention, because otherwise he would tamper with evidence by exerting pressure on the witnesses, as evidenced by his previous conduct whereby he had threatened them. It dismissed an argument by the applicant that he had committed the criminal offence more than a year before, thus the prosecutor’s office had erred in stating that he could tamper with evidence or influence witnesses. The court also held that the applicant’s “unclear” financial situation and the severity of the possible punishment demonstrated that there was a risk of his absconding. The court gave no consideration to an application by the applicant’s lawyer for the applicant to be placed under house arrest.
An appeal against that decision was dismissed on 3 March 2011.
On 21 March 2011 the Buda Central District Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 26 May 2011. It noted again that because of the severity of the possible punishment and the fact that the applicant had neither a permanent address nor a regular income, there were grounds to believe that he would abscond. The court held that there was a risk of his interfering with the investigation if he were to threaten the witnesses or destroy physical evidence.
The applicant appealed, arguing that the conditions for pre-trial detention had not been fulfilled because there was no risk of his absconding or influencing witnesses. He argued that his well-established personal circumstances – the fact that he lived with his common-law wife and two children, his parents, and his brother’s family – and the fact that he had no criminal record excluded the risk of his absconding. He further submitted that he had cooperated with the investigating authorities. Alternatively, the applicant requested that he be released and placed under house arrest.
The first-instance decision was upheld on appeal by the Budapest Regional Court on 15 April 2011, and the court’s reasoning was that the public interest in the applicant being detained was more important than his interest in his right to liberty being respected.
On 23 May 2011 the Buda Central District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 26 August 2011. The court maintained its previous reasons justifying the need for his detention. It emphasised that there was a risk of his absconding, owing to the severity of the possible punishment and the fact that he had no declared employment and had previously not been reachable at his permanent address. It added that, if released, the applicant might influence the witnesses or destroy evidence.
On 22 June 2011 the Budapest Regional Court upheld that decision.
On 24 August 2011 the Buda Central District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 26 November 2011 under Article 129 § 2 (b) (risk of absconding) and (c) (risk of collusion) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. As regards the risk of absconding, the court found that although the applicant had previously not been reachable at his permanent address and had only had temporary jobs, his temporary residence had been known and he had no criminal record. However, given the seriousness of the potential punishment and his “unstable” financial circumstances, his presence at the proceedings could only be ensured through the most restrictive measure. As regards the risk of collusion, the court dismissed an argument by the applicant’s lawyer that the prosecution authorities should have questioned all the witnesses by that stage of the proceedings. It held that although the majority of the witnesses had been heard, further questioning could still be necessary.
On 26 August 2011 the Budapest Regional Court upheld the lower court’s decision under Article 129 § 2 (b) and (c) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Subsequently, the applicant’s pre-trial detention was extended on a number of occasions. In particular, on 23 November 2011 the Buda Central District Court extended his detention until 26 February 2012. The court found that he had failed to attach a “hosting declaration” (befogadó nyilatkozat) and a declaration of his host’s financial capacity to his application to be placed under house arrest. According to the court, although the investigation was about to conclude, based on previous witness testimonies, there was a risk that the applicant would intimidate witnesses. It also held that this last reason could justify the applicant being detained until the closure of the investigation. That decision was upheld on appeal by the Budapest Regional Court on 1 December 2011. Although by that time the applicant had submitted a hosting declaration, the appeal court objected to his release for the reason that he had not provided a declaration of his host’s financial capacity.
Furthermore, on 24 February 2012 the Budapest High Court held that the unclarified financial situation of the applicant and the seriousness of the crime substantiated the risk of his absconding. It also found, without giving further reasoning, that there were still grounds to believe that at that stage of the proceedings the applicant would influence the witnesses. In an appeal, the applicant argued that the investigating authorities had implemented no procedural measures, the proceedings had been unreasonably lengthy, and previously he had always been reachable at his temporary residence. As regards the risk of his influencing witnesses, the applicant submitted that no such risk could be established two years after the alleged criminal offence. On 8 March 2012 the Budapest Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal, stating that the investigation was being conducted in a timely manner and witness testimonies had previously evidenced that the applicant had tried to exert pressure on the witnesses.
On 25 April 2012 the applicant’s pre-trial detention was extended by the Budapest High Court until 26 June 2012. The court maintained that, under Article 129 § 2 (b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, his detention was still necessary because of the risk of his absconding. It considered that the applicant had no “financial or essential” ties counterbalancing the risk of him escaping an eventual serious punishment. Although he had family ties, a child who was a minor, and a relative willing to give assurances to provide for him if he were released, given the seriousness of the charges, the gravity of the possible punishment and his unstable financial circumstances, there was a real risk that he would abscond. However, the court did not find that the risk of collusion (Article 129 § 2 (c) of the Code of Criminal Procedure) was substantiated, since there was no way to influence any of the investigative measures which the prosecution had relied on. In particular, the witness who the investigating authorities still intended to hear was unlikely to testify, given the fact that he was ill and unreachable. The court also considered that although it was likely that the applicant’s acquaintances and relatives had tried to influence witnesses in the two years following the commission of the crime, there was no reliable information that this had actually taken place, and a hypothetical risk of further attempts to do so could not substantiate the risk of collusion.
That decision was upheld on appeal on 7 May 2012.
On 22 June 2012 the applicant’s pre-trial detention was extended until 26 August 2012. The court agreed with the applicant’s argument that his unsettled personal circumstances could not be relied on to justify his detention after the passing of a lengthy period of time following his arrest. It nonetheless held that, in the absence of any financial ties, his family ties could not counterbalance the risk of his absconding, also having regard to the severity to the potential punishment.
That decision was upheld on appeal by the Budapest Court of Appeal on 28 June 2012, and an appeal by the applicant to the effect that less restrictive measures could be applied in his case was dismissed.
The Budapest High Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention on 21 August 2012, reiterating the same arguments as before. It dismissed the applicant’s arguments that no investigative measure had been implemented for a considerable period of time. It also found that the hosting declaration of the applicant’s family member, the fact that he was raising a child who was a minor, and the fact that his legal residence had also been clarified were irrelevant, and did not diminish the risk of his absconding. The second-instance court upheld the decision on 24 August 2012.
On 24 October 2012 the applicant’s pre-trial detention was extended again for a month under Article 129 § 2 (b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. However, the Budapest High Court expressed doubts as to whether there was enough evidence to conclude that there was a reasonable suspicion that the applicant had committed the crime. It dismissed an argument by the prosecutor’s office that the applicant would hinder the investigation. It considered that, irrespective of the seriousness of the charges, it appeared that there was less risk of his absconding, since he was raising two children who were minors and he had no criminal record. On appeal, the Budapest Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance judgment but extended the applicant’s detention by two months.
On 21 December 2012 the applicant’s detention was extended; the Budapest High Court again referred to the fact that, at the time of his arrest, the applicant had been unreachable at his permanent address and had been earning a living from temporary jobs, which, taken together with the severity of the potential punishment, substantiated the risk of his absconding. The decision was upheld on appeal on 10 January 2013.
On 22 February 2013 the Budapest High Court released the applicant from pre-trial detention and placed him on bail under house arrest. According to that decision, besides the suspicion against the applicant, the only grounds for restricting his liberty were the risk of his absconding, given the gravity of the offence, and this in itself could not justify his continued pre-trial detention. On appeal, the Budapest Court of Appeal reversed the first-instance decision and placed the applicant in detention on 28 March 2013. It noted that, given the seriousness of the offence, there was a danger of his absconding, irrespective of his family ties.
On 23 April 2013 the Budapest High Court released the applicant from detention upon his giving an undertaking not to leave his place of residence. Relying on the Court’s case-law, the High Court found that pretrial detention could only serve as a measure of last resort, and the applicant’s continued detention would only serve as an anticipated punishment. The decision was overturned by the Budapest Court of Appeal on 26 April 2016, and the applicant was placed in detention for the same reasons as those given before.
On 17 June 2013 the Budapest Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office preferred a bill of indictment.
On 25 June 2013 the Budapest High Court extended the applicant’s detention until the date of the first-instance court’s judgment, under Article 129 § 2 (b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (risk of absconding), for essentially the same reasons as those given before.
On 28 January the applicant applied for release, but the application was dismissed on 18 February by the Budapest High Court on the grounds that, given the gravity of the offence and the complexity of the case, pretrial detention did not constitute an anticipated punishment. That decision was upheld on appeal by the Budapest Court of Appeal on 18 February 2014. A further application by the applicant of 18 April 2014 was dismissed on 8 April 2014 (the dismissal was upheld by the second-instance court on 24 April 2014) on the grounds that the applicant had not relied on new circumstances warranting his release.
The applicant’s detention was reviewed on 16 July 2014 by the Budapest Court of Appeal. It held that the gravity of the offence, the applicant’s lack of financial resources and essential ties, and the fact that he had only notified the authorities of his place of residence once he had been placed in detention substantiated the risk of his absconding.
On appeal, that decision was upheld by the Kúria on 24 September 2014, which endorsed the reasons given by the lower court. The Kúria also found that the applicant’s pre-trial detention was both necessary and proportionate, and no less restrictive measure would be sufficient to ensure the purpose of the criminal proceedings.
On 29 October 2014 the applicant was found guilty of aggravated murder and sentenced to eighteen years’ imprisonment by the Budapest High Court.
The relevant parts of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Act no. XIX of 1998) provide as follows:
“(2)  Pre-trial detention of a defendant may take place in proceedings related to a criminal offence punishable by imprisonment, provided that:
(a)  the defendant has escaped, or has attempted to escape, or has absconded from the court, or the prosecutor or the investigating authority, or other proceedings have been initiated against the defendant for the commission of an intentional criminal offence also punishable by imprisonment,
(b)  if, owing to the risk of [the defendant] escaping or absconding, or for other reasons, there is reasonable cause to believe that the defendant’s presence during procedural actions cannot be otherwise ensured,
(c)  if there is reasonable cause to believe that, if left at liberty, the defendant would frustrate, obstruct or jeopardise the obtaining of evidence, especially by means of influencing or intimidating witnesses, or by the destruction, falsification or concealment of physical evidence or documents...
(d)  if there is reasonable cause to believe that, if left at liberty, the defendant would accomplish the attempted or planned criminal offence or commit another criminal offence punishable by imprisonment.”
“(2)  Instead of pre-trial detention, the court may impose [on a defendant]: an obligation not to leave a certain area; house arrest; or a restraining order.”
“(1)  Pre-trial detention ordered prior to the indictment being preferred may continue until the decision of the court of first instance during the preparations for trial, but may never exceed one month. Pre-trial detention may be extended by the investigating judge by a maximum of three months on each occasion, but the overall period may still not exceed one year after the order for pre-trial detention. Thereafter, pre-trial detention may be extended by the county court acting as a single judge by a maximum of two months on each occasion, in compliance with the procedural rules pertaining to investigating judges.”
“(1)  The court shall examine an application to terminate pre-trial detention on the merits, and deliver a reasoned decision on that application. Repeated applications may be rejected by the court without substantial justification, unless the defendant or defence counsel relies on new circumstances.”
“(1)  The court, the prosecutor and the investigating authority shall take all necessary steps to reduce a term of pre-trial detention by as much as possible. If the defendant is held in pre-trial detention, an extraordinary procedure shall be conducted.”
“(2)  The suspect, defence counsel or victim may inspect any expert opinion prepared during the investigation, but may only inspect other documents if this would not be contrary to the interests of the investigation.”
“(1)  After the conclusion of an investigation, the prosecutor or (unless the prosecutor allows otherwise) the investigating authority shall hand over the investigation file to the suspect and defence counsel in a room designated for that purpose. The suspect and defence counsel shall be permitted to inspect all the documents – with the exception of those treated as confidential – that may serve as the basis for pressing charges.”
“(1)  The investigating judge shall hold a hearing if the application relates to the following:
“(1a)  [As in force since 1 July 2015] If the application concerns the ordering of pre-trial detention, copies of all investigation documents relied on in the application shall be attached to the application sent to the suspect and his/her defence counsel. If the application concerns the extension of pre-trial detention, copies of all investigation documents produced since the last decision on pre-trial detention shall be attached to the application sent to the suspect and his/her defence counsel.
...
(3)  At the [court] hearing, the [prosecution], having submitted the application [for pre-trial detention or for extending pre-trial detention] shall present the evidence substantiating the application in writing or orally. Those present shall be given the opportunity to examine the evidence, within the limits set out in Article 186 ... If a notified party does not attend the hearing but has submitted observations in writing, this document shall be presented by the investigating judge.
(4)  The investigating judge shall examine whether the statutory requirements related to the application have been met, whether there are any obstacles to the criminal proceedings, and whether the application is substantiated beyond reasonable doubt. In the cases specified in Article 210 § 1 (a) to (d), this examination shall also extend to the personal circumstances of the suspect.”
“(1)  Unless otherwise provided for in this Act, the investigating judge shall deliver a ruling with an explanation of the reasons [for the decision] within three days of the application being submitted, [a ruling] in which he accepts or rejects the application either wholly or in part. The explanation shall include the substance of the application, a brief description, and a classification of the criminal offence underlying the procedure, and shall state whether the statutory requirements related to the application have or have not been met. If the investigating judge rejects the application, it may not be repeated on identical grounds.”
“(1)  A decision of the investigating judge may be appealed against by all those parties who have been notified of the decision. Any appeal against a decision given orally shall be lodged [orally] immediately after the decision has been given.
...
(5)  Regardless of an appeal, an order for a coercive measure involving the restriction or deprivation of a person’s liberty may be executed [immediately].”
On 4 May 2011 the Head of the Criminal Division of the Supreme Court issued Opinion No. BKv. 93 on the interpretation and application of the relevant provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure governing access to investigation files in habeas corpus proceedings. The opinion pointed out that: “in the reasoning of the decision on pre-trial detention, the investigating judge gives an account of the general preconditions for pretrial detention, and gives reasons as to which special grounds for pretrial detention he or she has found to be established, based on which data. The reasoning of the decision should elaborate on the factual and legal arguments of the defence and the judicial assessment of those arguments ... When assessing the special grounds for pre-trial detention, the court must display special diligence. It must have due regard to the fact that any proposition that a certain event might occur in the future can only be based on factual grounds. The term ‘reasonable grounds to believe’ refers to events in the future that are predictable, possible, conceivable, that are likely to happen, based on the available facts and circumstances. The severity of the criminal offence – and the prospective punishment – is only relevant when taken together with the special circumstances of the case ... The severity of the criminal offence does not in itself constitute grounds for pretrial detention. It is not sufficient to refer to the application of the prosecutor’s office in the reasoning of the decision, the courts should give account of the reasonable suspicion against the suspect, the special grounds for pre-trial detention, and any doubt concerning the well-founded nature of the prosecutor’s application. The court must also elaborate on the personal circumstances of the suspect and what conclusions can be drawn from those circumstances. In compliance with the adversarial nature of the proceedings, the reasoning should establish the facts serving as the basis of each special ground for pre-trial detention, and should present the factual and legal arguments of the defence submitted in response to the application of the prosecutor, and should elaborate on the judicial assessment of those arguments.”
The statistical data available on the website of the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office as regards the application of preventive measures – including remand in custody, the obligation not to leave a certain area, and house arrest – can be summarised as follows:
On 29 May 2017 the Kúria issued a report entitled “Summary of the assessment of the jurisprudence concerning measures restricting personal liberty”, providing an analysis of the decisions of lower courts in pre-trial detention proceedings. The report contains the following recommendations:
“To avoid the shortcomings of previous practice, in each case it must be assessed whether a less restrictive measure could serve the same aims. Pre-trial detention could only be ordered if house arrest [or] the obligation not to leave a certain area cannot be envisaged by the court. Similarly, house arrest should only be ordered if the obligation not to leave a certain area cannot sufficiently achieve the same purpose. This assessment is especially important following the presentation of the indictment or the first-instance judgment.
Regard must always be had to the courts’ obligation under Article 136 § (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure to reduce the length of pre-trial detention to the minimum possible.
...
In every case, courts must have regard to the submissions of the suspect and the defence, even if they are not decisive in the decision. It is not enough to make reference to them, sufficient reasons must be given as to why the court did not find them well-founded...
The fact that the suspect has fled or absconded cannot be relied upon to substantiate the special grounds for pre-trial detention under both Article 129 § 2 (a) of the Code of Criminal Code and Article 129 § 2 (b). If the suspect has already escaped or fled, it cannot be held that, for the same reasons, the risk of absconding also exists.
If the decision is based on Article 129 § [2] (a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the reasoning must contain [reference to] the time when the new criminal proceedings were instituted against the suspect, the authority conducting the proceedings, the case number, and the criminal offence which is the subject of the case.
As regards the risk of [a person] fleeing and absconding dealt with in Article 129 § 2, it is not sufficient to refer to the severity of the prospective punishment, it is also necessary to establish the scale of the penalty.
... the court must also describe, besides the severity of the prospective punishment, which personal circumstances of the suspect lead it to conclude that a risk of the suspect escaping or absconding existed.
In a decision based on Article 129 § 2 (c), it is not sufficient to rely on [a proposition] that the suspect would frustrate, obstruct or jeopardise the obtaining of evidence, this presumption must also be substantiated with fact. This is particularly true for restrictive measures maintained following the first-instance judgment, that is [following] the evidence having been obtained.
The factual basis of the risk of reoffending – the special grounds for pre-trial detention contained in Article 129 § 2 (d) – must be contained in the decision. It is not sufficient to mention that the criminal offence is of a repetitive nature. A criminal record can be grounds to conclude that there is a risk of reoffending, nonetheless it is relevant to note how many times [offences were committed], which criminal offences [were committed], when the suspect was the subject of criminal proceedings, and what the resulting punishment was...
The decisions based on the prosecution’s application must also elaborate on the factual and legal arguments of the suspect and the defence and on the judicial opinion on those arguments. In the event that the defence has requested the application of a less restrictive measure, it must also be mentioned why the court does not find [such measures] applicable.”
On 29 September 2006 the Committee of Ministers adopted Recommendation Rec(2006)13 to member States on the use of remand in custody, the conditions in which it is applied, and the provision of safeguards against abuse. The relevant parts read as follows:
“General principles
[1] In view of both the presumption of innocence and the presumption in favour of liberty, the remand in custody of persons suspected of an offence shall be the exception rather than the norm.
In order to avoid inappropriate use of remand in custody the widest possible range of alternative, less restrictive measures relating to the conduct of a suspected offender shall be made available.
Remand prisoners shall be subject to conditions appropriate to their legal status; this entails the absence of restrictions other than those necessary for the administration of justice, the security of the institution, the safety of prisoners and staff and the protection of the rights of others and in particular the fulfilment of the requirements of the European Prison Rules and the other rules set out in Part III of the present text.
The use of remand in custody
Justification
Remand in custody shall generally be available only in respect of persons suspected of committing offences that are imprisonable.
A person may only be remanded in custody where all of the following four conditions are satisfied:
[1] In order to establish whether the concerns referred to in Rule 7b. exist, or continue to do so, as well as whether they could be satisfactorily allayed through the use of alternative measures, objective criteria shall be applied by the judicial authorities responsible for determining whether suspected offenders shall be remanded in custody or, where this has already happened, whether such remand shall be extended.
[1] The determination of any risk shall be based on the individual circumstances of the case, but particular consideration shall be given to:
Wherever possible remand in custody should be avoided in the case of suspected offenders who have the primary responsibility for the care of infants.
In deciding whether remand in custody shall be continued, it shall be borne in mind that particular evidence which may once have previously made the use of such a measure seem appropriate, or the use of alternative measures seem inappropriate, may be rendered less compelling with the passage of time.
A breach of alternative measures may be subject to a sanction but shall not automatically justify subjecting someone to remand in custody. In such cases the replacement of alternative measures by remand in custody shall require specific motivation.
Judicial authorisation
The responsibility for remanding someone in custody, authorising its continuation and imposing alternative measures shall be discharged by a judicial authority.
...
Duration
[1] Remand in custody shall only ever be continued so long as all the conditions in Rules 6 and 7 are fulfilled.
Any specification of a maximum period of remand in custody shall not lead to a failure to consider at regular intervals the actual need for its continuation in the particular circumstances of a given case.
[1] It is the responsibility of the prosecuting authority or the investigating judicial authority to act with due diligence in the conduct of an investigation and to ensure that the existence of matters supporting remand in custody is kept under continuous review.”
On 1 October 2015 the Parliamentary Assembly adopted Resolution no. 2077 entitled “Abuse of pre-trial detention in States Parties to the European Convention on Human Rights”, in which it called on all States Parties to the Convention to:
“12.1. implement measures aimed at reducing pre-trial detention, including the following:
On 2 December 2011 the Committee of Ministers adopted Resolution CM/ResDH(2011)222 on the execution of judgments of the European Court of Human Rights in four cases against Hungary concerning the length of detention on remand. According to information provided by the Government, following amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure which had entered into force on 1 July 2003, domestic courts were to give detailed reasons for remanding a person in custody. In addition, the risk that an accused person might abscond was no longer to be deduced from the seriousness of the alleged crime alone. Moreover, following further amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure which had entered into force on 1 May 2006, courts were only to remand a person in custody as a last resort, while taking into account the principle of proportionality.
In its decision of CM/Del/Dec(2017)1288/H46-16 of 7 June 2017 concerning prison overcrowding in Hungary, the Committee of Ministers “noted with interest the further extension of the application of “reintegration custody”, the facilitation of and increase in the use of house arrest, and the slight decrease in the number of defendants placed in pre-trial detention; and it strongly encouraged the authorities to further pursue their efforts in this regard and to find all possible means “to encourage prosecutors and judges to use as widely as possible alternatives to detention...”.