The case originated in an application (no. 25935/08) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Aleksandr Arzumanyan (“the applicant”), on 29 December 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Grigoryan, a lawyer practising in London. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic courts had failed to provide relevant and sufficient reasons for his detention.
On 6 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Yerevan. He is a former Minister of Foreign Affairs and at the material time he headed a political movement called “Civil Disobedience”.
.  On 5 May 2007 criminal proceedings were instituted under Article 190 § 3 (1) of the Criminal Code (money laundering) in respect of the applicant.
On 7 May 2007 the applicant was arrested and on 10 May 2007 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan ordered the applicant’s detention for a period of two months, upon an application by the investigator, taking into account the nature and the dangerousness of the imputed offence and the fact that the applicant, if remaining at large, could abscond and obstruct the investigation by exerting unlawful influence on the persons involved in the proceedings. The applicant objected to that application, arguing that the investigator had failed to submit any wellfounded arguments in support of the allegation that he would abscond or obstruct justice, whereas he had no previous convictions, was known to be of good character, had a permanent place of residence and stable social life, and was a well-known public figure. The District Court’s decision stated that it could be contested before the Criminal Court of Appeal within fifteen days.
.  On 11 May 2007 the applicant lodged an appeal, raising similar arguments.
On 24 May 2007 the Criminal Court of Appeal decided to uphold the decision of the District Court, finding that the nature and the dangerousness of the imputed offence, the particular circumstances of the case and the possible investigative measures to be carried out gave sufficient reasons to believe that the applicant could obstruct the investigation.
On 2 July 2007 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan extended the applicant’s detention by two months, upon an application by the investigator, finding that the applicant, if remaining at large, could obstruct the investigation, abscond, exert unlawful influence on the persons involved in the proceedings and commit another offence. The District Court’s decision stated that it could be contested before the Criminal Court of Appeal.
.  On 3 July and 3 September 2007 the applicant lodged an appeal, raising arguments similar to those previously raised.
On 24 July 2007 the Criminal Court of Appeal decided to uphold the decision of the District Court, finding that the nature and the dangerousness of the imputed offence, the particular circumstances and complexity of the case; the investigative measures to be carried out and the applicant’s behaviour, namely his refusal to give any testimony, which was a factor slowing down the investigation, gave sufficient reasons to believe that the applicant could obstruct the investigation by exerting unlawful influence on the persons involved in the proceedings and also abscond.
On 31 August 2007 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan extended the applicant’s detention by two months, upon an application of the investigator, on the same grounds as before. The District Court’s decision stated that it could be contested before the Criminal Court of Appeal.
.  On 3 September 2007 the applicant lodged an appeal, raising arguments similar to those previously raised
.  On 6 September 2007 the investigator decided to replace the applicant’s detention with a written undertaking not to leave his residence and to release him in view of the fact that the investigative measures would take some time and it was no longer necessary to keep the applicant in detention.
.  On 17 September 2007 the Criminal Court of Appeal decided to leave the applicant’s appeal of 3 September 2007 unexamined in view of the fact that he had been released.
The Armenian Constitution was enacted in 1995. On 27 November 2005 the Constitution was amended with effect from 6 December 2005. In accordance with the new Article 92 of the Constitution, the Court of Cassation, as the highest judicial instance, was entrusted with a new role, namely to ensure the uniform application of the law.
Article 22 of the Constitution provided at the material time that no one was obliged to testify against himself, his spouse or a close relative.
Article 137 § 5 provides that a court decision imposing detention as a preventive measure may be contested before a higher court.
Article 287 provides that an appeal against a court decision whether or not to impose or extend detention may be lodged with the Court of Appeal.
Article 403 provided at the material time that an appeal on points of law might be lodged against final judgments and decisions of the first instance courts and the Court of Appeal.
Paragraph 4 of the Decision stated that Article 137 § 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP) prescribed that a court’s decision to impose detention as a preventive measure might be contested before a higher court. However, the Code did not provide for a procedure for contesting the lawfulness and reasons of the Court of Appeal’s decisions imposing and extending detention. Hence, in such cases the Court of Appeal’s decisions might be contested before the Court of Cassation.
The Decision stated that Paragraph 4 of Decision no. 20 of the Council of Court Chairmen of 12 February 2000 was repealed, taking into account that under Article 92 of the Constitution the Court of Cassation, as the highest general jurisdiction court, was called upon to ensure the uniform application of the law.
The Decision set out the new text of Paragraph 4 of Decision no. 20 of the Council of Court Chairmen of 12 February 2000. It stated that, since under Article 92 of the Constitution the Court of Cassation was the highest judicial instance called upon to ensure the uniform application of the law, an appeal to that court against decisions taken in pre-trial proceedings, including any decision on detention, did not follow from its constitutional status. Such appeals were to be left unexamined. In exceptional cases they might be examined by the Court of Cassation, if they raised issues of importance for judicial practice.
On 13 July and 30 August 2007 the Court of Cassation examined appeals on points of law in two detention cases (decisions nos. VB-115/07 and VB-132/07). Both appeals on points of law were lodged by the General Prosecutor’s Office against decisions of the Criminal Court of Appeal releasing the relevant detainees on bail. The appeals on points of law were admitted for examination on the ground that a decision by the Court of Cassation in those cases might have a significant impact on the uniform application of the law. The Court of Cassation quashed the decisions of the Court of Appeal, finding, inter alia, that that court had no authority under the law to release a detainee on bail, if that issue had not been the subject of examination before the trial court.