The case originated in an application (no. 43977/13) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Swiss national, Mr Mihret Kadusic (“the applicant”), on 1 July 2013.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Sutter-Jeker, a lawyer practising in Basle. The Swiss Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Schürmann.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that there had been an insufficient causal link between his criminal conviction, handed down at first instance on 27 May 2005 and upheld on appeal on 12 January 2007, and the institutional therapeutic measure subsequently ordered in respect of him, and that this amounted to a violation of Article 5 § 1 (a) of the Convention.
On 21 May 2015 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Article 5 § 1 and Article 7 of the Convention and Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1982 and is currently detained in Bostadel Prison, in Menzingen.
In a judgment of 27 May 2005 the Criminal Court of the Canton of Basle Urban (“the Criminal Court”) found the applicant guilty, on account of acts committed between 2000 and 2004, of robbery, endangering life, assault with a dangerous object causing multiple bodily injuries, multiple acts of coercion, multiple offences of receiving stolen goods, and offences under federal legislation on drugs, road traffic and weapons. The Criminal Court sentenced him to eight years’ imprisonment, after deducting periods spent in pre-trial detention from 22 May to 25 June 2003 and from 3 May 2004 until the delivery of the judgment. In addition, the Criminal Court declared enforceable a twelve-month custodial sentence that had been suspended when handed down on 2 May 2001, for theft and attempted coercion. On 19 July 2005 the applicant was transferred to Bostadel Prison.
In a judgment of 12 January 2007 the Court of Appeal of the Canton of Basle Urban (“the Court of Appeal”) dismissed an appeal by the applicant, essentially upholding the first-instance judgment. In a judgment of 12 May 2007 the Federal Court dismissed a subsequent appeal by the applicant.
In a letter dated 4 July 2007, addressed to the intercantonal commission for the assessment of the dangerousness of offenders in the Cantons of Solothurn, Basle Urban and Basle Rural (“the intercantonal commission”), the applicant asked for the conditions of his sentence to be relaxed. The intercantonal commission submitted its report on 29 October 2007. It found that it was premature to grant any adjustments other than the opportunity to work in an outside environment, on the grounds that the applicant, who did not have a mental illness or a personality disorder, had not shown willingness to “come to terms with his criminal past”. The intercantonal commission thus concluded that the applicant was to be regarded as a danger to the public. It recommended an expert psychiatric assessment and vocational guidance measures, and acknowledged that the applicant could work in an outside environment but could not be granted any other adjustments of the conditions of his sentence, such as being able to spend the holidays with his father.
Acting on instructions from the Department of Justice of the Canton of Basle Urban, Dr R.A., a psychiatrist and psychotherapist, issued a psychiatric opinion on 24 September 2008 after examining the applicant in person, and diagnosed him as having moderate paranoid and narcissistic personality disorders (World Health Organization International Classification of Diseases – ICD-10), with full criminal responsibility. Dr R.A. found that these disorders had already been present at the time when the offences had been committed. He also noted that the applicant was not prepared to engage in self-reflection and to change his attitude, meaning that there would generally be a high risk of reoffending, and concluded that the prognosis was highly unfavourable.
On 15 October 2008 the governor of Bostadel Prison drew up a progress report on the applicant’s detention, in which he noted that there was a high risk that the applicant might escape and accordingly proposed that he be employed within the prison premises.
In a report dated 10 November 2008 the intercantonal commission found that the applicant represented a danger to the public, and recommended that no adjustments to the conditions of his sentence be ordered and that the appropriate court be asked to review whether the conditions for an (outpatient) therapeutic measure in conjunction with the sentence (vollzugsbegleitende therapeutische Massnahme) were satisfied (Article 63 of the Criminal Code). The intercantonal commission also recommended that should such a measure prove unsuccessful, consideration be given to converting the sentence into indefinite detention.
On 30 December 2008 the Department of Justice of the Canton of Basle Urban asked the Court of Appeal to ascertain whether, following its judgment of 12 January 2007, the conditions for ordering a therapeutic measure were satisfied. On 9 June 2009 the governor of Bostadel Prison issued a progress report on the applicant’s detention, in which he noted in particular that the applicant had refused any psychotherapy. In a judgment of 4 December 2009 the Court of Appeal held that there was no legal basis justifying a subsequent order for an outpatient therapeutic measure, but wondered whether it might be advisable to order institutional measures. To clarify this possibility, it proposed that an additional expert report be drawn up.
In a report dated 5 January 2010 the governor of Bostadel Prison noted in particular that the applicant had displayed good behaviour while working in an outside environment and that release on parole could therefore be envisaged, even if only for a limited period.
On 30 June 2010, in an additional report to the expert report of 24 September 2008, after examining the applicant in person, Professor A.E., a psychiatrist and psychotherapist, concluded that it was unlikely that an institutional therapeutic measure would serve any useful purpose, given that the applicant was not showing any motivation to change his attitude towards the offences he had committed and was incapable of developing empathy. She added that the applicant was not especially overawed, in emotional terms, by the sentence he was serving. However, she did not rule out all possibility of treatment, referring to some more promising therapeutic approaches.
On 7 July 2010, referring to the above-mentioned additional psychiatric report, the post-sentencing authority of the Canton of Basle Urban (“the post-sentencing authority”) asked the Court of Appeal to review whether, following its judgment of 12 January 2007, the conditions for ordering subsequent indefinite detention, or possibly an institutional therapeutic measure, were satisfied (Articles 64 and 59 of the Criminal Code respectively, taken together with Article 65; see paragraph 24 below). In submissions of 20 September 2010 the applicant asked the Court of Appeal to find that this was not the case.
On 17 December 2010 the governor and the sentence supervision officer of Bostadel Prison produced a report on the progress of the applicant’s detention, in which they noted that there was no obstacle to a gradual relaxation of the conditions of his sentence until his release on parole. In a letter dated 21 April 2011 to the Court of Appeal, they confirmed their findings of 17 December 2010.
In a judgment of 6 May 2011, after hearing evidence from Professor A.E. and the applicant’s representative that day, the Court of Appeal ordered the applicant’s subsequent indefinite detention under Article 65 § 2 of the Criminal Code, in its version in force since 1 January 2007. At the hearing that day, the applicant and his lawyer had had the opportunity to put questions to A.E.
In a judgment of 30 January 2012 the Federal Court partly upheld an appeal by the applicant against the Court of Appeal’s judgment of 6 May 2011, finding that the conditions for ordering subsequent indefinite detention were not satisfied. It noted that indefinite detention was an exceptional measure and could only be ordered with caution. It pointed out that in view of the significant restrictions this measure entailed for the person concerned, indefinite detention should be regarded as a last resort, and this applied a fortiori where it was ordered subsequently. It added that the indefinite detention of a young person who had received no previous treatment could only be justified if it was unlikely that within a period of approximately five years, therapy would lead to a significant reduction of the risk of reoffending.
In addition, the Federal Court noted that it was appropriate to consider whether an institutional therapeutic measure should be ordered. It found that it could not be ruled out that the applicant might respond favourably to psychological counselling. Accordingly, it quashed the judgment appealed against and remitted the case to the Court of Appeal for a fresh decision.
In a judgment of 22 August 2012 the Court of Appeal ordered an institutional therapeutic measure, in accordance with Article 65 § 1 of the Criminal Code, at the same time suspending the execution of the part of the sentence remaining to be served (“Der Restvollzug ... wird aufgeschoben ...”). Before giving judgment, the Court of Appeal had requested information from Professor A.E. In her reply dated 25 June 2012 she had affirmed, with reference to Article 59 § 3 of the Criminal Code, that in view of the type, severity and complexity of the applicant’s mental disorder, only an institutional measure was likely to meet his therapeutic needs to an adequate extent. She had also pointed out that the prisons in Thorberg (Canton of Berne) and Pöschwies (Canton of Zurich) had therapy departments (“Therapieabteilungen”) for the purposes of Article 59 § 3 of the Criminal Code and that this should be borne in mind.
According to the applicant, he should have completed his sentence on 19 March 2013, taking into account his pre-trial detention from 22 May to 25 June 2003 and from 3 May 2004 onwards (see paragraph 6 above).
In a judgment of 28 May 2013 the Federal Court dismissed an appeal by the applicant against the judgment of 22 August 2012, observing that the subsequent ordering of an institutional therapeutic measure was compatible with the Convention, from the standpoint of Articles 5 and 7 and of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7, and with federal law. More specifically, the Federal Court acknowledged that the law governing measures for offenders other than sentences (Articles 56-65 of the Criminal Code) applied retrospectively to criminal acts committed before the entry into force of the relevant law on 1 January 2007 (paragraph 2, sub-paragraph 1, of the transitional provisions of the 13 December 2002 amendment to the Criminal Code). The Federal Court left open the question of the application of the principle of non-retrospective application to institutional therapeutic measures ordered subsequently, pointing out that although such measures were to be regarded as a penalty within the meaning of Article 7 of the Convention, the fact that such a measure had been ordered subsequently in the applicant’s case had not resulted in a heavier penalty being imposed on him than the one applicable under the law in force when the criminal acts had been committed, seeing that the measures provided for under the former law (Article 43 of the Criminal Code, in force until 31 December 2006) had been at least as strict as those applicable under the new law; that being so, there had been no breach of the principle of non-retrospective application in the present case. Regarding Article 5 § 1 (a) of the Convention, the Federal Court noted that although a subsequent order for an institutional therapeutic measure was inherently at variance with the binding nature of the principal judgment, there had to be a sufficient causal link between the judgment and the measure for the subsequent detention ordered in the context of review proceedings to comply with that Convention provision. Such a link had been present in his case. With regard to the ne bis in idem principle, after noting that Article 4 § 2 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention provided for a number of exceptions to that principle, the Federal Court observed that the review conducted in the present case for the purposes of ordering a subsequent institutional therapeutic measure on the basis of the applicant’s serious mental illness, which had already been present but had not been detected at the time of the initial judgment, did not constitute a second penalty in respect of him.
In response to the applicant’s argument that the expert medical opinions no longer reflected his current psychiatric condition, the Federal Court pointed out that the extremely detailed expert opinion of 24 September 2008 had been supplemented by the report of 30 June 2010 and corroborated by the expert’s oral statements at the hearing on 6 May 2011 concerning the diagnosis and the risk of reoffending. The Federal Court thus concluded that the expert opinions reflected the applicant’s current state of health.
Having been invited by the Court to provide information about the applicant’s current situation, the parties submitted observations on the matter. In a letter dated 26 May 2016 the applicant informed the Court that he was still in Bostadel Prison, and had been there since 19 July 2005 (see paragraph 6 above). He maintained that he was not receiving any treatment or therapy.
In a letter dated 31 May 2016 the Government confirmed that the applicant was still in Bostadel Prison. They added that the prison offered programmes, in the form of therapeutic services provided by the Forensic Institute of Central Switzerland (Forensisches Institut Zentralschweiz (forio)), aimed at treating disorders such as those affecting the applicant. The Government stated that he had categorically refused to undergo any (psychiatric) treatment whatsoever and had justified his refusal by referring to the proceedings pending before the Court.
Both parties appended reports by Bostadel Prison on the applicant’s behaviour. The reports indicated that his behaviour was decent and discreet, including in the context of his work assignments.
The provisions of the former Criminal Code of 21 December 1937, as in force until 31 December 2006, were worded as follows:
“1.  The court may replace a sentence of imprisonment with indefinite detention if, after committing multiple intentional criminal offences for which he has been deprived of his liberty for a total of at least two years, whether as a result of sentences of imprisonment, or as a result of a vocational training measure or after having already been detained indefinitely as a habitual offender instead of serving custodial sentences, the offender, within a period of five years following his final release, commits a further intentional criminal offence indicating his criminal tendencies. If necessary, the court shall order an examination of the offender’s mental state.
The detention shall take place in an open or secure facility, not including institutions for first offenders, prisons for minor offences, vocational training facilities or institutions for alcoholics.
The detainee shall be required to perform any work assigned to him. After a period equivalent to half the sentence, but not less than two years, a detainee who has displayed good conduct may be employed outside the institution. In exceptional cases, this adjustment may be granted to other detainees if their condition so dictates.
The detainee shall remain in the institution for a period equivalent to two-thirds of the sentence, but no less than three years, after deduction of any period of detention on remand counting towards the sentence. The competent authority shall order conditional release for three years once the minimum period prescribed for such release has expired, if detention no longer appears necessary; it shall place the released person under supervision. In the event of a return to detention, the minimum period of the further detention shall generally be at least five years.
On a proposal by the competent authority, the court may in exceptional cases terminate the detention before the expiry of its minimum period if it is no longer justified and two-thirds of the duration of the sentence has elapsed.”
“1.  Where the mental state of an offender who, by reason of that state, has committed an act punishable by imprisonment under this Code requires medical treatment or special care intended to remove or reduce the risk that the offender might commit other such punishable acts, the court may order that he be sent to a hospital or an asylum. It may order outpatient treatment if the offender does not represent a danger to others.
If, on account of his mental state, the offender poses a severe threat to public safety and such a measure is necessary to prevent a danger to others, the court shall order his indefinite detention. The detention shall take place in an appropriate institution. The court shall deliver its judgment on the basis of an expert opinion concerning the offender’s physical and mental condition, and the necessity of detention, treatment or care.
In the case of indefinite detention or admission to a hospital or asylum, the court shall suspend the execution of a custodial sentence. Where outpatient treatment is ordered, the court may suspend the execution of the sentence if it is not compatible with the treatment. In such circumstances, it may order the convicted person to comply with rules of conduct in accordance with Article 41 § 2 and, if necessary, place him under court supervision.
Where treatment in an institution is ended owing to lack of success, the court shall decide whether and to what extent any suspended sentences are to be served. If outpatient treatment is deemed to be ineffective or to pose a danger to others and the offender’s mental state nevertheless requires special treatment or care, the court shall order the offender’s admission to a hospital or an asylum. Where treatment in an institution is unnecessary, the court shall decide whether and to what extent any suspended sentences are to be served. In place of such sentences, the court may order another security measure if the relevant conditions are satisfied.
The competent authority shall terminate the measure where its purpose has ceased to exist. If the reason for the measure has not entirely subsided, the competent authority may order release from the institution or from the treatment on a probationary basis. The released person may be placed under court supervision. The probation or supervision shall be discontinued if they are no longer justified. The competent authority shall forward its decision to the court prior to the release.
After hearing evidence from the medical officer, the court shall decide whether and to what extent any suspended sentences are to be served from the time of release from the institution or from the end of the treatment. It may discharge the sentence in full if there is cause to fear that the effects of the measure would be seriously undermined by completing the sentence. The duration of detention following the implementation of an institutional measure shall be counted towards the sentence that was suspended when the measure was ordered. When giving notice of its decision, the competent authority shall state whether it considers that the serving of the sentence would have a detrimental effect on the released person.”
The relevant provisions of the new Criminal Code, in force since 1 January 2007, are worded as follows:
“1.  A measure shall be ordered if:
The ordering of a measure presupposes that the resulting interference with the offender’s personality rights is not disproportionate in view of the likelihood and seriousness of further potential offences.
When ordering a measure under Articles 59-61, 63 and 64 or amending a sanction in accordance with Article 65, the court shall base its decision on an expert assessment. This shall include an opinion on:
If the offender has committed an offence within the meaning of Article 64 § 1, the assessment must be conducted by an expert who has neither treated the offender nor been responsible in any other way for his care.
4 bis.  If consideration is given to ordering lifelong detention in accordance with Article 64 § 1 bis, the court shall base its decision on reports from at least two experienced experts who are independent of each other and who have neither treated the offender nor been responsible in any other way for his care.
In general, the court shall only order a measure if a suitable institution is available.
Where the requirements for a measure are no longer fulfilled, it shall be discontinued.”
“1.  Where the offender is suffering from a serious mental disorder, the court may order institutional treatment subject to the following conditions:
Institutional treatment shall be provided in an appropriate psychiatric or therapeutic institution.
The treatment shall be provided in a secure facility if there is a risk of the offender absconding or committing further offences. It may also be provided in a penal institution in accordance with Article 76 § 2, to the extent that the necessary therapeutic treatment can be provided by qualified staff.
The deprivation of liberty associated with institutional treatment shall generally not exceed five years. If the requirements for conditional release are not satisfied after five years and it is expected that the continuation of the measure will deter the commission of further criminal offences linked to the offender’s mental disorder, the court may at the request of the executive authority order the extension of the measure for a maximum of five years at a time.”
“1.  The measure shall be discontinued if:
If the deprivation of liberty associated with the measure is for a shorter period than the suspended custodial sentence, the remainder of the sentence shall be served. If the requirements for suspension of a custodial sentence or for conditional release are satisfied, the execution of the remainder of the sentence shall be suspended.
The court may order a further measure in place of the execution of the sentence if it is to be expected that such a measure will deter the commission of further criminal offences linked to the offender’s condition.
If, on the discontinuation of a measure ordered on account of an offence referred to in Article 64 § 1, there is serious cause to fear that the offender might commit further similar offences, the court may order his indefinite detention at the request of the executive authority.
If, on the discontinuation of the measure, the competent authority deems it appropriate to order an adult protection measure, it shall notify the adult protection authority.
Furthermore, the court may discontinue an institutional therapeutic measure before or during its implementation and order another institutional therapeutic measure in its place if it is to be expected that the new measure will have a significantly better chance of deterring the commission of further criminal offences linked to the offender’s condition.”
“1.  The competent authority shall consider, of its own motion or on request, whether the offender should be conditionally released from the implementation of the measure or whether the measure may be discontinued, and if so, when. It shall take a decision on the matter at least once a year, having first granted a hearing to the offender and obtained a report from the management of the institution responsible for implementation of the measure.
If the offender has committed an offence referred to in Article 64 § 1, the competent authority shall reach its decision on the basis of an independent expert opinion, after hearing a committee comprising representatives of the prosecution authorities, the executive authorities and the field of psychiatry. The expert and psychiatrists concerned must have neither treated the offender nor been responsible in any other way for his care.”
“1.  The court shall order indefinite detention if the offender has committed premeditated murder, intentional homicide, serious assault, rape, robbery, hostage-taking, arson, endangering life or any other offence carrying a maximum custodial sentence of at least five years by which he has caused or intended to cause serious harm to the physical, psychological or sexual integrity of another, and if:
...”
“1.  If, before or during the execution of a custodial sentence or of indefinite detention within the meaning of Article 64 § 1, an offender fulfils the requirements for an institutional therapeutic measure as provided for in Articles 5961, the court may order such a measure subsequently. The court with jurisdiction shall be the one that imposed the sentence or ordered the detention. The execution of the remainder of the sentence shall be suspended.
If, during the execution of a custodial sentence, new information or evidence comes to light to the effect that the offender satisfies the requirements for indefinite detention and that such requirements were already satisfied at the time of the conviction but could not have been known to the court, the court may order indefinite detention subsequently. Jurisdiction and procedure shall be determined by the rules on reopening proceedings.”
Paragraph 2 of the transitional provisions of the 13 December 2002 amendment to the Criminal Code, which came into force on 1 January 2007, provides as follows, in so far as relevant:
“(1)  The provisions of the new law on measures (Articles 56-65) and on their execution (Article 90) shall also apply to the perpetrators of acts committed or tried before those provisions come into force. However:
(2)  Within twelve months of the entry into force of the new law, the court shall assess whether persons who have been detained under Article 42 or Article 43 § 1, second sub-paragraph, of the former law fulfil the requirements for a therapeutic measure (Articles 59-61 or 63 [of the new law]). If they do, the court shall impose the measure; if not, the detention shall be continued in accordance with the new law.”
Paragraph 189 of the former Code of Criminal Procedure of the Canton of Basle Urban, as in force at the material time, was worded as follows, in so far as relevant:
“Criminal proceedings that have been concluded by means of an enforceable judgment shall be reopened:
...
...”
The Swiss Code of Criminal Procedure of 5 October 2007 replaced the cantonal Codes of Criminal Procedure on 1 January 2011. Article 410 of the Code governs the admissibility of and grounds for a request to reopen proceedings:
“Anyone who is adversely affected by a legally binding final judgment, a summary penalty order, a subsequent judicial decision or a decision in separate proceedings concerning measures may request that the proceedings be reopened if:
...”