The case originated in an application (no. 50031/11) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Uzbekistani national, Mr Abdusami Abdusamatovich Rakhmonov (“the applicant”), on 10 August 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms R. Magomedova, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 11 August 2011 the President of the First Section, acting upon a request by the applicant of 10 August 2011, decided to apply Rules 39 and 41 of the Rules of the Court, indicating an interim measure to the Government under which the applicant should not be extradited to Uzbekistan until further notice and granting priority to the application.
On 14 November 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in .
According to the applicant, on 19 July 2010 he arrived in Moscow from  with a view to finding a seasonal job and marrying. He soon learnt that his brothers had been arrested and charged with participation in an extremist religious organisation. He also learnt that he was suspected by the Uzbekistani authorities of having founded an extremist religious organisation himself.
On 18 October 2010 the applicant lodged a request with the Moscow Division of the Federal Migration Service (the FMS) seeking refugee status in . On 21 January 2011 the FMS refused to grant refugee status to the applicant. The applicant appealed.
On 14 April 2011 the FMS quashed the decision of 21 January 2011 and remitted the matter for fresh consideration to its division in .
On 6 July 2011 the FMS refused by a de novo decision to grant the applicant refugee status. The applicant appealed. It appears that the appeal proceedings are still pending.
On 16 September 2010 the Bukhara Town Court of the  ordered the applicant’s arrest pending the criminal investigation against him.
On 3 February 2011 the applicant was arrested at the FMS’s office where he had gone to receive the copy of the decision in his case. The  police informed the Uzbekistani authorities of the applicant’s arrest. On the same day they received a copy of the arrest order of 16 September 2010 and documents confirming that the applicant had been put on the wanted persons’ list.
On 4 February 2011 the Izmailovskiy District Court of Moscow authorised the applicant’s detention pending extradition. The applicant was also advised of his right to appeal against the extension of his detention within three days of the adoption of the relevant decision. In particular, the court noted as follows:
“Having heard the parties to the proceedings, and having studied the extradition materials submitted in respect of [the applicant], the court finds that the [prosecutor’s] request should be granted. The court has established that [the applicant’s] detention is lawful and justified under international treaties and the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure. [The applicant’s] name is on the wanted persons’ list in connection with a crime he committed in the . He has not been recognised as a refugee. Nor have any other circumstances preventing [the applicant’s] extradition been identified.
The court has received a decision by the  dated 16 September 2010 authorising the [applicant’s] remand in custody which mentions that [the applicant] has absconded.
Regard being had to the fact that the documents submitted to the court are in compliance with the requirements set forth in the rules of criminal procedure, the court finds that the [prosecutor’s] request should be granted. In view of the evidence submitted (the documents from the Republic of Uzbekistan) confirming that [the applicant] was charged with serious offences ... that his name was on the wanted persons’ list and that he had been remanded in custody, the court believes that if released, [the applicant] might continue his criminal activities or abscond, or otherwise interfere with administration of justice.”
On 5 February 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal against the decision of 4 February 2011. He addressed it to the Moscow City Court, which received it on 21 February 2011. On 22 February 2011 the City Court forwarded the applicant’s appeal to the District Court for processing. The District Court received the appeal statement on 28 February 2011. On 1 March 2011 the District Court fixed the appeal hearing for 16 March 2011 and informed the applicant and his counsel accordingly.
On 11 March 2011 the General Prosecutor’s Office of the  requested the applicant’s extradition.
On 16 March 2011 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 4 February 2011 on appeal.
On 24 March 2011 the District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 3 August 2011, noting as follows:
“[The applicant’s] detention should be extended given that he is charged with [serious offences] committed on the territory of the .
These offences ... carry a custodial sentence exceeding one year. [The applicant] is not a refugee. There are no circumstances preventing his extradition [to ].
Regard being had to the above, the court finds that the request should be granted given that the information in respect of the [applicant’s] character leads the court to consider that, if released, he might abscond or interfere with the establishment of the truth.
The court takes into account that the applicant’s remand in custody was lawful and justified. There are no new circumstances in favour of its change or annulment.”
On 3 August 2011 the Izmailovskiy Inter-District Prosecutor ordered the applicant’s release on account of the expiry of the maximum period of detention pending extradition and under his undertaking not to abscond. On the same day he was arrested for his alleged failure to comply with the administrative rules governing residence of foreigners in .
On 17 August 2011 the General Prosecutor’s Office of the Russian Federation gave a decision refusing to extradite the applicant to .
On 5 August 2011 the District Court found the applicant’s stay in  to be in contravention of the Russian Administrative Code and ordered his expulsion. The applicant was to remain in custody pending the execution of the judgment. The applicant appealed.
On 14 September 2011 the City Court quashed the decision of 5 August 2011 and ordered the applicant’s release.
The Constitution guarantees the right to liberty (Article 22):
“1.  Everyone has the right to liberty and personal integrity.
Arrest, placement in custody and detention are permitted only on the basis of a judicial decision. Prior to a judicial decision, an individual may not be detained for longer than forty-eight hours.”
Article 16 of the European Convention on Extradition of 13 December 1957 (CETS no. 024), to which  is a party, provides as follows:
“1.  In case of urgency the competent authorities of the requesting Party may request the provisional arrest of the person sought. The competent authorities of the requested Party shall decide the matter in accordance with its law.
...
Provisional arrest may be terminated if, within eighteen days of arrest, the requested Party has not received the request for extradition and the documents mentioned in Article 12. It shall not, in any event, exceed forty days from the date of that arrest. The possibility of provisional release at any time is not excluded, but the requested Party shall take any measures which it considers necessary to prevent the escape of the person sought.”
The CIS Convention on legal aid and legal relations in civil, family and criminal matters (the 1993 Minsk Convention), to which both Russia and  are parties, provides that a request for extradition must be accompanied by a detention order (Article 58 § 2).
A person whose extradition is sought may be arrested before receipt of the request for his or her extradition. In such cases a special request for arrest, containing a reference to the detention order and indicating that a request for extradition will follow, must be sent. A person may also be arrested in the absence of such a request if there are reasons to suspect that he or she has committed, on the territory of the other Contracting Party, an extraditable offence. The other Contracting Party must be immediately informed of the arrest (Article 61).
A person arrested under Article 61 must be released if no request for extradition is received within forty days of the arrest (Article 62 § 1).
Chapter 13 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure (“Preventive Measures”) governs the use of preventive measures (меры пресечения), which include, in particular, placement in custody. Custody may be ordered by a court on an application by an investigator or a prosecutor if the person is charged with an offence carrying a sentence of at least two years’ imprisonment, provided that a less restrictive preventive measure cannot be used (Article 108 §§ 1 and 3). The period of detention pending investigation may not exceed two months (Article 109 § 1). A judge may extend that period to six months (Article 109 § 2). Further extensions to twelve months, or in exceptional circumstances eighteen months, may be granted only if the person is charged with serious or particularly serious criminal offences (Article 109 § 3). Beyond eighteen months no extension is permissible and the detainee must be released immediately (Article 109 § 4). The detention order is amenable to appeal within three days following its adoption (Article 108 § 11). The statement of appeal must be lodged with the court which delivered the decision subject to appeal (Article 355 § 1).
Chapter 54 (“Extradition of a person for criminal prosecution or execution of sentence”) regulates extradition procedures. On receipt of a request for extradition not accompanied by an arrest warrant issued by a foreign court, a prosecutor must decide on the preventive measure to be applied to the person whose extradition is sought. The measure must be applied in accordance with the established procedure (Article 466 § 1). A person who has been granted asylum in  because of possible political persecution in the State seeking his extradition may not be extradited to that State (Article 464 § 1 (2)).
An extradition decision made by the Prosecutor General may be challenged before a court. Issues of guilt or innocence are not within the scope of judicial review, which is limited to an assessment of whether the extradition order was made in accordance with the procedure set out in the relevant international and domestic law (Article 463 §§ 1 and 6).
Ruling No. 22, adopted by the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation on 29 October 2009 (“the directive decision of 29 October 2009”), stated that, pursuant to Article 466 § 1 of the CCrP, only a court could order the placement in custody of a person in respect of whom an extradition request was pending and the authorities of the country requesting extradition had not submitted a court decision to place him or her in custody. The judicial authorisation of placement in custody in that situation was to be carried out in accordance with Article 108 of the CCrP and following a prosecutor’s request to place that person in custody. In deciding to remand a person in custody, a court was to examine if there existed factual and legal grounds for applying that preventive measure. If the extradition request was accompanied by a detention order of a foreign court, a prosecutor could remand the person in custody without a Russian court’s authorisation (Article 466 § 2 of the CCrP) for a period not exceeding two months, and the prosecutor’s decision could be challenged in the courts under Article 125 of the CCrP. In extending a person’s detention with a view to extradition a court was to apply Article 109 of the CCrP.
In ruling no. 245-O-O of 20 March 2008, the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation noted that it had reiterated on several occasions (rulings nos. 14-P, 4-P, 417-O and 330-O of 13 June 1996, 22 March 2005, 4 December 2003 and 12 July 2005 respectively) that a court, when taking a decision under Articles 100, 108, 109 and 255 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure on the placement of an individual into detention or on the extension of a period of an individual’s detention, was under an obligation, inter alia, to calculate and specify a time-limit for such detention.