The case originated in an application (no. 19664/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Viktorovich Velichko (“the applicant”), on 15 December 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr P. Legros and Ms M. Simanova, lawyers practising in Brussels, Belgium, and , respectively. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been detained in appalling conditions pending criminal proceedings against him; that the length of his pre-trial detention and the criminal proceedings against him had been unreasonable; that the supervisory review of his release on bail, as such, and the ensuing remand in custody had been unlawful and that the procedure followed, in particular, the authorities’ failure to ensure his presence at the hearing, had been incompatible with the Convention provisions.
On 30 April 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1965 and is serving a prison sentence in the Murmansk Region.
On 13 January 2005 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of fraud and abuse of power. On 14 January 2005 the  authorised the applicant’s detention pending investigation. In particular, the court noted as follows:
“... [The prosecutor] submitted that there were sufficient grounds to believe that [the applicant] might attempt to conceal ... the evidence and to put pressure on witnesses who worked under his supervision or were financially or otherwise dependent on him. The investigators had sufficient material in their possession showing that [the applicant] might interfere with the investigation and the establishment of the truth, or that he might abscond.
...
The fact that the [applicant’s] efforts aimed at interfering with the investigation had a systematic nature was confirmed by ... a recording of a discussion which took place on 27 January 2004 between [the applicant] and [defendant] Shch., during which [the applicant] asked [the defendant] to reconcile the statements they were to give during the questioning to be held by the investigator.
Furthermore, according to the testimony of witness G., [the applicant] asked him to change his earlier statement, threatening him with unpleasant consequences if he refused to comply.
According to the statement of witness S., [the applicant] told him that he was the holder of a Belarusian passport ... and [had] bank accounts abroad.
...
Having regard to the arguments put forward by [the prosecutor and defence counsel] and to the materials in the case file, [the court] concludes that [the applicant] should be remanded in custody. ...
... [T]he court takes into account the materials presented by investigators showing that [the applicant] might influence the witnesses or interfere with the proceedings or the establishment of the truth.
Regard being had to the [applicant’s] character, age and family situation, the court also takes into consideration [the fact] that he is suspected ... of having committed criminal offences entailing a custodial sentence which exceeds two years.”
On 12 July 2005 the Severomorskiy Town Court of the Murmansk Region received the case file. The court ordered that the applicant remain in custody pending trial.
On 22 December 2005 the  further extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 11 April 2006.
On 5 April 2006 the  extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 11 July 2006. The applicant asked to be released, arguing that he had a permanent residence and employment, had to support a minor child and had no previous criminal record. He further complained that he suffered from chronic gastritis and chronic duodenal ulcer. However, at the temporary detention centre he had not been receiving the medication and special diet he had been prescribed by his doctor. Lastly, he claimed that he had been unable to prepare his defence owing to the poor conditions of his detention. The court dismissed the applicant’s arguments, noting as follows:
“The grounds for the [applicant’s] detention have not ceased to exist, given that [he] is charged with serious criminal offences for which a custodial sentence exceeding two years can be applied in the event of conviction. In such circumstances, the court considers that [the applicant] might abscond or interfere with the administration of justice.
...
The [applicant’s] argument that the medical aid provided is insufficient and that he is not receiving a prescribed diet is not supported by appropriate evidence and is rebutted by the information submitted by the prosecutor. ... The special diet was prescribed for the period from spring to autumn. The prescription was cancelled in November 2005.”
On 25 April 2006 the  quashed the decision of 5 April 2006 and released the applicant on bail. The court noted, inter alia, as follows:
“According to the materials in the case file, the applicant was taken into custody to prevent him from putting pressure on witnesses and interfering with the administration of justice.
The materials supporting the above measure were, indeed, relevant during the investigation stage of the proceedings ...
To date, the applicant has been indicted, the prosecution has collected the evidence and summarised it in the indictment, the lists of witnesses for both the prosecution and the defence have been prepared, [and] the case is being tried in court.
Accordingly, [the applicant] is not in a position to influence the witnesses for the prosecution and, as a result, to interfere with the establishment of the truth. Moreover, any change by the witnesses in their statements during the trial will be assessed by the court in accordance with [the rules of criminal procedure].
Having regard to the above, the [lower] court’s conclusion that the grounds for the applicant’s detention have not ceased to exist is not convincing.
The restrictive measure applied to [the applicant] should therefore be less severe.”
On 27 April 2006 the applicant paid the bail and was released.
On 26 May 2006 the  granted a request made by the prosecutor for supervisory review of the decision of 25 April 2006. On 15 June 2006 the Presidium of the  quashed the decision of 25 April 2006 by way of supervisory review and remitted the matter for fresh consideration on appeal. It also ordered the applicant’s remand in custody pending the appeal hearing. In particular, the court noted as follows:
“It is clear from the [court order] of 14 January 2005 that [the applicant] was remanded in custody in view of the risk of his putting pressure on witnesses, that is of interfering with the administration of justice and the establishment of the truth. The court also took into account the [applicant’s] character, family situation and the fact that he was suspected of having committed offences entailing a custodial sentence exceeding two years.
The prosecutor’s argument that [the applicant] might abscond was not based on the above-mentioned court order.
Accordingly, [on 25 April 2006] the [Regional Court] verified only one ground underlying the [applicant’s] remand in custody, that is a risk of putting pressure on witnesses and interfering with the administration of justice.
Having regard to that ground, [the ] indicated... that the arguments furnished by the investigators and the court underlying the [applicant’s] remand in custody had been relevant during the investigation stage. When the trial started, all the evidence having been collected and all the victims and witnesses having been questioned, the defendant was prevented from interfering with the establishment of the truth ....
However, the materials in the case file show that witness G. asked the [prosecutor’s office] to protect him from the [applicant], who pressured [G.] not to testify against him. Furthermore, there is evidence showing that [the applicant has sought to] interfere with the administration of justice by giving instructions to other defendants as regards the charges against them.
The start of the trial does not signify that the risk of [the applicant] interfering with the administration of justice ceased to exist, as the testimonies of the [other defendants] are very important for the correct and objective consideration of the case ... by the [trial] court.
The trial started in July 2005.
The [Regional Court] failed to take into consideration the fact that [the applicant] is the holder of a Belarusian passport with a false name and bank accounts abroad; that he is indicted on sixty charges, each of them being a grievous offence; that he is accused of having committed those offences in concert and that he is the leader of the organised criminal group; and that the damage caused by the crimes of that organised criminal group amounted to 130 million roubles.
The decision adopted by the [] is contradictory to the previous court orders extending the [applicant’s] pre-trial detention.
On 15 July 2005 the [], when fixing the trial opening, ordered that [the applicant] should remain in custody.
On 4 August 2005 the [] upheld the said decision on appeal.
On 22 December 2005 the [] extended the [applicant’s] pre-trial detention until 11 April 2006.
The [] upheld the said decision on appeal.
The above court orders established that the circumstances underlying the applicant’s remand in custody have not ceased to exist.
The above court orders came into effect.
The [] in its decision [of 25 April 2006] questioned the findings of those decisions, which is impermissible.
As regards the amount of bail, [the court] also agrees with the prosecutor that [the amount of bail imposed on the applicant was insufficient, as he] was released on bail in the amount of 500,000 roubles, which is half as much as the bail imposed on defendant Shch.
Having regard to the above, the decision of the [] of 25 April 2006 shall be quashed ...”
On 20 June 2006 the applicant was re-arrested.
On 27 June 2006 the  upheld the decision of 5 April 2006 on appeal.
On 6 July 2006 the prosecutor asked the  to further extend the applicant’s detention referring, inter alia, to the fact that the applicant had a foreign passport under a false name and bank accounts abroad. The court ordered that the applicant remain in custody until 11 October 2006. It noted, in particular, as follows:
“The grounds for the [applicant’s] detention have not ceased to exist, given that [he] is charged with serious criminal offences for which a custodial sentence exceeding two years can be applied in the event of conviction.
Furthermore, the court has grounds to believe that [the applicant] might abscond or interfere with the administration of justice. The court bases this finding on the materials submitted by the prosecution.
The fact that the applicant, when released for a month and a half, behaved appropriately does not signify that he would not abscond in the future, given the complexity and length of the criminal proceedings and the multiple charges against him.”
On 5 October 2006 the  extended the applicant’s detention until 11 January 2007. The court referred again to the gravity of the charges against the applicant and the risk that he might abscond or interfere with the administration of justice. On 23 November 2006 the  upheld the decision of 5 October 2006 on appeal.
Subsequently, the  extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention on 21 December 2006, 4 April 2007, and 3 July 2007 until 11 April, 11 July and 11 October 2007 respectively. The court reiterated the reasoning of the previous court orders. The  upheld those decisions on appeal on 20 February, 15 May and 31 July 2007.
On 4 October 2007 the  extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 11 January 2008. In particular, the court reasoned as follows:
“When deciding on the further extension of the [applicant’s] pre-trial detention, the court .... considered the following the arguments furnished by the prosecution ... : the gravity of the charges, the risk of [the applicant] absconding or interfering with the proceedings.
At this stage of the trial, the grounds underlying the [applicant’s] remand in custody have not ceased to exist. [The applicant] is charged with numerous grievous offences which entail a custodial sentence exceeding two years.
Furthermore, the information contained in the documents submitted by the prosecution and considered by the court ... shows that [the applicant] might abscond or interfere with the administration of justice.
The length of the trial is justified by different factors, such as the number of offences [the applicant] is charged with, a great number of witnesses and [the amount of] documentary evidence, and cannot justify the [applicant’s] release.”
On 27 November 2007 the  upheld the decision of 4 October 2007 on appeal.
On 25 December 2007 the  extended the applicant’s pretrial detention until 11 April 2008. The court reiterated verbatim its reasoning contained in the court order of 4 October 2007.
It appears that the applicant’s detention pending trial was subsequently extended until his conviction on 27 October 2008.
As set out above (see paragraph 6) the applicant was arrested on 13 January 2005. Following the preliminary investigation, the criminal case was received by the  on 12 July 2005 for adjudication. On 15 July 2005 the  fixed the trial in respect of four defendants, including the applicant, for 26 July 2005. Subsequently the trial was deferred until 11 October 2005 due to the fact that two of the defence counsel and several witnesses were on vacation.
According to the Government, the criminal case concerned sixtysix counts of fraud and abuse of power. The trial court was to question 139 witnesses and to study substantial volumes of written evidence. The court held 370 hearings.
The Government provided the following information as regards the adjournment of the trial hearings:
On 22 July 2008 the trial concluded and the court retired for deliberations. The pronouncement of the verdict started on 27 October 2008 and was completed on 5 November 2008. The applicant was found guilty as charged and sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment.
It appears that none of the parties appealed against the verdict.
According to the applicant, from Monday to Friday of each week he was detained at the temporary detention centre in Severomorsk from 13 January 2005 until his release on bail on 27 April 2006 and from 20 June 2006 when he was again remanded in custody until 5 April 2007. According to the Government, the applicant was delivered to the temporary detention centre and detained there to study the case file, to participate in the trial and in connection with his making motions to the courts examining his case.
The Government provided the following description of the temporary detention centre. It was located on the ground floor of a fivestorey building constructed in 1995. There was no outside exercise area attached to it.
The cells where the applicant was detained had the following characteristics:
All the cells were equipped with suction and exhaust ventilation and electric lighting. The cells had no windows. Nor was there induction ventilation, toilets, a water supply or dining tables. On certain occasions, the number of detainees held in the cells exceeded their designed capacity.
The temporary detention centre underwent a refurbishment in JuneAugust 2007. The ventilation system was reconstructed. Toilets and a night lighting system were installed. Tables and benches were provided.
In 2009 the municipal administration allocated a plot of land for the construction of a new temporary detention centre which would be equipped with outside exercise area in compliance with statutory regulations.
According to the applicant, he was kept in a windowless cell without any other access to fresh air or daylight. It was dim and stuffy. The only source of lighting was a 40-watt bulb surrounded by a wooden lattice. There was no ventilation. The cell was not equipped with a toilet. During the day time, he was allowed to use the toilet in the building twice a day. For the rest of the time he had to use a bucket placed in the cell. No table or chairs were provided. Nor was there a sink or running water. He was not given any toilet paper. He had to stay indoors all the time without any opportunity for an outdoor walk or exercise.
On many occasions the cell where he was detained was overcrowded. The number of inmates varied from six to eight. The beds were metal frames with wooden boards placed over them. The inmates were not provided with mattresses, blankets, pillows or bed sheets.
In June 2006 the applicant complained to the Town Prosecutor about the conditions of his detention.
On 14 August 2006 the prosecutor admitted the truth of the applicant’s allegations in respect of the conditions of his detention at the temporary detention centre and promised that measures in response to the applicant’s complaint would be taken.
On 20 November 2006 the prosecutor advised the applicant of the authorities’ plans to start the construction of a new temporary detention centre in Severomorsk.
On an unspecified date the prosecutor informed the applicant that it was impossible to bring the conditions of the detention at the temporary detention centre into compliance with statutory requirements owing to certain financial difficulties.
The Federal Law on the Detention of Suspects and Defendants charged with Criminal Offences (as amended), in force since 21 June 1995, provides that suspects and defendants detained pending investigation and trial are held in remand prisons (section 8). They may be transferred to temporary detention centres if so required for the purposes of investigation or trial and if transportation between a remand prison and a police station or courthouse is not feasible because of the distance between them. Such detention at a temporary detention centre may not exceed ten days per month (section 13). Temporary detention centres at police stations are designated for the detention of persons arrested on suspicion of a criminal offence (section 9).
According to the Internal Regulations of Temporary Detention Facilities, approved by Order No. 41 of the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation on 26 January 1996, as amended (in force at the time of the applicant’s detention), the living space per detainee should be four square metres (paragraph 3.3 of the Regulations). It also made provision for cells in a temporary detention centre to be equipped with a table, toilet, water tap, shelf for toiletries, drinking water tank, radio and refuse bin (paragraph 3.2 of the Regulations). Furthermore, the Regulations made provision for the detainees’ right to outdoor exercise of at least one hour per day in a designated exercise area (paragraphs 6.1, 6.40, and 6.43 of the Regulations).
The Russian Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP) provides that, once a court refused to remand a defendant in custody pending criminal proceedings against him, the prosecution/law enforcement authorities are estopped from lodging a new request for remand in custody unless new circumstances arise (Article 108 §9 of the CCP).
A decision adopted by the appeal court comes into effect on the day of it pronouncement and can be reviewed by way of supervisory review or re-opening of the matter due to newly established circumstances (Article 391 of the CCP). Parties to the criminal proceedings, including the prosecutor, may ask for the supervisory review of a court’s final decision (Article 402 § 2 of the CCP).
The supervisory-revie w court should notify the parties to the proceedings, including the prosecutor and the defendant and his or her lawyers of the date, time and place of the supervisory-review hearing (Article 407 § 1 of the CCP). The parties present at the hearing may make submissions to the court (Article 407 § 6 of the CCP).
An appellate decision may be quashed or modified by way of supervisory review if it is found to be unlawful or unsubstantiated; or if it unreasonably upheld, annul or modify a lower-court decision; or if it was adopted in contravention of the rules of criminal procedure which fact affected its validity (Article 409 § 2 of the CCP).
The relevant extract from the 2nd General Report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) (CPT/Inf (92) 3) reads as follows:
“42.  Custody by the police is in principle of relatively short duration ...However, certain elementary material requirements should be met.
All police cells should be of a reasonable size for the number of persons they are used to accommodate, and have adequate lighting (i.e. sufficient to read by, sleeping periods excluded) and ventilation; preferably, cells should enjoy natural light. Further, cells should be equipped with a means of rest (e.g. a fixed chair or bench), and persons obliged to stay overnight in custody should be provided with a clean mattress and blankets.
Persons in custody should be allowed to comply with the needs of nature when necessary in clean and decent conditions, and be offered adequate washing facilities. They should be given food at appropriate times, including at least one full meal (i.e. something more substantial than a sandwich) every day.
The issue of what is a reasonable size for a police cell (or any other type of detainee/prisoner accommodation) is a difficult question. Many factors have to be taken into account when making such an assessment. However, CPT delegations felt the need for a rough guideline in this area. The following criterion (seen as a desirable level rather than a minimum standard) is currently being used when assessing police cells intended for single occupancy for stays in excess of a few hours: in the order of 7 square metres, 2 metres or more between walls, 2.5 metres between floor and ceiling.”
The CPT reiterated the above conclusions in its 12th General Report (CPT/Inf (2002) 15, § 47).