The case originated in an application (no. 676/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Mikhail Sergeyevich Zakharov (“the applicant”), on 10 November 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Sharifov, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 18 March 2014 the complaint concerning the length of pre-trial detention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lived, prior to his arrest, in Krasnogorsk, Moscow Region.
On 5 July 2007 the applicant, a police officer at the material time, was arrested on suspicion of abuse of official powers causing serious damage. On 10 July 2007 he was formally charged with the imputed crime. Subsequently he was additionally charged with embezzlement on a large scale as part of an organised criminal group.
On 6 July 2007 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow remanded the applicant in custody on the ground of the gravity of charges. The court also reasoned that he might put pressure on witnesses, destroy evidence or interfere with investigation.
On 3 September 2007, 11 December 2007, 10 April 2008 and 1 July 2008 the District Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention stating that the investigation was still pending, the case comprised 118 volumes and concerned fifteen suspects, the applicant had been suspected of a serious crime, could interact with his accomplices, abscond, destroy evidence and threaten witnesses. The court also took into account the applicant’s state of health, character and family status however it did not provide any detailed arguments in this respect.
On 30 December 2008 and 20 April 2009 the District Court issued collective detention orders in respect of the applicant and other co-accused pending their study of the case-file. The court referred to the gravity of the charges, the defendants’ possibility to abscond, commit crimes and interfere with the investigation.
The applicant’s appeals against the detention orders were rejected.
On 9 June 2010 the Moscow City Court acquitted the applicant of all charges.