The case originated in two applications (applications nos. 67374/11 and 612/12) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Azerbaijani nationals, Mr Tofig Rashid oglu Yagublu (Tofiq Rəşid oğlu Yaqublu – “the first applicant”) and Mr Ramiz Ahad oglu Ahadov (Ramiz Əhəd oğlu Əhədov “the second applicant”), on 12 September and 14 December 2011 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Alizade and Mr I. Aliyev respectively, lawyers based in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The first applicant alleged that he had been ill-treated while in police custody, and the second applicant alleged that he had been ill-treated while being arrested. Both applicants alleged that the domestic authorities had failed to investigate their complaints in this regard. The first applicant also complained of the unlawfulness of his administrative arrest during the dispersal of an assembly and his conviction. The second applicant further complained that he had been hindered in the exercise of his right of individual petition.
On 18 May and 11 December 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Article 3 of the Convention (applications nos. 67374/11 and 612/12), Article 5, Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (b), (c) and (d) and Article 11 of the Convention (application no. 67374/11); and Article 34 of the Convention (application no. 612/12), and the remainder of both applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants were born in 1961 and 1954 respectively and live in Baku.
On 2 April 2011 the applicants attended an unauthorised opposition demonstration held at Fountains Square in Baku. The demonstration was intended to be peaceful and was conducted in a peaceful manner. The participants were demanding free and fair elections, democratic reforms, freedom of assembly, and the release of people arrested during some previous demonstrations.
The first applicant was the Deputy Chairman of the Musavat Party. He also worked as a columnist for the Yeni Musavat newspaper.
Upon arriving at Fountains Square at around 3 p.m. on 2 April 2011, the first applicant was arrested by police officers and taken to the Nasimi district police office, together with other participants in the demonstration, including M.H. and N.S.
After his arrival at the police office, the first applicant was placed in the exercise yard of the temporary detention centre of the Nasimi district police office with other people who had been arrested, including M.H. and N.S. The applicant was allegedly beaten by S.N., who was the Deputy Head of the Nasimi district police office, another police officer called J.A., and a person wearing plain clothes whom the applicant did not know. According to the applicant, S.N. swore at him, kicked him in his abdominal area, and punched him. The applicant further submitted that after S.N. had kicked him in his testicles, he lost consciousness owing to the severe pain and, despite his requests, was not provided with the requisite medical assistance.
The Government maintained that the first applicant had not been subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment in police custody.
According to the first applicant, at around midnight on the day of his arrest he was taken to the Nasimi District Court. According to the Government, he was taken to the Nasimi District Court at around 5 p.m. on 2 April 2011. The first applicant stated before the court that he was not guilty of disobeying the lawful order of a police officer. He did not have any lawyer at the court hearing, and insisted on being allowed to have a lawyer of his own choice and inviting witnesses to testify on his behalf. However, the judge disregarded his requests. The hearing was brief.
The court found that the first applicant had failed to stop participating in an unauthorised demonstration. The court convicted him under Article 310.1 (failure to comply with a lawful order of a police officer) of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) and sentenced him to eight days’ administrative detention. It relied on the testimonies of two police officers, A.E. and E.S., who testified that the applicant had been attempting to hold an unauthorised demonstration and had continued his actions, disobeying a request they had made for him to stop participating in the unlawful demonstration.
During the court hearing on 2 April 2011 the first applicant also complained that on that day he had been beaten at the police station, and he asked the court to facilitate the provision of the requisite medical assistance, but his request was ignored.
On 4 April 2011 the first applicant lodged an appeal with the Baku Court of Appeal, arguing that his arrest and conviction had been unlawful and the hearing before the first-instance court had not been fair – in particular, he had not been allowed to have a lawyer of his own choice, and his procedural application to call witnesses to testify on his behalf had been dismissed. He also complained of ill-treatment, and stated that he still felt unwell and had not received the requisite medical assistance.
On 8 April 2011 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the first applicant’s appeal. It also held that he had had a State-appointed lawyer at the first-instance court, and that his ill-treatment claims had not been proved.
On 6 April 2011 the first applicant lodged a complaint with the Nasimi District Court under the procedure for judicial review of prosecuting authorities’ actions or decisions. Relying on Articles 3, 5, 6, 11, 13 and 14 of the Convention, he complained regarding his ill-treatment on 2 April 2011, the unfairness of his conviction, the violation of his freedom of assembly, and the discrimination against him on the basis of his political views.
By a decision of 12 April 2011, the Nasimi District Court refused to admit the case, and sent the complaint to the Nasimi district prosecutor’s office, claiming that the latter had the authority to consider it.
On an unspecified date in April 2011 the first applicant applied to the Baku prosecutor’s office, requesting that a criminal investigation into the matter be instituted.
According to a forensic report dated 15 April 2011, there was an abrasion (sıyrıq) on the first applicant’s left calf caused by a blunt object, which could have been inflicted on 2 April 2011.
By a decision of 28 April 2011, the Nasimi district prosecutor’s office refused to open a criminal case, on the grounds that the first applicant’s beating by S.N. had not been proved. It mainly relied on the findings of an inquiry conducted by the Nasimi district prosecutor’s office into a similar complaint of ill-treatment from M.H., who had been detained with the first applicant on 2 April 2011. Within the framework of that investigation, the first applicant, when questioned as a witness, and M.H. and N.S., who had been detained with him, had given similar testimonies about being ill-treated by S.N. and other officers while in police custody.
The Deputy Head of the Nasimi district police office, S.N., denied any involvement in the first applicant’s case, stating that he had not been at the police office at the material time. Police officers V.M., M.R., E.S. and A.E. stated that the first applicant had not been detained in the temporary detention facility and had not been beaten. Police officer E.S. added that the injury on the first applicant’s leg might have been caused during his arrest, when he had resisted being put in the police car.
In an appeal of 31 May 2011, filed with the Nasimi District Court against the decision to refuse to open a criminal case, the first applicant reiterated his previous complaints, pointing out that: his forensic examination had taken place so long after the event that most of the injuries on his body had disappeared; the prosecutor’s office had not identified the precise circumstances leading to his injury, in particular, the place and time that his injuries had been inflicted; he had not been called to testify, but his witness statement in M.H.’s case had been used instead, and no separate investigation into his complaint had been conducted.
On 21 June 2011 the Nasimi District Court held that the Nasimi district prosecutor office’s decision had been lawful. It stated that the first applicant’s complaint had been added to the investigation into M.H.’s similar complaint stemming from the same facts, and that the relevant investigative actions had also been carried out in respect of the first applicant.
By a judgment of 14 July 2011, the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the first applicant’s appeal of 30 June 2011, and upheld the first-instance court’s decision.
The second applicant was a member of the Popular Front Party of Azerbaijan.
At around 2 p.m., while the second applicant was chanting during the demonstration on 2 April 2011, four police officers approached him and twisted his arms behind his back in order to put him in a police car. At this point the Deputy Head of the Nasimi district police office, S.N., who allegedly knew the second applicant from previous demonstrations, insulted him and twisted his arm even more, saying to the police officers, “You should not twist [his arms], but break them, like this”, in response to which the second applicant shouted out because of the pain. Shortly thereafter, under S.N.’s orders, the police officers beat him with truncheons. The second applicant lost consciousness and lay on the ground for several minutes. After he regained consciousness, the officers dragged him to a police car and took him to the Sabail district police office. While in police custody the second applicant requested a medical examination and assistance, but his request was refused.
The second applicant was reprimanded for participating in a public assembly, under Article 298 (violation of the rules on holding public assemblies) of the CAO, and released at around 5 p.m. that day.
On 2 April 2011 the second applicant complained to the Sabail district prosecutor’s office that he had been beaten and insulted during his arrest as a result of being an opposition member. He requested that criminal proceedings be instituted.
A forensic report dated 4 April 2011 stated that the second applicant had a bruise (qançır) on his left arm which could have been caused on 2 April 2011.
The second applicant sought medical assistance at a medical centre, which provided him with outpatient treatment. According to his medical records of 5 April 2011, issued by the medical centre, the applicant had contusion of the soft tissues of his left upper arm and thorax, thoracic bruising, and haemarthrosis of his right elbow joint. He was prescribed outpatient treatment, including a sling for his left upper arm and medicine. The medical records also stated that the second applicant was experiencing chest pain while breathing and had a haematoma and bruising on his upper arm, and that his upper arm’s functions were limited.
The second applicant submitted the medical records to the Sabail district prosecutor’s office, as well as photos of him taken during the demonstration which had been published in the 24-25 April 2011 issue of the Azadlig newspaper, and in which S.N. and other police officers could be seen twisting his arm.
The Sabail district prosecutor’s office questioned four police officers who had taken part in the second applicant’s arrest. S.N. denied the illtreatment allegations, stating that he had not twisted the applicant’s arms. Police officers A.R., V.S. and A.A. claimed that they had not used physical force against the second applicant during his arrest, and that S.N. had not twisted his arms. A.A. also mentioned that the injury could have been inflicted when the second applicant had resisted the police by pushing them and hitting a police car with his hands.
By a decision of 5 May 2011, the Sabail district prosecutor’s office refused to open a criminal case, finding that there was no evidence that the second applicant had been beaten by police during his arrest. It relied mainly on the statements of the police officers, and held that the bruise on the second applicant’s arm mentioned in the forensic report had been caused when he had demonstrated resistance to the police.
On 3 June 2016 the second applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the Sabail District Court against the refusal to open a criminal case. He complained that the district prosecutor’s office had failed to conduct an effective investigation into his ill-treatment complaints. He also pointed out that the prosecutor’s office had relied on the testimonies of witnesses who had denied that S.N. had twisted his arms, while the photos he had submitted proved the contrary, and that the decision to refuse to open a criminal case was silent as to his other injuries confirmed by the medical records of 5 April 2011.
On 13 June 2011 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the second applicant’s complaint, finding the investigator’s decision lawful. The court’s decision was silent as to the second applicant’s specific complaints.
In an appeal of 16 June 2011, the second applicant reiterated his previous complaints.
On 24 June 2011 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s decision as lawful.
On 8 August 2014 criminal proceedings were instituted against Mr I. Aliyev, who represented the second applicant before the Court. On 8 and 9 August 2014 the investigating authorities seized a large number of documents from Mr I. Aliyev’s office, including all the case files relating to the ongoing proceedings before the Court (see Aliyev v. Azerbaijan, nos. 68762/14 and 71200/14, 20 September 2018). The file relating to the present application was also seized in its entirety.
On 25 October 2014 the investigating authorities returned to Mr Aliyev’s lawyer a number of the case files concerning the applications lodged before the Court, including the file relating to the present application.
The relevant domestic law concerning the prohibition of ill-treatment is summarised in the case of Mustafa Hajili v. Azerbaijan (no. 42119/12, §§ 26-28, 24 November 2016).
The relevant domestic law concerning administrative proceedings and freedom of assembly is summarised in the cases of Gafgaz Mammadov v. Azerbaijan (no. 60259/11, §§ 27-39, 15 October 2015), and Huseynli and Others v. Azerbaijan (nos. 67360/11 and 2 others, §§ 56-66, 11 February 2016).