The case originated in an application (no. 9237/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Anatolyevich Myalichev (“the applicant”), on 8 January 2014.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 2 December 2014 the complaint concerning the applicant’s detention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lived in the Sverdlovsk Region.
On 6 April 2012 the Leninskiy District Court in Nizhniy Tagil issued a detention order in respect of the applicant who had been charged with murder and had absconded. The order was to be valid for an initial period of two months following the applicant’s arrest.
On 19 February 2013 the applicant was apprehended in China and extradited to Russia.
On 30 April 2013 the Leninskiy district prosecutor asked the District Court to extend the applicant’s detention for a further two months. On the same day the District Court granted the application in part. It extended the authorised period of detention “for one month, until 19 May”.
The applicant filed an appeal. He complained, in particular, that the initial two-month detention period had expired already on 19 April 2013 and that his subsequent detention had been unlawful.
On 10 June 2013 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court rejected the appeal. On 26 September 2013 a judge of the Regional Court refused the applicant leave to appeal to the regional cassation instance.
On 4 March 2014 a judge of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation refused the applicant leave to appeal to the Supreme Court. The judge noted, in particular, that the belated filing of an application for an extension of the authorised period of detention was not a ground for varying the custodial measure.