The case originated in an application (no. 25874/94) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Jacek Kawka (“the applicant”).
The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights on 30 November 1998 within the three-month period laid down by former Articles 32 § 1 and 47 of the Convention. The Commission’s request referred to former Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby Poland recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (former Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 5 §§ 1 (c) and 4 of the Convention.
Before the Court, the applicant, who was granted legal aid, was represented by Mr Wiktor Celler, a lawyer practising in Łódź, Poland. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Krzysztof Drzewicki, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 14 January 1999 the panel of the Grand Chamber determined that the case should be decided by one of the Sections (Rule 100 § 1 of the Rules of Court). It was thereupon assigned to the First Section. Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant and the Government each filed a memorial.
After consulting the Agent of the Government and the applicant’s lawyer, the Chamber decided that it was not necessary to hold a hearing.
On 6 January 1994 the Zgierz District Prosecutor issued a warrant of arrest against the applicant and on the same day he was remanded in custody on suspicion of attempted manslaughter by assaulting the victims in their apartment with a knife and axe.
On 25 March 1994 the Łódź Regional Court granted the prosecutor’s request for prolongation of the detention until 4 July 1994 in view of the need to take further expert opinions. On 5 April 1994 the Łódź Regional Court dismissed the applicant's request for release.
On 11 April 1994 the case was transferred to the Zgierz District Prosecutor.
On 26 April 1994 the Łódź Court of Appeal granted the applicant's request to have the decision of 25 March 1994 amended, and fixed the period for which the applicant's detention was authorised to 30 June 1994.
On 25 May 1994 the applicant requested his release. The Łódź Regional Court and, upon appeal, the Łódź Court of Appeal, dismissed his request.
On 15 June 1994 the applicant requested his release. On 17 June 1994 he underwent a psychiatric examination.
On 28 June 1994 the Łódź Regional Court, acting upon the motion of the Zgierz District Prosecutor, prolonged the applicant's detention from 30 June until 30 September 1994.  The court considered that the reasons for which the detention had been ordered had not ceased to exist.  There was sufficient suspicion based on the evidence that the applicant had committed the offence with which he had been charged.  The applicant had to undergo a further time-consuming psychiatric examination and further investigatory measures and evidence had to be taken.
On 15 July 1994 an additional psychiatric opinion was submitted to the prosecutor’s office.
On 19 July 1994 the Łódź Court of Appeal upheld the decision of 28 June 1994 considering that the detention had to be prolonged as the applicant's psychiatric examination had not been completed.
On 11 and 28 August 1994 the applicant requested to be released. His requests were on unspecified later dates dismissed by the Łódź Regional Court.
On 1 September 1994 the applicant requested the Regional Court to order his release.
On 5 September 1994 he was informed that the charges against him had been in part modified and he was given access to the case-file.
On 20 September 1994 the applicant was served with a bill of indictment. On the same day the prosecutor lodged the indictment to the Łódź Regional Court.
On 4 October 1994 the Łódź Regional Court dismissed the applicant's request for release of 1 September 1994, having examined it in the prosecutor’s presence.  The court considered that there was a reasonable suspicion that the applicant had committed a dangerous offence, supported by the evidence given, inter alia, by the two victims of the assault. The reasons for which the detention had been ordered still existed. The applicant had failed to indicate in his request any new circumstances capable of justifying this.
On 6 October 1994 the applicant's father appealed against this decision. He submitted that the period of detention had expired on 30 September 1994, whereas the applicant had not received any decision further prolonging his detention.
On 10 October 1994 the applicant's lawyer also lodged an appeal against the decision of 4 October 1994 with the Court of Appeal. He submitted that the court's conclusions as to the reasonableness of the suspicions against him were based on insufficient evidence as only the evidence given by the victims supported the charges laid against the applicant. The applicant's detention since 30 September 1994 lacked any legal basis, as the detention period had expired on this date, and no further decision relating to the prolongation of the detention had been issued by any authority.
On 25 October 1994 the Łódź Court of Appeal upheld the decision of 4 October 1994.  The court first considered ill-founded the applicant's arguments that the suspicion against him lacked any legal or factual basis. The court further considered that the applicant's suggestion that his detention since 30 September 1994 was unlawful, was entirely erroneous. The applicant's lawyer must apparently have overlooked the fact that the bill of indictment had been lodged with the court on 21 September 1994. Therefore the time-limits provided for by Article 222 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969 had ceased to apply, given that this provision applied only to the pre-trial stage of criminal proceedings. One might have thought, the court continued, that such manifestly obvious conclusion, which required only a cursory perusal of relevant provisions, should not have caused any interpretation difficulties.
The court fixed the date for the first hearing for 27 January 1995, but it was later adjourned. Subsequently, on 14, 16, 27 and 31 March 1995 and on 6 April 1995 the applicant requested to be released, but to no avail, as the Łódź Regional Court dismissed all his requests.
On 5 June 1995 the court convicted the applicant of attempted manslaughter and sentenced him to five years' imprisonment.
At the material time, the domestic provisions governing detention on remand were contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969, which was later repealed and replaced by the new Code of Criminal Procedure of 6 June 1997 (hereafter referred to as the “new Code of Criminal Procedure), which entered into force on 1 September 1998.
Under the 1969 Code, the grounds for imposing detention on remand and competent authorities were governed by the following provisions:
	"1. Preventive measures [i.e. detention on remand, bail and police supervision] shall be imposed by the court; before a bill of indictment is lodged with the court, those measures shall be ordered by the prosecutor (...)."
	"1.  A decision concerning preventive measures may be appealed [to a higher court] .... 
	2.  A prosecutor's order on detention on remand may be appealed to the court competent to deal with the merits of the case...."
“A preventive measure (including detention on remand) shall be immediately quashed or altered if the basis therefor has ceased to exist or new circumstances have arisen which justify quashing or replacing a given measure with a more or less severe one.”
“1.  Detention on remand may be imposed if:
...
(2)  there is a reasonable risk that an accused will attempt to induce witnesses to give false testimony or to obstruct the due course of proceedings by any other unlawful means;
...
(4)  an accused has been charged with an offence which creates a serious danger to society.”
Until 4 August 1996, when the Law of 29 June 1995 on Amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure and Other Criminal Statutes came into force, the national law did not set out any statutory time-limits concerning the length of detention on remand in court proceedings. However, pursuant to Article 222 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the prosecutor could order detention on remand for a period not exceeding three months. When, in view of the particular circumstances of the case, the investigation could not be completed within three months, a detention on remand could, if necessary, be prolonged by either the court competent to deal with the merits of the case, at the prosecutor’s request, for a period not exceeding one year, or by the Supreme Court, at the request of the Prosecutor General, for such further fixed term as was required to terminate the investigation.
Since 4 August 1996, and under the present criminal legislation, i.e. the new Code of Criminal Procedure, referred to above (see § 26), the courts have been, and are bound by the maximum statutory time-limits for which pre-trial detention can be imposed, during the entire course of the proceedings.
Under the provisions applicable at the material time, the courts, when ruling on a prosecutor’s request submitted to it pursuant to Article 222 the Code, were obliged to determine the precise period for which detention could be prolonged. If they refused to prolong detention or if the prosecutor failed to submit a request for a further prolongation before or on the expiry of the last detention order (regardless of whether it had been made by him or by a court), the detainee had to be released immediately.
Presence of the parties at court sessions other than hearings on the merits was regulated at the relevant time in Articles 87 and 88 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969 which provided, insofar as relevant:
"The Court pronounces its decisions at a hearing if the law provides for it; and otherwise, at a court session held in camera. ..."
"A court session in camera may be attended by a prosecutor (...); other parties may attend if the law provides for it."
However, no rule provided for the attendance of the accused or his or her lawyer before the court in any type of the proceedings concerning detention on remand.
At the relevant time there were no specific provision governing detention on remand after the bill of indictment was lodged with the competent court. In particular, there was no provision to the effect that lodging a bill of indictment automatically prolonged or replaced previous detention order, or that this event itself resulted in detention, which had originally been prolonged by a court for a fixed period at the investigation stage, being continued either for an unlimited period, or until a judgment at first instance was given. Nor was there any case-law to that effect. Nevertheless, according to the domestic practice, once a bill of indictment had been lodged with the court competent to deal with the merits of the case, detention was assumed to be prolonged pending trial, without any further judicial decision being given.
Articles 295 and 296 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969, referring to the formal requirements that a bill of indictment had to satisfy, stated, inter alia, that it should contain the first name and surname of the accused and information as to whether a preventive measure had been imposed on him or her. It also had to comprise a statement of the offence with which he or she had been charged, a detailed description of the facts of the case along with a statement of reasons for the accusation, an indication of the court competent to entertain the case, and the evidence upon which the accusation was founded.
On 6 February 1997 the Supreme Court, in an interpretative ruling of certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969 as amended by the Law of 29 June 1995, addressed the problems posed by the practice of keeping an accused in detention under the bill of indictment. In its resolution (no. I KZP 35/96) the Supreme Court replied – in the affirmative – to the question whether, after lodging a bill of indictment with the court competent to deal with the merits of the case, that court was obliged to give a decision prolonging detention on remand, which had meanwhile exceeded the period fixed (or further prolonged) at the investigation stage. The relevant parts of the resolution read as follows:
“Under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure which applied before [4 August 1996, when] the amendment of 29 June 1995 took effect, an obligation to determine the period of detention imposed by a prosecutor at the investigation stage was laid down in Article 211 § 2. However, it did not emerge explicitly from Article 222 §§ 1 and 2 (1) of the code that, at the investigation stage, a prosecutor or the court competent to deal with the case had each time to determine the point until which detention should last. It was deemed to be obvious that, when prolonging detention at the investigation stage, both the prosecutor and the court competent to deal with the case had to determine the time until which detention was to last under a given decision. It was therefore assumed that the obligation to determine the period of detention arose if a decision on that matter was given before the expiry of the maximum statutory terms applicable at a given stage of the proceedings.
Comparing the old legislation with the present one leads [this Court] to the conclusion that the legislator, when amending the code in June 1995, simply extended [the scope of] the rules applicable to continuing and prolonging detention on remand – which had previously applied only at the investigation stage – to the phase of court proceedings. 
Before the amendment, the legislation was based on the precept that a suspect should not be detained indefinitely as long as his case was not being dealt with by an independent court. Now, the starting-point is that a suspect (and an accused) should not be detained indefinitely as long as a first-instance judgment is not rendered.
Under the previous legislation there was no need to determine the period of detention after a bill of indictment had been lodged with the court because at this point proceedings reached the phase in which there was no statutory time-limit [on this measure]. For this reason, the court concerned had no interest in [knowing] until when detention had been prolonged under the last decision[;] detention could continue because ‘detention of limited duration’ had become ‘detention of unlimited duration’. There was therefore only a need to ascertain whether there were grounds for continuing detention under Article 213 of the code.”
In its further resolution no. I KZP 23/97 of 2 September 1997, the Supreme Court confirmed that:
“If the case, in which detention on remand had been ordered, has been referred to a court with a bill of indictment and the period of detention which had previously been fixed expires, the court has a duty to consider whether detention needs to be continued and to give an appropriate decision on this matter.”
Referring to the resolution of 6 February 1997, it also stressed that:
“ … the ratio legis of the amendments to criminal legislation is based on the precept that a suspect (accused) should in no case be detained indefinitely until the first-instance judgment is rendered in his case …
It should be noted that, from the point of view of procedural safeguards for an accused, what is material is not how long his detention at the investigation stage has lasted and how long it has lasted at the stage of the court proceedings, but the total period of his detention and whether his detention and its length are subject to review. If there is such a review at the investigation stage (section 222 §§ 1 and 2), there is no reason why there should not be one at the stage of the court proceedings …”
A new Code of Criminal Procedure was enacted by the Sejm (Parliament) on 6 June 1997. Its Article 250, in its relevant part, reads:
Pursuant to Article 249 of the new Code of Criminal Procedure, before deciding whether the preventive measures should be imposed, the court shall hear the person charged with offence. The lawyer of the detainee should be allowed to attend in the court session concerning review of the lawfulness of pre-trial detention, if he or she is present at the court. However, it is not mandatory to inform the lawyer of the date and time of this session, unless the suspect so requests, and if it will not hinder the proceedings.
The court shall inform the lawyer of a detainee of the date and time of court sessions at which a decision, concerning prolongation of detention on remand or an appeal against a decision to impose or to prolong detention on remand, is to be taken. A failure on the part of the duly informed lawyer to attend the session does not prevent the court from pursuing examination of the issue.
The applicant lodged his application with the Commission on 22 August 1994, alleging, inter alia, that the courts were arbitrary in their decisions relating to his detention. He complained in particular that for a certain unspecified period as from 30 September 1994 his detention on remand had lacked legal basis, as no decision of a competent authority had been given in order to prolong it beyond that date. The applicant complained that he had never been brought before a court in the proceedings concerning the review the lawfulness of his detention on remand. He finally complained that under domestic law applicable at the material time, neither he nor his lawyer had been entitled to attend any hearing in the proceedings concerning review of the lawfulness of his detention.
The application was declared partly admissible by the Commission on 17 May 1995. On 7 July 1997 the Commission declared admissible the applicant’s complaints under Article 5 §§ 1 and 4 of the Convention. In its report of 8 September 1998 (former Article 31 of the Convention) it expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been a violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention in that the applicant’s detention under the bill of indictment had been unlawful, and that there had been a violation of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention in that the proceedings concerning review of his detention on remand had not been truly adversarial.