The case originated in an application (no. 41970/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Aleksandr Anatolyevich Shcherbina (“the applicant”), on 8 July 2011. The applicant’s nationality is the subject of controversy between the parties.
The applicant was represented by Ms Negoryukhina, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his extradition to Kazakhstan put him at risk of ill-treatment and that his detention in Russia pending extradition to Kazakhstan was unlawful.
On 18 November 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1970 in the town of Kustanay, in the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic, a constituent member of the Soviet Union. From 1988 to 1990 he served in the Soviet Army in Vladivostok. In 1990 he enrolled as a student at the military academy in the town of Ryazan in Russia. When the Soviet Union was dissolved in 1991, Kazakhstan became an independent State. Under Kazakh law, all those who were permanent residents of Kazakhstan in 1991 acquired Kazakh citizenship. A similar law was enacted in the Russian Federation. In 1992 the applicant left the military academy and for personal reasons returned to Kazakhstan. He had a USSR passport and was married to a Russian woman.
In 1998 the applicant was convicted in Kazakhstan for armed robbery. According to him, he was wrongly accused and ill-treated by the investigating officers. He claimed that the conditions of his detention in Kazakhstan were very poor, that prison officials ill-treated him and other convicts, that he was subjected to discrimination as an ethnic Russian and that prison officials extorted money from him.
The applicant served part of the sentence in a prison and was later transferred to an “open colony”, where convicts could move around unguarded. In 2001, when he was on leave from the colony, he fled to Russia. He explains that he feared for his life and for the lives of his relatives. In Kazakhstan he was put on the wanted list.
Upon his arrival in Russia the applicant obtained a false Russian passport. He lived and worked in Russia under a false name using that passport. The applicant’s real identity was discovered in 2007; he was sentenced by a judge to a fine for forgery of an official document, but remained in Russia.
The applicant claims that he tried to regularise his residence status. In particular, he claims that he was eligible for Russian nationality, since in 1991 (when the law on Kazakh nationality was enacted) he had been residing in Russia, not Kazakhstan.
In 2007 the Kazakh authorities requested the extradition of the applicant to Kazakhstan. On 2 May 2007 the applicant was arrested and detained in Russia in connection with that request, but on 5 October 2007 he was released on the order of Judge K. No extradition followed.
It appears that some time later the Kazakh authorities renewed their request. On 28 February 2011 the applicant was detained again upon the orders of the Kaluga town prosecutor.
On 30 March 2011 the applicant challenged the detention order before the court. The case was received by Judge K. from the Sverdlovskiy District Court, who set the date of the first hearing for 8 April 2011.
At the hearing of 8 April 2011 the prosecutor challenged Judge K. on the ground that she had already participated in the examination of the applicant’s extradition case earlier, in 2007, when she had ordered his release. It is unclear whether the applicant or his lawyer objected to the replacement of the judge.
On 15 April 2011 Judge N. from the Sverdlovskiy District Court of Kostroma examined the applicant’s complaint and ruled that the prosecutor’s detention order of 28 February 2011 was unlawful. The District Court found that under Russian law a prison sentence handed down by a foreign court was not sufficient for a person to be detained without a detention order issued by a court in Russia. The District Court ordered the prosecutor to take measures in order to rectify the situation complained of.
At the same hearing the prosecutor filed a request with the District Court seeking the applicant’s detention pending extradition. The District Court examined it on the spot and ruled that the applicant was to be detained to prevent him from absconding.
On 28 April 2011 that detention order was quashed by the Kostroma Regional Court as unsubstantiated. The Regional Court noted, in particular, that in view of the applicant’s profile and his previous behaviour (namely, the fact that after his first arrest pending extradition in 2007 he had continued to live openly at his officially known address) there was no reason to suppose that he would flee. The applicant was released, and house arrest was imposed on him. He was required to stay at home during the night.
In the meantime, on 5 April 2011, the Deputy Prosecutor General ordered the applicant’s extradition to Kazakhstan. The applicant challenged that decision before the court. He referred to the facts which, in his view, made him eligible for Russian nationality. He also claimed that if he returned to Kazakhstan he risked being subjected to ill-treatment by the prison authorities. In support of this argument he invoked reports by various human rights defence groups and international organisations concerning the human rights situation in Kazakhstan, in particular in the area of the rights of prisoners.
On 6 May 2011 the Kostroma Regional Court, in the presence of the applicant and his lawyer, examined the applicant’s extradition case on the merits. In particular, it examined his allegations about the risk of illtreatment in Kazakhstan, the fact that he had been serving a sentence for an ordinary criminal offence and the fact that the Kazakh authorities had given assurances to the Russian authorities that he would not be illtreated. The extradition order was upheld.
On 4 July 2011 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation upheld the decision of the Regional Court. It noted, in particular, that the applicant had been convicted of an offence which was not political in nature and had not tried to seek refugee status in Russia because of the alleged persecution, preferring instead to live there under another name. The fact that he had been granted leave from the colony was at odds with his allegations that he had been ill-treated there. The Supreme Court further examined reports by international organisations and NGOs on ill-treatment and poor conditions of detention in Kazakh prisons but concluded that they were not sufficient to show that the applicant personally ran the risk of ill-treatment.
In 2011 the applicant asked the Migration Service to grant him Russian nationality. He claims that it was not his first attempt to that end, but the case file contains no documents in support of his claim. The Migration Service replied that in view of his background (in particular, the fact that at the time of the collapse of the USSR his permanent place of residence was in Kazakhstan) he was not eligible for automatic conversion of his USSR passport to a Russian passport, and that he had not satisfied the formal criteria for lodging a naturalisation request.
The applicant challenged the refusal of the Migration Service in court. He claimed, in particular, that in 1991 he was studying in Russia and was therefore eligible for Russian nationality. On 28 July 2011 the Sverdlovskiy District Court of Kostroma dismissed his complaint. The applicant’s appeal against the decision of 28 July 2011 is still pending.
It is unclear whether or not the applicant has been extradited.
The general provisions of the Civil Code on tort read as follows:
“1.  Damage inflicted on the person or property of an individual ... shall be compensated for in full by the person who inflicted the damage ...
The person who inflicted the damage shall be liable for it unless he proves that the damage was inflicted through no fault of his ...”
“Damage caused to an individual ... as a result of unlawful action or inaction by a State authority ... or official ... must be compensated for. ...”
“1.  Damage caused to an individual as a result of unlawful conviction, unlawful institution of criminal proceedings, unlawful application of a preventive measure in the form of placement in custody or an undertaking not to leave the place of residence, or the unlawful application of an administrative penalty in the form of detention or community service shall be compensated for in full, irrespective of the fault of the officials or agencies ...
Damage sustained by an individual ... as a result of unlawful actions by ... the investigative bodies and the prosecution ..., which did not result in the consequences listed in paragraph 1 of the present Article, shall be compensated for on the grounds and according to the procedure provided by Article 1069 of the Code. Damage sustained by an individual in the framework of the administration of justice shall be compensated for provided that the judge’s guilt has been established in a final criminal conviction.”
Chapter 59 part 4 of the Civil Code concerns compensation for nonpecuniary damage. It contains the following provision:
“Compensation for non-pecuniary damage shall be made irrespective of the fault of the tortfeasor when:
... the damage has been caused to an individual as a result of unlawful conviction, unlawful institution of criminal proceedings, unlawful application of a preventive measure in the form of placement in custody ...”
Article 1099 of the Code establishes that the general principles of compensation of non-pecuniary damage are governed by Article 151 of the Code. Article 151 § 2 stipulates, in particular, that “when defining the amount of compensation to be granted for non-pecuniary damage the court must take into account the extent of the fault of the tortfeasor ...”.
Article 133 of the Code of Criminal Procedure governs the exercise of the “right to rehabilitation” which is, in essence, the restoration of the person to the status quo ante following an acquittal or discontinuance of the criminal proceedings. This right includes the right to compensation in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage and the restoration of labour, pension, housing and other rights. The damage must be compensated for in full, irrespective of the fault of the investigator, prosecutor or court (paragraph 1). Paragraph 2 confers the “right to rehabilitation” on defendants who have been acquitted, against whom charges have been dropped, in respect of whom proceedings have been discontinued or whose convictions have been quashed in their entirety or in part. However, no right to compensation arises where the prosecution is terminated on “non-rehabilitation” grounds, such as in the case of an amnesty or where the prosecution has become time-barred (Article 133 paragraph 4). Paragraph 3 provides that “any individual who has been unlawfully subjected to preventive measures in criminal proceedings shall have the right to rehabilitation”. In a judgment acquitting an individual a court has to mention explicitly that he has the right to “rehabilitation” (Article 134). A claim for compensation of pecuniary damage is to be lodged with the same authority which issued the decision to acquit or the decision to terminate the criminal prosecution (Article 135 § 2), whereas any claims for monetary compensation of non-pecuniary damage are to be lodged with civil courts and examined under the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure (Article 136 § 2).