The case concerns the applicant’s detention following her repeated absences from court hearings in criminal proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Šiauliai. She was represented by Ms M. Gušauskienė, a lawyer practising in Vilnius.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms L. Urbaitė.
In November 2013 the applicant was notified by the authorities that she was suspected of fraud, abuse of office, and misuse of funds. It was alleged that in 2009 to 2010 she had used financial support, received from European Union funds, not in accordance with its purpose, thereby misappropriating property of high value. In April 2014 an indictment against her and three other individuals was drawn up and the case was transferred to the Kretinga District Court for examination. In June 2014 the court classified the case as “warranting a speedier [than usual] examination” (byla pripažintina greičiau nagrinėtina).
On an unspecified date during the pre-trial investigation the applicant was banned from leaving the country (see paragraph 45 below). She was informed that a stricter measure might be imposed in the future if necessary.
From July 2014 to October 2016 sixty-four court hearings were scheduled. Forty-seven of them were adjourned for reasons unrelated to the applicant: illnesses of the other co-accused, their lawyers or the judge; failure of the other co-accused to appear; and lawyers’ holidays or participation in other cases. In September and October 2016 two co-accused were given fines for failure to attend hearings without valid reason (see paragraph 42 below).
From July 2014 to October 2016 seven hearings were adjourned, and one finished early, for reasons attributable to the applicant (see paragraphs 815 below).
From March to May 2015 three hearings were adjourned because the applicant was ill. Her lawyer submitted medical certificates to the court. At the prosecutor’s request, the court ordered a medical expert to assess whether the applicant’s state of health permitted her to attend hearings. The expert examined her medical file and issued a conclusion on 28 May 2015. It stated that the applicant was of advanced age and had several chronic illnesses, including type 2 diabetes, pulmonary hypertension, respiratory insufficiency, and osteochondrosis. She was following outpatient treatment and taking prescription medication. The expert’s conclusion further stated:
“From March to May 2015 [the applicant] had pneumonia and a worsening of her chronic pulmonary illnesses, and she could not therefore attend the court hearings of 27 March, 27 April and 11 May 2015. According to the available medical documents and a laboratory examination, at present [the applicant’s] health must be [considered] fully satisfactory (pilnai patenkinama) ... and her health allows her to appear before the court. [The applicant] may be simulating ... a worsening of her chronic illnesses (gali simuliuoti ... lėtinių ligų paūmėjimą).”
From June 2015 to April 2016 five hearings were held and the applicant attended all of them.
In April 2016 two hearings were adjourned because the applicant was ill. Her lawyer submitted medical certificates. The court again ordered a medical expert to assess whether the applicant’s state of health permitted her to attend hearings. The expert examined her medical file and issued a conclusion on 26 May 2016. It stated:
“1.  [The applicant] is of advanced age, has chronic illnesses and is following outpatient treatment. On 18 and 22 April 2016 [she] saw a general practitioner for pain in the neck, back and waist, and difficulty in spinal movement ... Since both times the deterioration of her health coincided with the dates of the court hearings, [the applicant] may have aggravated (simulated the worsening of) the illnesses. [She] made an appointment with the general practitioner [on her own initiative], no serious pathology was detected, and during the second visit an improvement [of her condition] was identified. She could therefore have attended the court hearings of 19 and 25 April 2016.
Based on her state of health, [the applicant] is able to appear before the court. Her illnesses are not included in the list of serious incurable illnesses.”
Following the expert’s conclusion, the court ruled that the applicant’s failure to appear at the two hearings in April 2016 had been unjustified and gave her a fine of 570 euros (EUR). It also ordered the Ministry of Health to examine whether the medical certificates which had been issued to the applicant in 2015 and 2016 (see paragraphs 8 and 10 above) had been accurate.
The next hearing was held on 13 September 2016 and the applicant was present. However, after the lunch break her lawyer informed the court that a fire had broken out at the applicant’s company’s premises and asked for permission for her to leave. The court terminated the hearing.
The following hearing was scheduled for 23 September 2016. On 21 September the applicant’s lawyer requested that she and the applicant be excused from that hearing, on the grounds that the lawyer of one of the coaccused would not be able to attend because of his involvement in another case, and that the hearing would have to be adjourned anyway. It is unclear if she received any response from the court. On 23 September the court held the hearing but the applicant, her lawyer and the aforementioned lawyer were absent. The hearing was adjourned and they were given fines of EUR 380 for failure to appear before the court without valid reason. In its decision to fine the applicant, the court also observed that she had not provided any documents to prove that there had been a fire at her company’s premises on the day of the previous hearing (see paragraph 12 above).
In October 2016 the relevant institution under the Ministry of Health, after examining the medical certificates which had been issued to the applicant (see paragraphs 8 and 10 above), concluded that the general practitioner who had examined her had not carried out a comprehensive examination of her health, had not properly described her condition in the medical documents, and had not justified the diagnosis of pneumonia with any objective data, in breach of the relevant regulations.
Two hearings were held in October 2016 and the applicant attended them. A third hearing scheduled for that month was adjourned because her lawyer requested that the judge be withdrawn from the case. The request was dismissed on the grounds that it had no basis in law.
A hearing was held on 7 November 2016. During that hearing, which started at 9.30 a.m., the applicant’s lawyer informed the court that the applicant was on her way to court from her home in Šiauliai (approximately 140 kilometres from Kretinga) but was running late because her car had broken down and she was waiting for help; it was unclear when she would arrive at court. The hearing was adjourned. The applicant arrived at court at around 2.50 p.m.
On the same day the Kretinga District Court ordered the applicant’s detention for three months. It stated that she had failed to attend hearings on multiple occasions, providing various reasons, such as illness, even though a court-appointed medical expert had found that her health allowed her to attend (see paragraphs 8, 10 and 14 above). She had also previously failed to appear on the grounds that other participants in the proceedings would be absent, and one hearing had been terminated early because of a fire at her company’s premises (see paragraphs 12 and 13 above). The court observed that all the other co-accused and their lawyers had managed to attend the hearing that day, so there was no reason to consider that the weather conditions had been difficult. It held that the applicant had “a careless attitude towards the criminal proceedings” and that her repeated absences without valid reason had precluded the court from examining the case in the shortest time possible. It noted that restrictive measures had already been ordered against the applicant and that she had been informed that a stricter measure might be imposed (see paragraph 5 above). Since she was systematically interfering with the proceedings, and hearings had to be adjourned because of her unjustified absences, the court considered that there were grounds for her detention under Article 122 § 1 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter “the CCP”, see paragraph 48 below).
On 9 November 2017 the applicant asked the Kretinga District Court to annul the decision to place her in detention. She submitted that her absence from the hearing had not been deliberate and provided documents showing that her car had broken down. She also asked the court to take into account her state of health, in particular the fact that she had type 2 diabetes. The prosecutor supported the applicant’s request, stating that she had not missed the hearing deliberately and that the decision to detain her should therefore be annulled. However, the court left its decision unchanged, citing essentially the same grounds as before (see paragraph 17 above). It also observed that the applicant had previously been fined for failure to appear before the court (see paragraphs 11 and 13 above) and banned from leaving the country (see paragraph 5 above) but that she had continued to “systematically obstruct the proceedings”.
The applicant lodged an appeal against the decision to place her in detention. She submitted that the Kretinga District Court had incorrectly found that she had systematically failed to attend hearings without valid reason. In particular, she had not been responsible for the fire at her company’s premises (see paragraph 12 above) or for her car breaking down (see paragraph 16 above), and she had provided the relevant supporting documents to the court. Furthermore, the one time that she had not attended a hearing because of the absence of her co-accused’s lawyer, the court had been notified in advance (see paragraph 13 above). She argued that there were therefore no grounds to find that she was wilfully interfering with the proceedings.
She further submitted that the detention was disproportionate, especially in view of her advanced age and poor health, and that not even the prosecutor had supported it (see paragraph 18 above). However, the court had not considered imposing more lenient restrictive measures (see paragraph 50 below).
Lastly, the applicant contended that the decision to detain her for three months was unreasonable because only two court hearings had been scheduled for November and December 2016.
On 22 November 2016 the Klaipėda Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It observed that the examination of the case had been protracted because, among other things, the applicant had failed to attend hearings. Although she had attempted to justify some of her absences by submitting medical certificates, court-appointed medical experts had considered the absences unjustified and that she might have simulated the worsening of her illnesses (see paragraphs 8, 10 and 14 above). As a result, the court had doubts as to the truthfulness of her submissions regarding the fire at her company’s premises and the breakdown of her car. It noted that she had places of residence in Šiauliai and Rietavas, and that she had claimed that on 7 November 2016 she had been coming to court from Šiauliai. However, the documents which she had provided to the court suggested that on the day in question her car had been transported from another town, Plungė, to Šiauliai and back to Plungė, and did not indicate that any repairs had been done to the car. It therefore concluded that the applicant was hiding from the court and protracting the examination of the case, which constituted grounds for her detention under Article 122 § 1 (1) of the CCP (see paragraph 48 below).
The court also stated that in view of the circumstances demonstrating the applicant’s “deliberate reluctance to attend hearings”, more lenient restrictive measures would not be effective in ensuring uninterrupted proceedings, and that therefore the public interest outweighed her right to liberty. However, it considered that there were no grounds to find that she might attempt to influence witnesses or destroy evidence, and that Article 122 § 1 (2) of the CCP (see paragraph 48 below) should not therefore be applied.
Lastly, it stated that the number of scheduled court hearings (see paragraph 21 above) was immaterial because additional hearings could be scheduled in the future.
On 29 November 2016 the applicant was admitted to Šiauliai Public Hospital for two months of psychiatric treatment. The hospital recommended that during her treatment she should not take part in court proceedings. On 2 February 2017 she was referred to outpatient treatment. Three court hearings which had been scheduled for December 2016, January and February 2017 were adjourned as a result of the applicant’s treatment.
In December 2016 the Šiauliai police informed the Kretinga District Court that they had been unable to arrest the applicant because she had not been at home.
In December 2016 and January 2017 the applicant lodged several requests with the Kretinga District Court to annul the decision to detain her and to impose a more lenient restrictive measure, raising similar arguments as before (see paragraphs 18-21 above). The requests were dismissed, with the court stating that the applicant’s inpatient treatment (see paragraph 25 above) did not eliminate the grounds on which her detention had been ordered.
On 25 January 2017 the court ordered a psychiatric assessment of the applicant, in order to determine whether she would be able to take part in the court proceedings. The applicant submitted a request to postpone her detention until the psychiatric assessment was carried out. The court refused to examine it because it had no basis in law.
On 2 February 2017 the Kretinga District Court asked the Šiauliai police to explain why the decision to place the applicant in detention had still not been executed.
On 8 February 2017 the applicant was arrested and remanded in custody at Šiauliai Remand Prison.
Before her arrest, the applicant had asked the court to adjourn several scheduled hearings because of her continuing psychiatric treatment (see paragraph 25 above). The court dismissed her requests after she had been detained, finding that the arguments raised therein were no longer relevant.
On 14 February 2017 she informed the court that because of the detention, her psychiatric treatment had been interrupted, which amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment. She asked for permission to complete the treatment at Šiauliai Public Hospital. The court refused to examine the request on the grounds that the CCP did not contain any provisions regarding the medical treatment of detainees.
In February and March 2017 the applicant lodged several requests to annul the detention and replace it with a more lenient restrictive measure. She submitted that she required constant medical help and that her health had deteriorated in detention. She also submitted that the examination of the criminal case was nearly finished and that therefore keeping her in detention no longer served any purpose.
The Kretinga District Court dismissed these requests, finding that the grounds for her detention were still present because the examination of the case had not yet finished. It observed that the criminal proceedings had been prolonged because, inter alia, the applicant had refused to give evidence and had submitted multiple unfounded requests. It stated that she had been detained because of her repeated unjustified absences from hearings and that more lenient restrictive measures which had previously been imposed on her (see paragraphs 5, 11 and 13 above) had been ineffective. It also noted that the CCP did not provide that an individual should be released from detention on the grounds of the deterioration of his or her health.
A court hearing scheduled for 14 February 2017 was adjourned because the applicant was not taken to court from the remand prison. The next hearing was held on 17 March 2017 and the applicant was present. The following hearing, scheduled for 16 May 2017, was adjourned because the civil claimant failed to appear.
On 3 May 2017 the Kretinga District Court extended the applicant’s detention for a further three months (see paragraph 51 below). It stated that the examination of the criminal case had not yet finished because the psychiatric assessment of the applicant was ongoing (see paragraph 28 above), she had not yet given evidence, and defence lawyers kept submitting new or repeated requests for the examination of evidence. The court considered that there were reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant had committed the crimes of which she was suspected. Even though she had a place of residence and a lawful source of income, her behaviour during the proceedings – namely her repeated unjustified absences from court hearings – led to the conclusion that the grounds for her detention were still present, because she might otherwise interfere with the court’s ability to examine the case.
The applicant lodged an appeal against that decision. She submitted that the court had merely repeated the arguments of its previous decisions (see paragraphs 17, 18 and 34 above) and had not indicated any new circumstances justifying the extension of the detention. She also submitted that the detention had precluded her from continuing her psychiatric treatment. Furthermore, she contended that the detention could not be used to coerce her into giving evidence in the criminal proceedings. Lastly, she submitted that the court had not considered more lenient restrictive measures (see paragraph 50 below) and that she had fully complied with the previous restrictive measure which had been imposed (see paragraph 5 above).
On 18 May 2017 the Klaipėda Regional Court allowed the applicant’s appeal in part and quashed the decision to extend the detention. It noted that the examination of the criminal case had been protracted because, inter alia, the applicant had failed to attend hearings, and that the initial decision to detain her had been justified because of her multiple absences without valid reason. However, it considered that her participation in the proceedings at that time could be ensured by more lenient restrictive measures. The court observed that after the applicant had been placed in detention, the examination of the criminal case had not progressed significantly and hearings had been adjourned for reasons not attributable to her (see paragraphs 35 above). Accordingly, it considered that extending the detention in order to ensure her participation in the hearings was not proportionate. In addition, she was of advanced age and poor health, had a permanent place of residence, a family, her own business, and no previous convictions (see paragraphs 47 and 49 below). Even though she had previously failed to properly comply with the duty to appear before the court, that could be ensured by imposing a more lenient restrictive measure. The Klaipėda Regional Court released the applicant on bail of EUR 5,000 (see paragraph 45 below). She was informed that if she failed to attend court hearings or otherwise interfered with the proceedings, the amount of bail would not be returned to her.
On 18 May 2017 the court-appointed psychiatric expert (see paragraph 28 above), after interviewing the applicant and consulting her medical file, issued a conclusion. It was noted that she had been diagnosed with severe depression without psychotic features, characterised by slow thinking, low mood, impaired memory, attention deficit, feelings of hopelessness, and suicidal thoughts. However, the expert stated that it had not been possible to comprehensively assess the applicant’s psychological state after a single interview, and recommended that the court order an inpatient psychiatric assessment.
Three further hearings were held in June 2017, at which the applicant appeared and gave evidence. In August 2017 the Kretinga District Court convicted her and sentenced her to two years and three months’ imprisonment.
Article 20 of the Constitution states that human liberty is inviolable. No one may be arbitrarily apprehended or detained, and no one may be deprived of his or her liberty other than on the grounds and in accordance with the procedures established by law.
Article 142 § 1 of the CCP enshrines, inter alia, the obligation of the suspect and accused to appear before the court when summoned. If the summoned individual fails to appear without valid reason, he or she may be brought to court (atvesdintas). Under Article 163 § 1, a suspect or accused who fails to appear before the court without valid reason may be given a fine.
Article 37 § 1 provides a list of valid reasons which justify an individual’s absence from a hearing in a criminal case. In so far as relevant to the present case, these reasons include an illness which precludes the person from appearing in court, certified with an appropriate medical certificate (Article 37 § 1 (5)), and unexpected loss of property of high value (Article 37 § 1 (4)). Under Article 37 § 2, the court may recognise other reasons for absence as valid. Under Article 37 § 3, a lawyer’s participation in a different case is not usually considered a valid reason to justify his or her absence.
Article 119 states, inter alia, that restrictive measures can be applied in order to ensure that the suspect or the accused participates in the proceedings, to prevent interference with the pre-trial investigation or the examination of the case before the court, and to prevent the commission of further criminal acts.
At the material time, Article 120 § 1 listed the restrictive measures which could be imposed during criminal proceedings, including, in so far as relevant: detention, monitoring (by means of electronic tagging), house arrest, bail, confiscation of documents, obligation to regularly report to a police station, and a ban on leaving the country or one’s place of residence without the permission of a relevant authority.
Article 121 § 3 provides that several restrictive measures, other than detention, may be imposed at the same time.
Under Article 121 § 4, when deciding whether to impose a restrictive measure and when choosing a specific measure, the prosecutor or the court must take into account the gravity of the alleged criminal offence, the suspect’s character, whether he or she has a permanent place of residence and a job or another legal source of income, the suspect’s age, state of health, marital status, and other relevant circumstances.
Article 122 § 1 permits detention where there is a well-founded belief that the suspect may flee (Article 122 § 1 (1)), interfere with the investigation (Article 122 § 1 (2)), or commit further crimes (Article 122 § 1 (3)).
Article 122 § 2 provides that where there is a reasonable suspicion that a suspect may flee, detention may be ordered after taking into account his or her marital status, permanent place of residence, employment status, state of health, prior convictions, connections abroad, and other relevant circumstances.
Article 122 § 7 states that detention may only be ordered when the objectives listed in Article 119 of the CCP cannot be achieved by more lenient restrictive measures (see paragraph 44 above).
Article 127 § 1 provides that the duration of the detention is determined by the judge ordering the detention, but that it may not be ordered for more than three months at a time. Under Article 127 § 2, detention may be extended by no more than three months when the case is particularly complex or large-scale.
Article 246 § 1 states that the attendance of the accused is obligatory when the case is examined by the first-instance court. If the accused is unable to appear in person or is in detention, his or her attendance may be ensured via audio or video link. Under Article 247, if the accused fails to appear, the hearing must be adjourned. The court has the right to bring the accused to court or impose restrictive measures (see paragraphs 42 and 45 above).
Article 2421 § 1 establishes a court’s duty to examine a case within the shortest possible time and with as few adjournments as possible.
Under Article 243 § 1, the examination of a case may be adjourned in order to rest, to re-summon the parties or participants who have failed to appear, to request new evidence, or for other valid reasons.
In its ruling of 30 December 2004, the Senate of the Supreme Court of Lithuania stated that if the suspect or accused denied the charges against him or her, refused to give evidence in the criminal proceedings or gave inconsistent evidence, this did not amount to interference with the proceedings within the meaning of Article 122 § 1 (2) of the CCP (see paragraph 48 above).