The case originated in an application (no. 26876/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ms Irina Batdanovna Kolesnik, a national of Turkmenistan, and Mr Viktor Pavlovich Kolesnik, a national of , (“the applicants”), on 9 June 2008.
The applicants were represented by Mrs Ryabinina, a lawyer practising in Moscow, and by Mrs Tseytlina, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mrs V. Milinchuk, the former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by their new Representative, Mr G. Matyushkin.
The applicants alleged that the first applicant's extradition to  would subject her to a risk of ill-treatment and violate their right to respect for their family life, that her detention was not lawful and not subject to judicial review, and that the presumption of innocence had been breached. They referred to Articles 3, 5, 6 and 8 of the Convention.
On 27 June 2008 the President of the Chamber decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Government that it was desirable in the interests of the parties and the proper conduct of the proceedings not to extradite the first applicant to  pending the Court's decision.
On 2 March 2009 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicants were born in 1961 and 1946 respectively and live in the Tula Region.
The applicants are a married couple and have a daughter born in 1992. The first applicant also has a daughter from her previous marriage, born in 1985. Both daughters are Russian nationals.
Prior to their arrival in Russia, the applicants and their daughter were living in . There the second applicant and their daughter acquired Russian citizenship in 2002. On 15 November 2005 criminal proceedings were brought against the first applicant's employer on economic charges. The first applicant was questioned as a witness on several occasions and allegedly threatened by the investigator.
On 10 December 2005 the applicants and their daughter moved to . The first applicant's elder daughter was already living in .
The applicants purchased a house in the Tula Region. In May 2006 the first applicant obtained a temporary residence permit. In September 2006 the first applicant also applied for Russian citizenship.
On 22 February 2007 her application for Russian citizenship was refused on the ground that criminal proceedings were pending against her in the State of her nationality. It does not appear that the first applicant appealed against this decision to a court.
On 24 July 2007 the first applicant applied to the Federal Migration Service (the FMS) seeking refugee status.
On 26 July 2007 the FMS refused to examine the merits of the request, on the ground that the first applicant had a temporary residence permit, was married to a Russian national and was on a wanted list in .
The first applicant complained about the refusal to the Central District Court of Tula. In her complaint she did not raise any arguments concerning her fears that in  she would be subjected to ill-treatment and separated from her family.
On 28 January 2008 the Central District Court of Tula upheld the decision of the FMS and dismissed the first applicant's complaint. The first applicant appealed.
On 29 May 2008 the  upheld the first-instance decision.
On 2 July 2008 the first applicant applied for temporary asylum in . In her application she stated briefly that she would be subjected to torture and other forms of ill-treatment if expelled to .
On 23 July 2008 the first applicant was interviewed in this connection while in custody.
On 25 July 2008 her application was accepted for examination, and on 22 October 2008 the FMS refused the application. The first applicant appealed, referring to a threat of inhuman treatment in Turkmenistan and to family ties in .
On 17 February 2009 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow ruled that the FMS decision should be upheld. The first applicant did not appeal against this decision to a higher court.
On 28 January 2006 the Turkmen authorities, in the context of the criminal proceedings commenced in 2005, charged the first applicant with economic crimes and fraud and placed her on a wanted list.
On 6 September 2006 the prosecutor of the Kopetdagsky District of Ashgabat remanded the first applicant in custody.
On 10 October 2006 the Turkmen authorities sent the Office of the Prosecutor General of  a request to extradite the first applicant.
On 15 December 2006 the first applicant learned from the deputy prosecutor of Donskoy town that an “extradition check” was being conducted. Thereafter she contacted various branches of Russian authorities asking for protection from allegedly unlawful persecution by Turkmen authorities.
On 28 August 2007 the  Inter-District Transport Prosecutor's Office drafted a report on the results of the “extradition check”. The report stated, inter alia:
“As it follows from the documents submitted by [the Turkmen authorities], [the first applicant] is wanted for crimes [punishable under Turkmen law]...
[The first applicant] is not persecuted in Turkmenistan on political, religious, ethnic or racial grounds, she does not possess information which constitutes any State or military secret of the , and she has not applied to the Russian competent authorities for either political asylum or refugee status. She has applied for ... Russian nationality. However, her request has been refused ... on the ground of criminal prosecution by competent authorities of a foreign State.
[The first applicant] is aware of the grounds for ... the criminal prosecution.”
On 22 February 2008 the General Prosecutor's Office of Turkmenistan sent a letter to the Office of the Prosecutor General of Russia, guaranteeing that if extradited to  the first applicant would not be subjected to persecution on political grounds.
On 11 March 2008 the Office of the Prosecutor General of Russia ordered the first applicant's extradition to Turkmenistan on charges under Articles 33 part 5, 218 parts 1, 2, 3 and 229 part 4 (a) of the Criminal Code of Turkmenistan. The document stated that the first applicant had been charged in  with embezzlement and use of forged documents, which entailed serious damage. It compared these acts with the crimes as described in the Russian Criminal Code, found no obstacles to the extradition and granted the request.
The first applicant challenged the extradition order before the Moscow City Court. In her complaint she submitted that her extradition to  might entail “catastrophic consequences to the point of physical elimination”. There were no other arguments regarding her fears of ill-treatment in , the grounds for her fears, or arguments concerning her removal from the family.
On 5 June 2008 the Moscow City Court rejected the first applicant's complaint as unfounded.
The first applicant appealed against the decision on the same date. In her appeal statement she mentioned her fears of ill-treatment in .
On 9 June 2008 the first applicant applied to the Court with a request to apply interim measures under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court and to stay her extradition.
On 27 June 2008 the Court granted the request and indicated to the Government of the Russian Federation that the first applicant should not be extradited to  until further notice.
On 17 July 2008 the Supreme Court of Russia allowed the first applicant's appeal, set aside the decision of 5 June 2008 and remitted the case for a fresh examination. At the same time the Supreme Court set the time-limit for the first applicant's detention at 8 August 2008.
On 1 August 2008 the Moscow City Court again rejected the first applicant's complaint against the extradition order.
On 16 October 2008 the Supreme Court of , on an appeal by the first applicant, quashed and remitted the decision of the Moscow City Court. It found that the City Court had failed to examine the first applicant's arguments that she risked ill-treatment and that her family was living in .
In November and December 2009 the Moscow City Court requested the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Turkmenistan to comment on the first applicant's complaints about the threat of ill-treatment and about the allegations of unfair trial. In reply, on 15 January 2009 the General Prosecutor's Office of Turkmenistan stated that in the event of extradition the first applicant would not be subjected to political persecution, nor to torture or inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment. The letter referred to Turkmenistan's obligations under the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights and the fact that the death penalty had been abolished in  in 1999. Furthermore, the letter stated that under the legislation of 1999, every year at the time of a Muslim festival there was an amnesty for convicted criminals if they had repented and taken the path to reform. On 9 February 2009, responding to a question from the Moscow City Court, the General Prosecutor's Office of Turkmenistan forwarded to the City Court a letter from the Ministry of the Foreign Affairs of that country, by which their initial request had been forwarded to the Prosecutor's Office.
On 13 February 2009 the Moscow City Court again found the decision of the General Prosecutor's Office of 11 March 2008 to be valid. The City Court heard the applicant and her lawyer, as well as Ms Ryabinina, who made a statement as an expert on the situation in Central Asia and in  in particular. The court reviewed the documents submitted by the applicants, including copies of the relevant international reports about the situation in . The court also examined the decisions by which the applicant's request for temporary asylum had been rejected. The court found that the first applicant's allegations of the danger of ill-treatment in  were based on general information and unsubstantiated. It relied on the assurances provided by the General Prosecutor's Office of Turkmenistan and found that they had been issued by a competent body. It also took into account information about the legal framework of the criminal proceedings and detention in , which appeared to be consistent with the requirements of fair trial and lawfulness of detention. The court took note of the annual amnesties announced in  for convicted persons. The City Court refused to consider the first applicant's arguments concerning the circumstances of the imputed actions, noting that she had been charged with a criminal offence in Turkmenistan and that the question of her involvement would be decided by the competent court in that country.
The first applicant appealed. On 31 March 2009 the Supreme Court confirmed the decision of 13 February 2009.
On 14 May 2007 the first applicant was arrested by Russian police.
On 16 May 2007 the deputy prosecutor of Donskoy town applied to the  seeking authorisation to remand the applicant in custody.
On 18 May 2007 the  dismissed the deputy prosecutor's request and the first applicant was released in the courtroom. The court found, inter alia, that at the time of her departure from Turkmenistan the first applicant had not been suspected of or charged with any criminal offences, no preventive measures had been applied to her and her freedom of movement had not been restricted. It also noted that the first applicant herself had contacted the Tula Regional department of the interior in relation to her placement on the wanted list by .
On 21 May 2007 the Donskoy Town Prosecutor's Office appealed. On 4 July 2007 the  set aside the decision of the  and remitted the case for a fresh examination.
On 19 August 2007, when attempting to leave for Ukraine to visit her relatives, the first applicant was arrested and placed in remand prison IZ-77/6 in .
On 21 August 2007 the Dorogomilovskiy District Court of Moscow examined the documents concerning the first applicant's extradition and granted the prosecutor's request to detain her provisionally until 24 August 2007. The first applicant and her counsel stated that they agreed with the prosecutor's request.
On 24 August 2007 the Dorogomilovskiy District Court of Moscow ordered the first applicant's detention pending extradition proceedings. The court set no time-limits for her detention. The first applicant did not appeal against this order.
In October 2007 the first applicant complained to the Moscow Lyublinskiy District Court arguing that the administration of remand prison IZ-77/6 had held her in custody unlawfully, since the term of her detention had already expired.
On 11 January 2008 the Lyublinskiy District Court granted the complaint. It found that the term of the first applicant's detention had expired on 19 October 2007 and that her detention after that date was unlawful. The first applicant was neither summoned to the hearing nor released. The administration of remand prison IZ-77/6 appealed.
On 28 February 2008 the Moscow City Court examined the appeal, set aside the decision of 11 January 2008 and delivered a new decision. The appeal court held that the time-limits provided in Article 109 of the Code of Criminal Procedure did not apply to the first applicant since she had not been charged with an offence within the . At the same time, since the order of the Dorogomilovskiy District Court provided no time-limits for her detention, her complaint should be dismissed.
On 19 February 2008 the Dorogomilovskiy District Court of Moscow again ordered the first applicant's detention pending extradition proceedings, although by that time she had already been detained for several months. The decision did not set time-limits and did not refer to Articles 108 or 109 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The first applicant appealed against the order.
On 19 March 2008 the Moscow City Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the decision of 19 February 2008. No time-limits were fixed for the first applicant's detention.
On 11 August 2008 the Moskovsko-Smolenskiy Office of the Transport Prosecutor ordered the release of the first applicant in accordance with the instructions of the Office of the Prosecutor General, on the basis of the Supreme Court's decision of 17 July 2008 setting the time-limit for her detention at 8 August 2008.
On 12 August 2008 the first applicant was released, having spent eleven months and twenty-five days in custody.
For a recent summary of the relevant Russian law and practice on issues of extradition of foreign nationals see Khudyakova v. Russia, no. 13476/04, §§ 33-48, 8 January 2009.
For an overview of relevant international reports about the situation in  prior to the end of 2006, see Ryabikin v. Russia, no. 8320/04, §§ 91-98, 19 June 2008. The reports cited in that judgment referred to persecution of ethnic minorities including Russians, violations of the principle of a fair trial, widespread use of torture by the police, intolerable conditions of detention and lack of access to detainees by independent bodies, lawyers and relatives. Various intergovernmental and non-governmental organisations characterised the human rights situation in  as “disastrous”, “abysmal” and “one of the worst totalitarian systems in the world”.
The latest developments in  following the coming to power of a new president at the end of 2006 are described as follows. The Freedom House wrote in its report “The Worst of the Worst 2009” - , 3 June 2009:
“The judicial system is subservient to the president, who appoints and removes judges without legislative review. The authorities frequently deny rights of due process, including public trials and access to defense attorneys. Prisons suffer from overcrowding and inadequate nutrition and medical care, and international organizations are not permitted to visit.”
The Amnesty International Report 2009 - , 28 May 2009 concluded:
“There was pervasive impunity for police, security services and other government authorities. ...
Discrimination against ethnic minorities continued and was manifested clearly through restricted access to work and higher education. The policy of checking people's Turkmen origin up to the third generation continued, and meant that there were no members of ethnic minorities among ministers, directors or deputies of regional or district administrations. The three-generation check also applied to those applying to institutions of higher education. There were a few exceptional cases where members of ethnic minorities or people with a non-Turkmen relative were admitted to university, but this would reportedly only occur if a bribe was paid or the person was well connected.”
The latest report of the US State Department came out in April 2010 (http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2009/sca/136095.htm). In relation to the situation in 2009 it contains the following relevant information:
“Although there were modest improvements in some areas, the government continued to commit serious abuses, and its human rights record remained poor. ...
Arbitrary or Unlawful Deprivation of Life
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or unlawful killings.
There were no updates on the 2007 reports of citizens who died under suspicious circumstances during detention, including the cases of an allegedly drunk suspect who died in police custody in  and a man who died in an Ashgabat detention center while awaiting an appeal decision.
Disappearance
There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
The constitution and law prohibit such practices; however, security officials trying to extract confessions from detainees tortured, beat, and used excessive force against criminal suspects, prisoners, and individuals critical of the government.
An October 2008 decision of the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) stated that "any criminal suspect held in custody ran a serious risk of being subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment." The ECHR also reported that the country lacked an effective system to prevent torture.
In contrast with previous years, there were no reports during the year that authorities detained persons in psychiatric hospitals as punishment. ...
... Prison conditions were poor; prisons were unsanitary, overcrowded, and unsafe. According to a civil society source, a women's prison near Dashoguz built for 800 prisoners held approximately 2,000. Disease, particularly tuberculosis (TB), was rampant.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment While in Detention
... Pre-trial detention legally could last no longer than two months, but in exceptional cases it could be extended to one year if an investigator made such a request to the prosecutor general. For minor crimes a much shorter investigation period applies. In contrast to previous years, authorities rarely exceeded legal limits for pre-trial detention. In the past chronic corruption and cumbersome bureaucratic processes contributed to lengthy trial delays; however, the government's anti-corruption efforts and the establishment of the  to improve state employees' qualifications generally eliminated such delays.
Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provides for an independent judiciary; in practice the judiciary was subordinate to the president. There was no legislative review of the president's judicial appointments and dismissals, except for the chairman (chief justice) of the Supreme Court, whom parliament nominally reviewed. The president had sole authority to dismiss any judge before the completion of his or her term. The judiciary was widely reputed to be both corrupt and inefficient.
The court system consists of a Supreme Court, six provincial courts (including one for Ashgabat), and 64 district and city courts. Civilian courts, under the authority of the Office of the Prosecutor General, tried members of the armed forces for criminal offenses.
Trial Procedures
The law provides due process for defendants, including a public trial, access to accusatory material, the right to call witnesses to testify on their behalf, a defense attorney or a court-appointed lawyer if the defendant cannot afford one, and the right to represent oneself in court. In practice authorities often denied these rights. Defendants frequently did not enjoy a presumption of innocence. There was no jury system. The government permitted the public to attend most trials but closed some trials, especially those it considered politically sensitive. There were few independent lawyers available to represent defendants. The CPC provides that a defendant be present at his or her trial and consult with his or her attorney in a timely manner. The law sets no restrictions on a defendant's access to an attorney. If a defendant cannot afford to pay for attorney's services, an attorney is provided at public expense. The court at times did not allow a defendant to confront or question a witness against him or her and denied the defendant and his or her attorney access to government evidence. In some cases courts refused to accept exculpatory evidence provided by defense attorneys, even if that evidence would have changed the outcome of the trial.
Even when the courts observed due process, the authority of the government prosecutor far exceeded that of the defense attorney, making it difficult for the defendant to receive a fair trial. Court transcripts were frequently flawed or incomplete, especially when defendants' testimony had to be translated from Russian to Turkmen. Defendants could appeal a lower court's decision and petition the president for clemency. In most cases courts ignored allegations of torture when defendants raised such allegations in trial. There were credible reports that judges often predetermined the outcome of the trial and sentence.
There were regular reports that police would arrest an individual and request he or she pay a fine for breaking a specific law. When a citizen asked to see the law, police or other government officials refused or stated the laws were secret. ...
... There was no further information on 2007 reports that some prisoners accused of economic crimes, including a number of former senior government ministers, might have been moved from Owadan Depe Prison to Mary Prison. Government officials continued to ignore inquiries from family members and foreign diplomats about many prisoners' locations or condition. Government officials also continued to prevent family members, foreign diplomats, and international observers such as the ICRC from accessing detainees or prisoners associated with the 2002 attack.”
The FCO - UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office reported in their latest publication on the subject, Human Rights Annual Report 2009 - Countries of Concern: , March 2010 (available at www.ecoi.net):
“In 2009, there were indications that  was backtracking on previous improvements and commitments to human rights. ...
Prison conditions remain extremely worrying. The Turkmen government has still not granted the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) access to Turkmen prisons.”
Section 218 of the Criminal Code of Turkmenistan (adopted in 1997) provides that forging documents, use and sale of forged documents or stamps is punishable by correctional labor terms of up to two years, or by a prison sentence of up to two years. The same actions if committed repeatedly are punished by a prison sentence of up to four years.
Section 229 § 4 provides that misappropriation of funds, committed by a group or which has caused significant damage, is punishable by a prison sentence of six to twelve years, with or without confiscation of property.