The case originated in an application (no. 14078/12) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Garik Dadayan (“the applicant”), on 5 March 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr K. Sardaryan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Government of Armenia to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not been given an opportunity to cross-examine two witnesses at his trial.
On 4 November 2016 the complaint under Article 6 § 3 (d) of the Convention concerning the applicant’s inability to have witnesses against him examined was communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Yerevan.
On 11 March 2010 two individuals, S.T. and H.O., were arrested by the Georgian law-enforcement authorities in Tbilisi when they tried to sell 15 g of enriched uranium which they had transported from Armenia by train on the same day.
In April 2010 the National Security Service of Armenia received information from the Georgian authorities that S.T. and H.O. had received the radioactive substance from the applicant. On 22 April 2010 the National Security Service instituted criminal proceedings in relation to the matter.
On the same date the applicant was arrested on suspicion of having aided and abetted S.T. and H.O. in the offence. He was believed to have acquired the enriched uranium which he had then sold to H.O. in Yerevan. Thereafter, S.T. and H.O. had smuggled the radioactive substance to Tbilisi, where they had been arrested.
On 23 April 2010 the applicant was charged with aiding and abetting S.T. and H.O. in the offence.
The applicant denied the charges. His case was that H.O., whom he had known for about ten years, had owed him money for a long time. In February 2010 he had been robbed in Ukraine, and afterwards he had somehow reached Moscow to find a job but had then been obliged to return to Yerevan. However, since his money had been stolen, he had decided to ask H.O. (as the person who owed him money) to send him some money for his journey. After his return he had met H.O. in Yerevan several times in order to discuss financial matters relating to the payment of the rest of the debt.
On 28 April 2010 H.O. was questioned as a witness at the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia. He stated that, inter alia, the applicant had given him 1 g of a radioactive substance in either 2002 or 2003. At the beginning of March 2010 he and S.T. had asked the applicant, who had been in Russia at the time, whether he would be able to obtain radioactive substances. During the conversation the applicant had enquired about the price per gram that had been offered for such a substance. The next day he had called H.O. and offered to bring the requested radioactive substance to Armenia. Since the applicant had had no means to travel, they had transferred money to him. The applicant had arrived in Armenia several days later and given the radioactive substance to H.O. They had agreed that H.O. would pay the applicant after the deal. When asked whether he owed any money to the applicant, H.O. denied ever having borrowed from him.
On 29 April 2010 S.T. was also questioned as a witness at the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia. He stated, inter alia, that when he had been in Georgia, some people had offered to buy uranium from him. He had then gone to Armenia and asked H.O. to find the applicant so that he could provide them with uranium. S.T. further stated that H.O. had been in contact with the applicant, who had agreed to come to Armenia and give him uranium. Thereafter they had sent travel money to the applicant by bank transfer. He had then met H.O. at the railway station. H.O. had brought the radioactive substance back to Georgia and stated that he had taken it from the applicant.
On 8 December 2010 the bill of indictment was finalised and the case was transferred to the Tavush Regional Court for trial. The following evidence was relied on in the bill of indictment: the witness statements made by S.T. and H.O. in Georgia; other witness statements, in particular those of K.O. and V.G., made in Armenia; the conclusion of a forensic examination conducted in Georgia, according to which the substance seized from S.T. contained enriched uranium; regular telephone correspondence between the applicant and H.O. in the period between 1 September 2009 and 30 March 2010, and in particular two telephone calls made on 10 March 2010; and the relevant exit and entry stamps in the applicant’s passport proving that he had arrived in Yerevan from Moscow on 10 March 2010.
At one of the hearings before the Regional Court, relying, inter alia, on the Strasbourg Convention of 1959 on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters, the applicant requested the temporary transfer of S.T. and H.O. from the prison in Georgia so that they could be examined at the trial.
His request was granted. Thus, on 27 January 2011 the presiding judge ordered S.T.’s and H.O’s temporary transfer to Armenia.
By a letter of 29 April 2011, the Ministry of Justice of Georgia, refused to grant the request by referring to Article 11 § 1(b) of the Strasbourg Convention, which states that a request for assistance may be refused if “his or her presence is necessary at criminal proceedings pending in the territory of the requested Party”. The Ministry of Justice added that S.T.’s and H.O.’s had been convicted by a judgment of the Tbilisi Court of Appeal of 30 March 2011, but that the judgment was still open to an appeal on points of law.
On 6 May 2011 the applicant’s representative allowed the Regional Court to continue with the examination of the case even if S.T. and H.O. could not be transferred to Armenia, since the applicant was ill. However, he asked the court not to rely in its judgment on the testimony given in Georgia by those absent witnesses.
At a hearing of 24 May 2011 the presiding judge informed the parties of the reply received from the Ministry of Justice of Georgia.
At the same hearing the applicant asked to summon S.G. – the conductor of the train who had been questioned during the investigation – as a witness, on the grounds that some of his statements were in contradiction with the statements of S.T. and H.O. The trial court rejected that application, considering it unfounded.
On 25 May 2011 the Regional Court convicted the applicant and sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment, and ordered the confiscation of his property. In doing so, the Regional Court relied on the statements of S.T. and H.O. made during the questioning in Georgia; the statements of the witnesses V.D. and K.O. – the applicant’s friend and H.O.’s daughter respectively; the results of forensic examinations carried out in Georgia and Armenia confirming that the substance discovered contained enriched uranium; the evidence of telephone correspondence between the applicant and H.O.; and the existence of exit and entry stamps in the applicant’s passport proving that he had arrived in Yerevan from Moscow on 10 March 2010.
The applicant lodged an appeal, complaining, inter alia, about the lack of opportunity to cross-examine S.T. and H.O. at trial and about the trial court’s refusal to summon S.G.
On 13 July 2011 the Criminal Court of Appeal upheld the applicant’s conviction. The judgment did not address the applicant’s arguments regarding the fact that S.T. and H.O. could not be examined and the refusal to examine witness S.G.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, raising similar arguments to those put forward in the previous appeal.
By a decision of 17 September 2011 the Court of Cassation declared the applicant’s appeal on points of law inadmissible for lack of merit.
In accordance with Article 86 §§ 3 and 4 of the Code, a witness is obliged to appear upon being summoned by the authority dealing with a case. The failure of a witness to comply with his obligations shall result in the imposition of sanctions prescribed by the law.
Article 153 § 2 of the Code states that a witness may be compelled to appear by a reasoned decision of the court, and shall inform the summoning authority of any valid reasons for not appearing within the set time-limit.
Article 332 § 1 of the Code provides that if a witness who has been summoned fails to appear, the court, having heard the opinions of the parties, shall decide whether to continue or adjourn the trial proceedings. The proceedings may be continued if the failure to appear of any such person does not impede the thorough, complete and objective examination of the circumstances of the case.
In accordance with Article 342 § 1 of the Code, it is permissible to read out at trial witness statements made during the inquiry, the investigation or a previous court hearing if the witness is absent from the court hearing for reasons which rule out the possibility of his appearance in court, if there is a substantial contradiction between those statements and the statements made by that witness in court, and in other cases prescribed by this Code.
Mutual assistance in criminal matters between Armenia and Georgia is governed, in particular, by the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters of 20 April 1959, which in so far as relevant reads:
“If the requesting Party desires witnesses or experts to give evidence on oath, it shall expressly so request, and the requested Party shall comply with the request if the law of its country does not prohibit it.
...”
“1. A person in custody whose personal appearance for evidentiary purposes other than for standing trial is applied for by the requesting Party shall be temporarily transferred to its territory, provided that he or she shall be sent back within the period stipulated by the requested Party and subject to the provisions of Article 12 of this Convention, in so far as these are applicable.
Transfer may be refused if:
the person in custody does not consent;
his or her presence is necessary at criminal proceedings pending in the territory of the requested Party;
transfer is liable to prolong his or her detention, or
there are other overriding grounds for not transferring him or her to the territory of the requesting Party.
...
The transferred person shall remain in custody in the territory of the requesting Party and, where applicable, in the territory of the Party through which transit is requested, unless the Party from whom transfer is requested applies for his or her release.”