The case originated in an application (no. 53071/08) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Ms Veselina Ivanova Chakalova-Ilieva (“the applicant”), on 14 October 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Ekimdzhiev, a lawyer practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that, by delivering two contradictory decisions concerning the proper defendant to an action which she had lodged against the authorities, the courts had prevented her from having the merits of her case adjudicated and had thus barred her from effectively asserting her claim.
On 29 June 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in Stara Zagora.
.  The applicant worked as head teacher in a secondary school in Stara Zagora.
.  On 19 July 2002 the head of the Regional Education Inspectorate (“the REI”) of the Ministry of Education dismissed the applicant on disciplinary grounds.
.  The applicant brought a claim against the REI, challenging the order for her dismissal and seeking reinstatement and compensation for lost earnings.
By a judgment of 2 April 2003 the Stara Zagora District Court (Районен съд) allowed the applicant’s claims. That judgment was upheld by the Stara Zagora Regional Court (Окръжен съд) and the Supreme Court of Cassation on 18 July 2003 and 24 November 2005 respectively. In the course of the proceedings, neither the opposing party nor any of the courts raised any doubts as to whether the REI was the correct defendant in the case.
.  Following the entry into force of the judgment of 24 November 2005, the applicant applied to take up her duties on 6 December 2005. On the same day a new order for her dismissal was issued by the head of the REI.
On an unspecified date, at the latest in January 2006, the applicant lodged an appeal against the dismissal order with the Stara Zagora District Court, challenging its lawfulness, and seeking reinstatement to her previous post and compensation for loss of income. It appears from the case file that at the first court hearing, the date of which was not specified, the REI argued that it was not the proper defendant in the case and that the claims had to be addressed to the secondary school in which the applicant had been working prior to her dismissal. The REI submitted that Article 61 § 2 of the Labour Code and section 37(4) of the Education Act provided that the applicant’s employer was the school.
During a court hearing on 12 April 2006 the District Court ruled in favour of the objection, and, reasoning that the proper defendant in the case was the school, discontinued the proceedings.
The applicant appealed against that decision before the Stara Zagora Regional Court.
On 26 May 2006 the Regional Court quashed the decision of the lower court, explicitly stating that the proper defendant in the applicant’s case was the REI. It remitted the case to the first-instance court for examination on the merits.
By a judgment of 8 December 2006 the District Court allowed the applicant’s claims.
Following an appeal lodged by the REI, on 27 April 2007 the Regional Court upheld the judgment.
The REI lodged an appeal on points of law. On 16 April 2008 the Plovdiv Appeal Court (Апелативен съд), sitting as a court of cassation according to a legislative amendment entered into force in July 2007, quashed the judgment of the lower court and dismissed the applicant’s claims. It found that the REI was not the applicant’s employer under the law and was not, therefore, the proper defendant in the case. Thus, the claims brought against it were unfounded. The court ruled that the applicant’s claims had to be brought against the school in which she had been working prior to her dismissal, as that school was her employer.
.  Employment contracts with head teachers are regulated by the Labour Code of 1986 and the Education Act of 1991.
.  Paragraph 1 of the Additional Provisions to the Labour Code defines an employer as any physical or legal entity or its subsidiary, as well as any organisationally and economically independent body which hires employees.
.  By virtue of Article 61 § 2 of the Labour Code and section 37(4) of the Education Act, the employment contracts of head teachers of State-run schools are to be concluded by the head of the REI, as the body superior to the employer.
Under Articles 344 and 358 § 1(2) of this Code, where an employee considers that he or she has been unfairly dismissed, he or she may bring an action to challenge the lawfulness of the dismissal before the civil courts within a period of two months. This provision is applicable also to the termination of civil servants’ employment contracts.
In a decision dated 2 June 2010, the Supreme Court of Cassation found that a number of domestic courts had interpreted inconsistently certain provisions of the Labour Code, namely those concerning the proper defendant in employment disputes. The Supreme Court of Cassation referred to court decisions delivered between July 2007 and the date of the case on which it was deliberating at the time. In view of that finding, the court suspended the proceedings at hand and proposed that an interpretative decision be taken (опред. № 269 от 2.06.2010 г. на ВКС по гр. д. № 187/2010 г., IV г. о., ГК). Subsequently, in interpretative decision no. 1 of 30 March 2012, the Plenary of the Civil Chambers of the Supreme Court of Cassation, (тълк. реш. № 1 от 30 март 2012 г. на ВКС по тълк.д. №1/ 2010 г., ОСГК) resolved this contentious issue. In particular, it noted that under Article 344 § 1 of the Labour Code, an action brought by an employee challenging an unlawful dismissal and seeking reinstatement and compensation had to be directed against the employer, namely the physical or legal entity which hired the employee. In the case of head teachers, this was the school. It held that the same approach applied to situations in which the employment contract had been concluded by the institution superior to the employer.
Interpretative decision no. 1 of 9 December 2013 by the Plenary of the Civil and Commercial Chambers of the Supreme Court of Cassation (тълк. реш. № 1 от 9 декември 2013 г. на ВКС по тълк.д. №1/ 2013 г., ОСГТК) concerned contradictions in the statements of claim. The Plenary specified that when a court sitting as a cassation instance found discrepancies in the statement of claim as a result of a contradiction between, on one hand, the facts and allegations indicating that there was a legitimate interest in seeking protection against a particular person and, on the other hand, the claim brought against another person, the decision of the second-instance court should be declared inadmissible and be quashed. The case must be remitted for a new examination by another composition of the first-instance court and the proper defendant summoned.
Section 86(2) of the Judicial Power Act of 1994 („Закон за съдебната власт“) provides that interpretative decisions are binding on the judiciary and the executive branch.
.  Under Articles 109 and 110 of the 1952 Code of Civil Procedure, applicable at the relevant time, a defendant was under an obligation to lodge any objections related to the claims at the latest at the first court hearing. The claimant had the possibility of presenting new evidence with respect to those objections within a time frame to be determined by the court.
By virtue of Article 117 §§ 4 and 5 of the 1952 Code of Civil Procedure, the claimant can indicate another defendant, together with the first, at any stage of the first-instance proceedings and without the consent of the defendants. In that case, however, the claimant would not benefit from the date on which the initial claim was filed against the first defendant. The date on which the request to join the new defendant was lodged would be considered as the date on which the claim was filed with respect to that defendant.