The case originated in an application (no. 10987/10) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr İbrahim Gürkan (“the applicant”), on 10 February 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Sayar, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 18 January 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
At the time of the events the applicant was serving in the Turkish Navy. On 8 July 2008 the military prosecutor filed an indictment against the applicant with the Kasımpaşa Military Criminal Court (Kuzey Deniz Saha Komutanlığı Askeri Mahkemesi). He accused the applicant of wilfully disobeying his superior contrary to section 87 of the Military Criminal Code.
On 18 February 2009 the Kasımpaşa Military Criminal Court, composed of a military officer with no legal background and two military judges, found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to two months and fifteen days’ imprisonment.
On 21 July 2009 the Military Court of Cassation rejected the applicant’s appeal. The applicant stated that he learned of this decision on 23 September 2009 when he was summoned to the prosecutor’s office. The applicant served his prison sentence between 5 November and 25 December 2009.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution provide:
Article 9
“Judicial power shall be exercised by independent courts on behalf of the Turkish Nation.”
Article 138
“In the performance of their duties, judges shall be independent; they shall give judgment according to their personal conviction, in accordance with the Constitution, statute and the Law.
No organ, authority, officer or other person may give orders or instructions to courts or judges in the exercise of their judicial powers, or send them circulars, or make recommendations or suggestions to them.
...”
Article 139 § 1
“Judges ... shall not be removed from their office or compelled to retire without their consent before the age prescribed by the Constitution.”
Article 145 § 4
“The personal rights and obligations of military judges ... shall be regulated by law in accordance with the principles of the independence of the courts, the safeguards enjoyed by the judiciary and the requirements of military service. Relations between military judges and the commanders under whom they serve as regards their non-judicial duties shall also be regulated by law...”
Section 2:
“Military courts shall be composed of two military judges and a military officer.”
In a decision dated 7 May 2009 and published in the Official Gazette on 7 October 2009, the  examined the independence and impartiality of military courts on account of the presence of a military officer on the bench. The  firstly pointed out that the officer sitting on the bench of the military criminal court was appointed on a case by case basis by his hierarchical superiors and continued to perform his other military duties while also acting as a judge. Noting that the military officer remained in the service of the military authorities, the  found that military courts could not be considered as compatible with the principle of judicial independence guaranteed under Article 9 of the Constitution. As a result, the  decided to repeal section 2(1) of Law no. 353 on the Composition and Functioning of Military Courts. The decision of the  became effective one year after its publication in the official gazette.