The case originated in an application (no. 33795/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian limited liability company, Magyar Cement Kft (“the applicant”), on 14 July 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Jarovinszkij, a lawyer practising in . The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
On 13 April 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. In accordance with Protocol No. 14, the application was allocated to a Committee of three Judges.
The applicant is a limited liability company with its seat in Tokod.
On 8 August 1994, the applicant, as the successful bidder in privatisation proceedings, acquired shares and non-current assets of a previously state-owned public company limited by shares.
On 20 February 1995 a competing bidder business entity challenged before the  the validity of the privatisation contract and the sale and purchase agreement concluded by the applicant company.
On 3 April 1998 the  delivered a partial judgment dismissing the plaintiff’s action.
On 4 June 1999 the Supreme Court, acting as a second-instance court, held a hearing, quashed the partial judgment and remitted the case to the first instance.
In the resumed proceedings the  delivered a partial judgment on 1 July 2002. This judgment was quashed again by the Supreme Court on 9 May 2003.
In the resumed proceedings the  dismissed all the plaintiff’s claims.
In its judgment of 15 April 2010 the Budapest Court of Appeal, acting as a second-instance court, partially upheld the first-instance judgment and as to the remainder of the claims, quashed the Budapest Regional Court’s judgment and remitted the case to the first instance.
The plaintiff lodged a petition for review with the Supreme Court, which upheld the partial judgment of the Budapest Court of Appeal 15 November 2010.
As to the remainder of the case, the  gave a partial judgment on 29 August 2012. The applicant appealed. The proceedings are still pending.