The case originated in an application (no. 45519/06) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Bulgarian nationals, Mr Atanas Nenov Duraliyski and Mr Nikolay Nenov Duraliyski (“the applicants”), on 6 October 2006.
The applicants were represented by Mr N.K. Kitanov, a lawyer practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had not had a fair trial in civil proceedings in which they had sought payment on the basis of an insurance policy after their father’s death.
On 1 December 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants, who are brothers, were born in 1973 and 1983 respectively and live in Plovdiv.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In September 2003 the applicants’ father made them beneficiaries under his life insurance and accident insurance policies. The total amount payable in case of death as a result of accident under the accident insurance policy was 10,000 Bulgarian levs (BGN), or BGN 5,000 in respect of each brother. The applicants’ father died on 29 June 2004 as a result of an allergic reaction to a wasp sting.
In September 2004 the applicants were informed by the insurance company that a “wasp sting” was not a risk covered by the accident insurance policy, and the company accordingly refused to pay out on the claim.
In 2005 the applicants, represented by counsel, brought a claim under the Commerce Act for the payment of compensation under the accident insurance policy. During a hearing on 12 April 2005, the applicants informed the court that, after their father’s death, they had handed the original insurance policy documents to the insurance company upon its request. Although the applicants had sought to recover those documents from the company, the latter had only returned to them the “additional conditions”. During the same hearing, upon a request by the applicants, the court ordered the insurance company to produce the complete insurance policy file, referring to Article 152 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1952, in force at the time. The company produced the file during a hearing on 10 May 2005 and the court accepted it as evidence in the case.
By a judgment of 26 July 2005 the Sofia District Court allowed the applicants’ claim. The court noted that, in so far as allergic reactions were not included in the disclaimer to the accident insurance policy signed on 15 September 2003, the applicants were entitled to benefit from the compensation payable in the event of their father’s death as a result of an accident.
The insurance company appealed against the judgment. In its appeal it acknowledged, inter alia, that the existence of a valid contract was not disputed. However, it claimed that the allergic reaction did not fall under the “accident” category as defined in the insurance policy.
On 16 May 2006 the Sofia City Court allowed the appeal and dismissed the applicants’ claim in a final judgment. The court stated that no copy of the insurance policy had been produced by the parties. It further stated that in the absence of a copy of the policy it was unable to correctly establish the circumstances of the case. Finally, it found that, while the fact of the contracting of the policy was not a subject of dispute between the parties, that did not in itself prove its existence.
According to Article 98 (2) of the Code of Civil Procedure 1952 (“CCP 1952”), as in force at the time, the claimant had to enclose the written evidence, on which his or her claim was based, together with the claim submitted to the court.
According to Article 111, CCP 1952, the court issued a ruling on the admissibility of evidence and the means for collecting evidence. The timelimit for producing evidence started running from the day of the hearing [during which the said time-limit was set] and applied also in respect of an absent party.
Article 127 (1) CCP 1952 stipulated that each party bore the onus of establishing the facts upon which its demands or objections were based.
Article 152 of CCP 1952 provided that either party could request from the other party a document which the latter was in possession of, after explaining the relevance of that document to the dispute in the case.
According to Article 218 (a) of the Code of Civil Procedure as in force at the time, civil claims up to the amount of BGN 5,000 were not subject to cassation appeal.
Pursuant to Article 303 § 1 (7) of the Code of Civil Procedure of 2007 (“the CCP”), in force as of 1 March 2008, civil proceedings may be reopened when a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights establishes that the Convention has been violated and when a fresh examination of the case is necessary in order to eliminate the consequences of the violation. The interested party may make the request no later than six months after the judgment has become final (Article 305 § 2 of the CCP). The request is examined by the Supreme Court of Cassation (Article 307 of the CCP).