The present case concerns minor-offence proceedings in which the applicant was found guilty of charges of domestic violence on the basis of statements by two witnesses who had been heard in the absence of both the prosecution and the defence.
The applicant was born in 1987 and lives in Zadar. He was represented by Mr I. Stanić, a lawyer practising in Zadar.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 4 November 2010 the Zadar Police Department lodged a request with the Zadar Minor Offences Court (Prekršajni sud u Zadru) for minor-offence proceedings to be instituted against the applicant, alleging that on 1 November 2010 he had verbally and physically attacked his aunt, S.K. The police submitted two reports signed by police officers, Officers C.J., Z.M., I.M. and M.B., which contained notes on interviews with the applicant, his father M.Z. and the injured party, S.K.
At a hearing held on 8 February 2011, the applicant gave his statement in the presence of his lawyer. He denied that he had insulted or physically attacked S.K. on the day when she had come to visit his father.
At the next hearing, held on 23 February 2011, the witness P.B. was questioned. She testified in favour of the applicant and confirmed his version of events.
On 25 February 2011 Officer Z.M. appeared at the trial court and was questioned outside the main hearing in the absence of both the defence and the prosecution. He stated that he had no immediate knowledge of the incident and that he had arrived at the applicant’s family house in response to a domestic violence report. He stated that he had conducted investigative interviews with the applicant and S.K. At the next hearing, held on 16 March 2011, Z.M.’s statement was read out and the applicant’s lawyer raised no objections to it.
The next twelve hearings were adjourned because summonses were not properly served on S.K., who had to be heard as a witness.
At the hearing held on 3 July 2012, S.K. gave her testimony before the trial court, in the presence of the applicant’s lawyer. She stated that the applicant had verbally insulted and physically attacked her. She answered questions put to her by the applicant’s lawyer.
On the next day the trial court gave a judgment acquitting the applicant.
Following an appeal by the police, on 20 March 2013 the High Minor Offences Court (Visoki prekršajni sud) quashed the judgment and ordered the trial court to question M.Z., S.K., P.B. and the police officers who had arrived at the scene on the occasion in question.
In the resumed proceedings, on 1 August 2013, the applicant reiterated his defence and submitted medical documentation in respect of M.Z. which showed that he could not testify due to advanced dementia.
At the hearing held on 26 August 2013, Officer I.M. was questioned in the presence of the applicant’s lawyer. He had no recollection of the incident, which had taken place three years earlier.
On 24 September 2013 P.B. was questioned in the presence of the applicant’s lawyer. She stated that the applicant had been her boyfriend at the material time, and confirmed his account of events.
On 7 October 2013 Officer C.J. was questioned in the presence of the applicant’s lawyer. He stated that he could not remember the event in question.
On 10 October 2013 Officer Z.M. appeared before the court of his own motion and the trial judge decided to question him outside the main hearing, in the absence of both the prosecution and the defence. Z.M. stated that on the day in question he had arrived at the applicant’s family house, where he had found that the applicant had been preventing S.K. from entering the house. He further stated that S.K. had been distressed and had told him that the applicant had verbally attacked her, but she had had no visible injuries. Z.M. was then summoned to the next hearing scheduled for 17 October 2013, but he failed to appear, despite the summons being properly served. The trial judge adjourned the hearing, stating that Z.M. had already been questioned outside the main hearing.
At the next hearing, held on 4 November 2013, Officer M.B. was questioned in the presence of the applicant’s lawyer. She stated that on the day in question she and Officer I.M. had interviewed S.K., who stated that the applicant had physically attacked her. Officer M.B. stated that she had seen red marks on the right side of S.K.’s face and that S.K. had been distressed throughout the interview. In reply to a question put to her by the applicant’s lawyer, M.B. stated that she remembered the event because she had consulted her interview notes beforehand. She also confirmed that she remembered the red marks on S.K.’s face, because it was her job to pay attention to such details, particularly if a person had sustained injuries. The applicant’s lawyer objected to M.B.’s testimony. S.K. failed to appear before the court, although she had been properly served with a summons at her address in Sweden, where she had been living.
The trial court scheduled the next hearing for 18 November 2013 and posted a summons for S.K. on the court’s noticeboard. S.K. then appeared at the court at her own initiative on 13 November 2013, and the trial judge questioned her outside the main hearing, in the absence of both the prosecution and the defence. She reiterated her statement given on 3 July 2012 (see paragraph 10 above), stating that the applicant had used insulting words, had pushed her down the stairs, and had slapped her several times on the left side of her face.
At the hearing held on 2 December 2013, the trial judge read out all the witness statements. The applicant’s lawyer objected to the statements of S.K. and Z.M. being read out, because they had been given outside the main hearing, in the absence of the applicant and his lawyer, who had not been notified of the date and time when those witnesses had been questioned. He requested that those witnesses be questioned again so that the defence could have the opportunity to ask them questions and further clarify the credibility of their statements and discrepancies in their testimony. The trial judge refused that request, noting that the witnesses had already been questioned outside the main hearing.
On the same day the trial court found the applicant guilty of domestic violence and imposed on him a fine in the amount of 1,200 Croatian kunas (HRK; approximately 160 euros (EUR)). Regarding the applicant’s lawyer’s request for S.K. and Z.M. to be heard again, the relevant parts of the judgement read as follows:
“... such a complaint is ill-founded ... by examining [Z.M.’s] earlier statement, the court has determined that it was not inconsistent with his new statement, because the witness Z.M. had previously stated that he had no immediate knowledge [of the event], and that was also his statement when he was questioned again, [and in that later statement] he did not present immediate knowledge of the event, but only knowledge [which he had] obtained by interviewing [the applicant] and [S.K.] ...
... the reading out of [S.K.’s] statement did not deny [the applicant] the right to question the witness, because the witness had presented all relevant circumstances in her statement and had been questioned on all relevant facts, [facts] which had been challenged during the proceedings ... questioning her again would in no way have contributed to a better assessment of the facts ... that request was aimed at unnecessarily delaying the proceedings, particularly taking into consideration the questions which the defence lawyer had asked the witness when she had first been questioned in the minor-offence proceedings.”
The applicant appealed, arguing, inter alia, that the trial court had violated his defence rights by refusing his request for Z.M. and S.K. to be questioned at the main hearing in the presence of the defence. He further pointed out the discrepancies between the crucial witness statements in his case. Namely, Z.M. had stated that he had interviewed S.K. on the day in question, but she had had no visible injuries. However, Officer M.B. had stated that she and another police officer, Officer I.M., had interviewed S.K., who had had red marks on the right side of her face. Furthermore, S.K. had stated that the applicant had slapped her several times on the left side of her face, which contradicted M.B.’s statement.
On 10 July 2014 the High Minor Offences Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The relevant parts of that judgment read as follows:
“... the reading out of the statements which Z.M. and S.K. had given outside the main hearing ... [allowed] the defendant and his lawyer to respond to all allegations made by those witnesses ... Thus, the first-instance court acted in accordance with the Minor Offences Act and questioned all witnesses who appeared before the court outside the scheduled hearings, since the requirements for conducting the main hearing were not fulfilled ..., and it read out the transcripts of their questioning at the main hearing held on 2 December 2013. It is clear that the defendant’s right to defence was not violated, because during the proceedings in which he presented his defence (after which he did not receive most of the summonses), he had the right to participate in the proceedings and make objections to witness statements, [and] he failed to do this, therefore the first-instance court properly concluded that the adjournment of the main hearing in order to re-examine [S.K.] and witnesses who had been questioned outside the main hearing, so that [the applicant] could question them, would have no bearing on the lawfulness of the rendered judgment.
... the facts of the case were entirely determined on the basis of statements given by S.K., Z.M. and M.B., and their statements were justifiably accepted as convincing and credible. The statements of Z.M. and M.B. are not contradictory; they both gave an account of their own observations ... The fact that they gave different accounts as to who had interviewed [S.K.] is irrelevant, because they both testified as to what they had personally seen when meeting [S.K.] after the event in question, regardless of who had conducted the interview.
... when [she was] first questioned before the same court in the same case (in the presence of [the applicant]), [S.K.] gave a statement which, in respect of all the relevant facts, was identical to the one given in the resumed proceedings.”
The applicant then lodged a constitutional complaint, complaining that his right to a fair trial and his defence rights had been breached.
On 17 December 2014 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible, on the grounds that the contested decisions were not susceptible to constitutional review.
The relevant part of Article 29 of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 56/1990, 135/1997, 113/2000, 28/2001, 76/2010 and 5/14) reads as follows:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.
In the event of [a person being] suspected of a criminal offence or criminal charges [being brought], the suspect, defendant or accused shall have the right: ...
- to question witnesses for the prosecution or have them questioned, and to have witnesses for the defence questioned under the same conditions as witnesses for the prosecution. ...”
Section 20 of the Protection against Domestic Violence Act (Zakon o zaštiti od nasilja u obitelji, Official Gazette no. 137/09 with subsequent amendments) provides that, where the minor offence of domestic violence has been committed against a family member, a court may impose either a fine of at least HRK 1,000 or a prison sentence of up to ninety days.
The relevant provisions of the Minor Offences Act (Prekršajni zakon, Official Gazette no. 107/07 with subsequent amendments) read as follows:
Section 85
“2.  The defendant must be given an opportunity to respond to all facts and evidence accusing him or her, and to present all facts and evidence in his or her favour.”
Section 167
“3.  If properly summoned parties and other properly summoned participants in the proceedings fail to appear, the main hearing may be held and the judgment rendered. The main hearing may be held in the absence of the defendant if it is not necessary to question him or her, and if [his or her absence] has no bearing on the lawful and proper rendering of the judgment.
If other summoned persons fail to appear at the main hearing, it shall be held in their absence, and if their presence is necessary, the hearing shall be adjourned and the court shall [either] summon them once again or, in the event that such requirements have been fulfilled, order that they be brought to the court. ...
If the conditions for holding the main hearing in the absence of certain persons have been fulfilled, the previously presented or written defence of the defendant, witness statements, and findings and opinions by expert witnesses shall be read out.
If the conditions for holding the main hearing have not been fulfilled, the judge may question, outside the main hearing, witnesses and expert witnesses who have responded to the summonses. Transcripts of their questioning shall be read out at the main hearing, when evidence is presented later.”
In its judgment no. Pž-64/2016 of 22 February 2017, the High Minor Offences Court gave the following interpretation of section 167(7) of the Minor Offences Act:
“Section 167(7) of the Minor Offences Act ... clearly and undoubtedly provides that there has to be a procedural situation ‘if the conditions for holding the main hearing have not been fulfilled’, meaning that an examination of witnesses and expert witnesses outside the main hearing can take place only on the day when the main hearing is scheduled and the court finds that ‘no conditions have been fulfilled for holding the main hearing’, and not on another day when the main hearing has not even been scheduled. The transcripts of witnesses or expert witnesses who are questioned in this way shall be read out when evidence is presented at the next main hearing. In main trial proceedings, there is no legal possibility for witnesses or experts to be examined without the parties being summoned, which is what the trial court did in this case. Apparently, ... the witness N.J. had been unable to attend the main hearing scheduled for 20 October 2015 and was therefore questioned at the court on 5 November 2015, but, for the reasons stated above, the court was not allowed to do so.
Accordingly, the trial court erred in the application of section 167(7) of the Minor Offences Act, which could influence the judgment.”