The case originated in an application (no. 40713/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Nikolay Nikonorovich Shchurov (“the applicant”), on 20 September 2004.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, their former Representative at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his right to a court had been violated.
On 11 January 2006 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1933 and lives in . He is a retiree.
On 13 May 2003 the Kirovskiy District Court of Volgograd (“the District Court”) allowed the applicant's claim against his former employer and regional health care authority. It ruled that the applicant's illnesses should be considered occupational diseases. That finding entitled the applicant to receive additional social security payments.
The judgment of 13 May 2003 was not appealed against and became final and enforceable ten days after its delivery.
The health care authority lodged an application for supervisory review of the judgment of 13 May 2003 with the  (“the ”).
On 3 September 2004 the Presidium of the  (“the Presidium”) examined the case by way of supervisory review and set aside the judgment of 13 May 2003.
The Presidium noted that the District Court had erred in finding for the applicant as recognition of a certain illness as occupational disease was within “the prerogative” of the competent health care authorities. The case was remitted back to the District Court.
Following determination de novo, the applicant's claim was dismissed in the final instance by the  on 17 March 2005.
Relevant domestic law on supervisory review is summarized in Denisov v. Russia (dec.), no. 33408/03, 6 May 2004.
Under Russian law on civil procedure all decisions and acts of State bodies and officials allegedly infringing upon citizens' rights and freedoms are subject to judicial review upon an interested person's complaint to a competent court, that is generally a district court (Article 254 of the Russian Code of Civil Procedure).