The case originated in an application (no. 15037/05) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Tatyana Konstantinovna Sakharova (“the applicant”), on 10 March 2005.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 5 May 2008 the application was communicated to the Government.
By letter dated 4 March 2010 the applicant was notified that the period allowed for submission of the observations had expired on 18 November 2008 and that no extension of that time-limit had been requested. The applicant’s attention was drawn to Article 37 § 1 (a) of the Convention, which provides that the Court may strike a case out of its list of cases where the circumstances lead to the conclusion that the applicant does not intend to pursue the application.
By letter of 13 April 2010 the applicant confirmed that she wished to maintain the application and requested not to strike it out of the list of cases.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it. In accordance with Protocol No. 14, the application was allocated to a Committee.
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in , the Rostov Region.
She is a widow of a military officer. She sued the military commissariats of  and the Rostov Region for recalculation of her pension on account of the increase of the monetary compensation paid in respect of a food allowance.
On 18 August 2004 the Justice of the Peace of the 6th Court Circuit of Novocherkassk granted her claim and ordered the military commissariat of the Rostov Region to pay the applicant 17,216.06 Russian roubles (RUB) in pension arrears, as well as to readjust future payments in line with the increase of the food allowance. The claim against the commissariat of  was dismissed.
The judgment was not appealed against and entered into force. It has not been executed.
According to the Government, at some point the military prosecutor’s office started an inquiry into lawfulness of several sets of court proceedings concerning military pension arrears throughout the  region.
On 14 October 2004 the defendant lodged a request for supervisory review of the case.
On 13 January 2005 the Presidium of the Rostov Regional Court quashed the judgment on the ground of a violation of substantive law and remitted the case to the President of the Novocherkassk Town Court for the transfer to a different court for a fresh examination. The Presidium found, in particular, that the Justice of the Peace incorrectly calculated the amount of the food allowance, having thus misinterpreted the material law.
On 28 April 2005 the Justice of the Peace of the 5th Court Circuit of Novocherkassk discontinued the proceedings on the ground of the applicant’s repeated failure to appear. The applicant did not appeal against the decision, and it entered into force.
According to the Government, at some point several unspecified military officials of the Rostov Region had been charged with and convicted of negligent attitude to duties which had caused damage to the State (Article 293 of the Criminal Code of the ). The Government did not provide any documents or further details in this respect.