The case originated in an application (no. 6945/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Oleg Yuryevich Ilatovskiy (“the applicant”), on 22 December 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr K. Redkin, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev and Mrs V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been convicted by a court which had not been “a tribunal established by law”.
On 25 October 2006 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lived until his arrest in .
On 7 June 2000 the applicant was charged with aggravated robbery and possession of weapons. On 17 April 2002 he was committed to stand trial before the Primorskiy District Court of St. Petersburg, composed of Ms T., the presiding judge, Mr S. and Ms B., lay judges. The Government, relying on a copy of “Supplement to list no. 1” approved on 28 August 1991 by the Head of the Primorskiy District Council of People’s Deputies and listing the names of eleven individuals, including Mr S., their home address and place of work, argued that Mr S. had been selected to serve in the Primorskiy District Court in 1991. The Government further submitted that Ms B. had been appointed as a lay judge to the Primorskiy District Court in 1999. They supported their assertion with a copy of decision no. 2156 of 7 December 1999 of the Primorskiy District Council, approving the list of lay judges for the Primorskiy District Court. According to that decision, Ms B. was elected by the Presidium of the Primorskiy District Assembly of War and Labour Veterans. Mr S. was not included in that list.
The applicant unsuccessfully asked the District Court to hear several individuals who could have provided “valuable information concerning the case”. He and his lawyer also challenged the composition of the bench a number of times, arguing that the lay judges S. and B. had no right to sit on the bench and asking for documents to be produced confirming that they had been elected to serve in the Primorskiy District Court. The challenges were dismissed with the bald statement that the court’s composition was lawful.
On 27 December 2002 the District Court found the applicant guilty of aggravated robbery, dismissed the charge of arms possession and sentenced him to eight years’ imprisonment.
The applicant and his lawyer filed an appeal against the judgment of 27 December 2002. They challenged, inter alia, the composition of the bench that had given the said judgment. They claimed that the lay judges, Mr S. and Ms B., had not been appointed in accordance with the procedure established by law. They also referred to the list of lay judges of the Primorskiy District Court of St. Petersburg which had been adopted by the St. Petersburg Legislative Council on 6 November 2002. Mr S. and Ms B. were not on that list. They also indicated that St. Petersburg archives did not have any document showing that those persons had ever been included in lists of lay judges in . The applicant further argued that, even assuming that Mr S. and Ms B. had been appointed as lay judges, their term of office had expired, at least on 5 August 2002 according to the decree of the President of the .
On 14 November 2003 the St. Petersburg City Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the applicant’s conviction. The City Court ruled that the complaint about the unlawful composition of the bench was unfounded. The lay judges had been appointed in accordance with domestic law and their powers could not have been discontinued by the decree of 5 August 2002 because the case had commenced before that date and they had already served as lay judges in the earlier period.
By virtue of Section 164 of the RSFSR Constitution of 1978 (in force until 12 December 1993, when the Constitution of the  was adopted), lay judges were elected during meetings of citizens at their place of work or residence for a term of five years.
Under Section 22 of the RSFSR Law of 8 July 1981 on the RSFSR Judicial System (hereafter “the RSFSR Judicial System Act”) (in force until 10 January 2000, the date of the official publication of the Federal Law on Lay Judges of Federal Courts of General Jurisdiction in the Russian Federation) lay judges of district courts were to be elected during meetings of citizens at their place of work or residence for a term of two and a half years. Section 22 also indicated that the procedure for the election of lay judges was laid down in the RSFSR Law on Election of District (Town) People’s Courts in RSFSR.
Part III of the RSFSR Law of 8 July 1981 on Election of District (Town) Courts in the RSFSR (hereafter “The Courts Election Act) (in force until 10 January 2000), setting out the procedure for election of lay judges, read as follows:
Article 56. Procedure for calling elections.
“Elections of lay judges of district (town) courts of RSFSR are called by the Presidium of the RSFSR Supreme Council.
A decree of the Presidium of the RSFSR Supreme Council calling an election of lay judges shall be published in the press no later than thirty days before [the lay judges’] term of office is to expire...”
Article 57. Management of elections
“Elections of lay judges of district (town) courts are carried out by executive committees of district, town... Councils of People’s Deputies.
...
The executive committee of the district, town... Council of People’s Deputies:
...
shall determine the results of elections... and compile a list of elected lay judges;
...
shall publish information on the results of the elections of lay judges...”
Article 58. Election procedure
“Elections of lay judges of district (town) courts are carried out during general staff meetings, general meetings and gatherings of citizens at their place of residence...
Staff meetings shall be called by the trade union committee and the administration of an enterprise, organisation...
General meetings and gatherings of citizens at their place of residence shall be called by the executive committee of the town, district... Council of People’s Deputies...
...
Lay judges... shall be elected by open vote in respect of each candidate separately.
Persons who have received more than half the votes of the electors at a staff meeting or of the electors at their place of residence... shall be considered to have been elected as lay judges of a district (town) court...”
Article 59. Minutes of the meeting for the elections of lay judges
“The results of the elections shall be recorded in the minutes of the meetings...”
Article 60. Determination of the results of elections of lay judges
“The executive committee of the district, town... Council of People’s Deputies shall determine the results of the elections of lay judges on the basis of the meeting minutes and shall compile the list of lay judges for that district (town) court.
...
The list of lay judges shall be approved by the executive committee of the district, town... Council and shall be sent to the district (town) court.”
On 12 December 1993 the Constitution of the  was adopted. Section 90 of the Constitution read as follows:
“1. The President of the  shall issue decrees and orders.
Decrees and orders of the President of the Russian Federation have binding force in the entire territory of the .
Decrees and orders of the President of the Russian Federation should not run contrary to the Constitution of the  and federal laws.”
Part 2 of the Russian Constitution contained provisions aimed at preserving the continuity of the judiciary and other State bodies for the transitional period. In particular, paragraph 6 of part 2 established that until the adoption of the federal law setting out the procedure for the examination of cases by a jury, the previous procedure of examination of that category of cases by courts should be preserved.
On 22 March 1995 the acting President of Russia issued Decree no. 299, which read as follows:
“Relying on Section 90 and paragraph 6 of part 2 of the Constitution of the , [I] order that:
Lay judges of district (town) courts should continue their service until the adoption of the respective federal law.
Executive authorities of the constituent elements of the  should, if necessary, organise by-elections of lay judges of district (town) courts at general staff meetings, general meetings and gatherings of citizens at their places of residence.”
On 1 January 1997 the Federal Constitutional Law no. 1-FKZ on the Judicial System of the  (hereafter – “the Judicial System Act”) entered into force. By virtue of section 1 of the Act judicial authority in the  was vested exclusively in courts comprising professional judges, jurors, lay and arbitration judges appointed/elected in accordance with the procedure laid down by the federal law.
Section 8 of the Judicial System Act prescribed that individuals could participate as jurors, lay and arbitration judges in the administration of justice in accordance with the procedure established by the federal law.
Section 37 established that lay judges elected to serve in the courts before 1 January 1997 should remain in office until the expiration of the term of office for which they had been elected.
On 23 January 1997 the President of the  issued Decree no. 41, which, in so far as relevant, read as follows:
“Having regard to the [fact] that the Federal Constitutional Law on the Judicial System of the Russian Federation has come into effect, for the purpose of ensuring the activities of the courts of general jurisdiction in the Russian Federation and for judicial protection of the rights of individuals, and relying on Section 90 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation, [I] order that:
Lay judges of... district courts should continue their service until the adoption of the federal law on the procedure for appointment (election) of lay judges.”
On 10 January 2000 the Federal Law on Lay Judges of Federal Courts of General Jurisdiction in the  (“the Lay Judges Act”) came into force. By section 1 (2) of the Act, lay judges are persons authorised to sit in civil and criminal cases as non-professional judges.
Section 2 provides that lists of lay judges must be compiled for every district court by local self-government bodies, such lists being subject to confirmation by the regional legislature. Section 5 determines the procedure for selection of lay judges. It provides that the president of a district court is to draw names at random from a list of lay judges assigned to that court. The number of lay judges assigned to every professional judge should be at least three times as many as that needed for a hearing.
By section 9, lay judges should be called to serve in a district court for a period of fourteen days, or as long as the proceedings in a particular case last. Lay judges may only be called for service once a year.
Under the Decree of the acting President of Russia issued on 25 January 2000, lay judges serving in the courts of general jurisdiction were authorised to remain in office until the courts received new lists of judges confirmed by the regional legislatures.
The Presidium of the Supreme Court of the  issued on 14 January 2000 a Regulation on the procedure for selection of lay judges. The regulation provided that the President of a district court should draw at random from the general list of lay judges, 156 names for each judge. The lay judges for a particular case were to be drawn by lot by the judge to whom the case had been assigned.
On 5 August 2002 the President of the  issued Decree no. 855, by which, relying on the Lay Judges Act, he declared that his decrees no. 299 of 22 March 1995, no. 41 of 23 January 1997 and no. 103 of 25 January 2000 were no longer in force.
Article 413 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure, setting out the procedure for re-opening of criminal cases, reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1. Court judgments and decisions which became final should be quashed and proceedings in a criminal case should be re-opened due to new or newly discovered circumstances.
...
New circumstances are:
...
(2) a violation of a provision of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms committed by a court of the  during examination of a criminal case and established by the European Court of Human Rights, pertaining to:
(a) application of a federal law which runs contrary to provisions of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
(b)  other violations of provisions of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
(c)  other new circumstances.”