The case originated in an application (no. 17912/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Austrian national, Mr Kurt Bösch (“the applicant”), on 10 May 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr W.L. Weh, a lawyer practising in Bregenz. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador Mr F. Trauttmansdorff, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained, in particular, about a breach of Article 6 of the Convention on account of unreasonably lengthy proceedings in which no oral hearing before a tribunal was held.
On 10 April 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant is the owner of a farm in Frastranz. On 21 April 1999 he asked the Mayor (Bürgermeister) of Frastanz to grant him a permit for the building of roofing between two buildings in order to create a tool shed on his farm.
On 12 July 1999 the Mayor, acting as building authority of first instance, dismissed this request as the project was contrary to the relevant area zoning plan (Flächenwidmungsplan). On 22 July 1999 the applicant appealed and submitted in particular that permits had been granted for the building of the other two buildings. He had constructed the roofing at issue at the same time and then sought a building permit for it as in the other cases. He further requested, should it be necessary, that the Municipal Council grant him an exemption permit under Section 22 of the Regional Planning Act (Raumplanungsgesetz). Under this provision a land owner may be exempted under certain conditions from the application of the relevant area zoning plan.
The Municipal Council (Gemeindeamt) remitted the case back to the Mayor. Having held a hearing on 15 March 2000, the Mayor, on 13 September 2000, again dismissed the applicant's request for a building permit. He referred to the relevant area zoning plan (Flächenwidmungsplan) and further noted that the local council (Gemeindevorstand) had not granted an exemption permit. The Mayor finally observed that for the construction of the two other buildings there had been proceedings for re-designation of the concerned land. The applicant had then promised to demolish the already existing roofing which had been built without the authorities' consent and the relating demolition order had not been challenged by the applicant.
By a decision of 15 January 2001 the local council dismissed the applicant's request for an exemption permit. It noted that the building project concerned 60 square metres while the relevant provisions of the Vorarlberg Regional Planning Act (Raumplanungsgesetz) provided such an exemption only for a small-sized project of around 25 square meters.
On 16 January and 11 July 2001 respectively the Municipal Council (Gemeindeamt) dismissed the applicant's appeals of 27 September 2000 against the above decisions.
The Feldkirch District Administrative Authority (Bezirkshaupt-mannschaft) confirmed these decisions on 28 March and 8 October 2001 respectively.
On 15 May 2001 the applicant filed a complaint with the  (Verfassungsgerichtshof) concerning the refusal of the building permit and requested the court to examine the lawfulness of the underlying area zoning plan. He further requested the  to hold an oral hearing.
On 20 June 2001 the  declined to deal with the applicant's complaint as it had no prospect of success.
The applicant subsequently filed two complaints with the  (Verwaltungsgerichtshof). In the first complaint, of 24 September 2001, he submitted that the refusal to grant him a building permit had been unlawful as the actual designation of the land concerned was not clear and the underlying area zoning plan was unlawful. In the latter regard, he requested the  to institute proceedings for examination of the lawfulness of the area zoning plan with the  after having established the relevant facts. He further submitted that the relevant authorities should have waited for the outcome of the proceedings concerning his request for an exemption permit. In his second complaint, of 20 November 2001, the applicant submitted that an exemption should have been granted as his project was small-sized within the meaning of the Regional Planning Act. In both complaints the applicant asked the  to hold a hearing.
On 21 October 2004 the  dismissed both complaints, which it had joined. The  found, in accordance with Section 39(2) of the Administrative Court Act (Verwaltungsgerichtshofgesetz), that there was no need for a hearing as the applicant's complaints concerned only legal questions of no particular complexity. The question of the lawfulness of the area zoning plan had been considered by the , which had no doubts as to the lawfulness either. This decision was served on the applicant's counsel on 11 November 2004.
In the meantime, on 29 June 2000, the Municipal Council dismissed the applicant's request for re-designation of the land concerned. The applicant did not pursue these proceedings any further.