The case originated in three applications (nos. 5325/02, 5353/02 and 27608/02) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by the applicants, whose names appear in the appendix attached to the present judgment.
The applicants were all represented by Mr Sedat Çınar, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
On 11 November 2006, the Court decided to give notice of the applications to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the applications at the same time as their admissibility.
In May 1999 the applicants were laid off by the Diyarbakır Sur municipality, with which they had been employed.
Each of the applicants brought an action in the , claiming outstanding salaries, dismissal indemnities, severance pay and other pecuniary rights.
In November 1999 the court ruled in their favour and ordered the municipality to pay the applicants certain amounts in Turkish liras (TRL), including costs, together with interest running from June 1999.
In the absence of an appeal the judgments became final on 19 November 1999.
In the following months, the applicants initiated enforcement proceedings in order to receive the due amounts. As their efforts proved fruitless, they requested the Diyarbakır Governorship to intervene in order to facilitate the enforcement of the court's judgments. The Governor's Office informed the applicants that it had requested the municipality to redress their grievances. However, due to lack of funds, the municipality did not make any payment.
At the date of introduction of the present applications, the relevant judgment debts were still outstanding. Thereafter, on an unspecified date, Hatip Bozyıl received his full award of 724 New Turkish liras (YTL) and friendly settlement agreements were reached between the following applicants and the municipality on the dates indicated:
- Ramazan Fidancan on 6 February 2002;
- Muhyettin Babayiğit on 11 April 2002;
- Ali Rıza Babayiğit on 27 October 2004;
- Talat Tunç on 21 May 2002;
- Hüseyin and Mehmet Şirin Kamik on 30 December 2003; and
- Fahri Açan on 13 May 2005.
No settlement was reached in respect of the other applicants. However, the municipality deposited certain partial amounts in the relevant account at the local enforcement office, which amounts were made available to some of the applicants and paid later.
Article 138 § 4 of the Turkish Constitution provides:
“The bodies of executive and legislative power and the authorities must comply with court decisions; they cannot in any circumstances modify court decisions or defer the enforcement thereof.”
Article 28 § 2 of the Code of Administrative Procedure reads:
“Decisions and judgments in administrative law actions concerning a specific amount shall be enforced ... in accordance with the provisions of the ordinary law.”
Under Section 82(1) of the Enforcement and Bankruptcy Act (Law no. 2004), State property cannot be seized. Likewise, Section 19(7) of the Municipalities Act (Law no. 1580 of 3 April 1930) provides that municipal property that is assigned to a public service cannot be seized.