The case originated in five separate applications against Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”).
The applicants were all Serbian nationals. Additional personal details, the dates of introduction of their complaints before the Court, and information regarding their legal counsel, respectively, are set out in the Annex to this judgment.
The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Vanja Rodić.
The applicants complained, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No.1 about the respondent State’s failure to enforce the final judgment rendered in their favour. They further submitted that the Constitutional Court did not consider their compensation claims even though they had been formulated in accordance with the relevant national legislation.
On 20 January 2014 the applications were communicated to the Government. On 1 February 2014 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was thus assigned to the newly composed Third Section (Rule 52 § 1).
On 13 April 2006 the Vlasotince Municipal Court ruled in favour of the applicants. The respondent, AD Retex, a privately owned company as of 2003, was ordered to: (a) reinstate them to their former jobs; (b) pay their salary arrears; (c) pay the relevant social insurance contributions due for the same period; and (d) pay the their legal costs.
By 11 July 2007 this judgment, as amended on appeal in respect of the legal costs, became final.
On 27 July 2007 the applicants filed a request for the enforcement of the said judgment.
On 6 August 2007 the Vlasotince Municipal Court accepted the applicants’ request and issued an enforcement order.
On 3 December 2007 the Leskovac District Court upheld this decision on appeal.
In January 2008 the Vlasotince Municipal Court carried out an assessment of the debtor’s movable assets.
On 21 April 2008, in response to a third party’s request, the Vlasotince Municipal Court excluded certain movable assets from the enforcement proceedings.
On 26 May 2008 the Vlasotince Municipal Court obtained an additional report regarding the value of the debtor’s movable assets.
On 22 April 2010 the Leskovac High Court ordered the re-examination of the third party’s exclusion request lodged in respect of the debtor’s assets.
On 21 January 2011 the Leskovac Commercial Court opened insolvency proceedings (stečajni postupak) in respect of AD Retex and on 3 June 2011 the applicants’ claims were confirmed in their entirety. The applicants themselves were classified as third-class creditors.
On 16 June 2011 the debtor’s assets were sold as part of the insolvency proceedings.
On 12 June 2013 the enforcement proceedings were stayed.
The insolvency proceedings before the Leskovac Commercial Court are still pending, and the applicants have yet to be paid apparently as a consequence of two related civil suits brought by other creditors.
On 26 April 2010 the applicants lodged an appeal with the Constitutional Court, maintaining that they had suffered a breach of the right to a fair trial within a reasonable time and a violation of their property rights. In terms of redress, the applicants sought recognition of these violations, an order from the Constitutional Court for the expedition of the impugned enforcement proceedings, and the “removal of all adverse consequences” suffered in this connection (including through the payment of their outstanding pecuniary claims).
On 4 April 2012 the applicants noted the adoption of the amendments to the Constitutional Court Act, and specified their compensation claims accordingly. Specifically, on account of the pecuniary damage suffered, the applicants requested the respective amounts awarded to them by the final judgment in question, whilst as regards the nonpecuniary damage sustained they claimed 2,200 euros each (see paragraphs 27-30 below).
On 27 March 2013 the Constitutional Court found, in the operative part of its ruling (u izreci), that the applicants had indeed suffered a violation of their right to a fair trial within a reasonable time, as well as a violation of their property rights, but rejected the compensation claims regarding the non-pecuniary damages sought by the applicants. The Constitutional Court, lastly, ordered that the impugned enforcement proceedings be terminated in accordance with the applicable legislation (see paragraph 31 below).
In its reasoning the Constitutional Court established that the courts in question had not acted promptly between 27 July 2007 and 21 January 2011. Concerning the compensation issue, the Constitutional Court stated that the applicants’ pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage claims had been filed out of time. In so doing, it merely referred to Articles 36 § 1 (2) and 85 § 3 of the Constitutional Court Act, as amended in 2011, and Article 40 § 1 of the amendments themselves (see paragraphs 27-30below).
Article 170 provides that a “constitutional appeal may be lodged against individual decisions or actions of State bodies or organisations exercising delegated public powers which violate or deny human or minority rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, if other legal remedies for their protection have already been exhausted or have not been prescribed”.
Article 84 § 1 provides that a “constitutional appeal may be lodged within thirty days of receipt of the individual decision or the date of commission of the actions” in question.
Article 85 § 1 refers to the necessary information which must be contained in the constitutional appeal. This information includes: (a) the appellant’s personal data; (b) information concerning his or her legal counsel; (c) the particulars of the decision being challenged; (d) an indication of the relevant provisions of the Constitution; (e) the description of the violations alleged; (f) the redress sought by the appellant; and (g) the appellant’s personal signature.
Article 89 § 2 provides that “[w]hen the Constitutional Court finds that an ... individual decision or action has violated or denied a human or minority right or a freedom guaranteed by the Constitution, it shall annul the ... decision in question or ban the continuation of such action or order the implementation of other specific measures as well as the removal of all adverse consequences within a specified period of time.”
Article 32 of this Act amended Article 85 § 1 of the Constitutional Court Act 2007 in so far as it removed the general reference to the need for the appellant to state the kind of redress deemed necessary (see at paragraph 25 above, under (f)). Article 85 § 1, as amended, now requires that a constitutional appeal must contain a specific indication of the amount and basis for any pecuniary and/or non-pecuniary damages sought by the appellant.
Article 32 of the Amendments to the Constitutional Court Act 2011, inter alia, also added paragraph 3 to Article 85 of the Constitutional Court Act 2007. This new provision states that a compensation claim may only be made “simultaneously with the lodging of a constitutional appeal”.
Article 36 § 1 (2) of the Constitutional Court Act 2007, as amended, provides that the Constitutional Court shall reject any and all submissions aimed at instituting any proceedings before it if the submissions in question have been lodged after the expiration of a given time-limit.
According to Articles 40 § 1 and 42 of the Amendments to the Constitutional Court Act 2011, which entered into force on 4 January 2012, all cases still pending before the Constitutional Court are to be concluded pursuant to the amendments enacted in 2011.
Article 93 §§ 1 and 2 provides, inter alia, that any pending enforcement proceedings shall be terminated upon the opening of insolvency proceedings in respect of the same debtor.