The case originated in an application (no. 77478/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mrs Lidiya Ivanovna Yerogova (“the applicant”), on 7 December 2000.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Novikov, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev and subsequently by Mrs V. Milinchuk, the Representatives of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained, in particular, of the quashing of a final judgment in her favour on account of newly discovered circumstances and the non-enforcement of that final judgment as a consequence of the quashing.
On 30 August 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility. On 7 November 2006 the Court put additional questions to the parties.
The applicant and the Government each filed written observations.
The applicant was born in 1946 and lives in . She receives an old-age pension.
On 1 February 1998 the Law on Calculation and Adjustment of State Pensions (hereafter “the Pensions Act”) introduced a new method of calculation of retirement benefits based on what is known as the “individual pensioner coefficient” (“the IPC”). The IPC was the ratio between an individual’s wages at the time of retirement and the national average wage. The IPC was meant to maintain a link between pensions and previous earnings.
The applicant considered that the Zheleznodorozhniy District Division of the Pension Fund (hereafter “the Fund”) had calculated her pension incorrectly and in August 1999 she sued the Fund for an increase of her pension in accordance with the Pensions Act.
On 8 December 1999 the Zheleznodorozhniy District Court of  found in the applicant’s favour. The District Court held that the Fund had misconstrued the law and that the applicant’s pension should be recalculated and increased in line with an IPC of 0.7 starting from 1 December 1999. On 23 December 1999 the  upheld that judgment.
According to the Government, on 15 June 2000 the Fund recalculated the applicant’s pension in compliance with the judgment of 8 December 1999.
On 7 August 2000 the Fund requested the Zheleznodorozhniy District Court to reopen the case owing to a newly discovered circumstance. The Fund claimed that on 29 December 1999 the Ministry of Labour and Social Development had issued an Instruction on the Application of Limitations established by the Pensions Act. The Instruction clarified how the Pensions Act should be applied. The Fund further indicated that on 24 April 2000 the Supreme Court of the  had dismissed a complaint by a group of individuals challenging the Instruction. The Supreme Court found that the Ministry of Labour had acted within its competence when it had issued the Instruction, and that the Ministry’s interpretation of the Pensions Act had been correct. The Fund contended that since it had been unaware of the Instruction and the Supreme Court’s decision of 24 April 2000 at the time of the judgment of 8 December 1999, the judgment would have to be reconsidered.
On 15 August 2000 the Zheleznodorozhniy District Court granted the Fund’s request, quashed the judgment of 8 December 1999 and reopened the proceedings. The District Court applied Article 333 of the RSFSR Code of Civil Procedure according to which judgments could be reconsidered in the event of discovery of significant circumstances which were not, and could not have been, known to the party concerned. The District Court found that the Supreme Court’s judgment of 24 April 2000 could serve as such a circumstance. The decision of 15 August 2000 was final and not amenable to appeal.
On the same day the Zheleznodorozhniy District Court, after a fresh examination of the case, dismissed the applicant’s action in full. On 7 December 2000 the  upheld the judgment.
On 1 July 2004 the applicant received a letter from the Fund. The letter read as follows:
“In response to your inquiry on 21 June 2004 [we] inform you that by its judgment of 8 December 1999 the Zheleznodorozhniy District Court ordered that the Zheleznodorozhniy District Division of the Pension Fund in Novosibirsk should recalculate your pension starting from 1 December 1999.
On 8 December 1999 a writ of execution was issued on the basis of that judgment.
The enforcement of that court judgment on the basis of the above-mentioned writ of execution had not been carried out because there were no funds”.
Article 333 of the RSFSR Code of Civil Procedure of 1964 (in force at the material time) provided for grounds for reconsideration of final judgments on the basis of “newly discovered circumstances”. Such grounds included, inter alia, significant circumstances which were not and could not have been known to the party which applied for reconsideration, and invalidation of a court ruling or another authority’s decision which had served as a legal basis for the judgment in question.
Article 334 required that an application for reconsideration of a judgment owing to the discovery of new circumstances should be lodged within three months of the discovery of the circumstances.
Pursuant to Article 337 a court, after having examined an application for reconsideration of a final judgment on the basis of newly discovered circumstances, should either grant such an application and quash the final judgment or dismiss the application. Such a decision was not amenable to appeal.
On 2 February 1996 the Constitutional Court of the  adopted a ruling concerning certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCrP). In that ruling the Constitutional Court decided that Article 384 of the CCrP (“Grounds for reconsideration of a [criminal] case on the basis of newly discovered circumstances”, which was in many respects similar to Article 333 of the Code of Civil Procedure) was unconstitutional in that it limited the grounds for the reopening of a criminal case to situations of “newly discovered circumstances”. In that ruling the  suggested that this provision of the CCrP prevented rectification of judicial errors and miscarriages of justice.