The case originated in an application (no. 36157/08) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a company incorporated in Moldova, Grafescolo S.R.L (“the applicant company”), on 11 July 2008.
The applicant company was represented by Mr V. Nagacevschi, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Apostol.
The applicant company alleged, in particular, that it had been the victim of unfair civil proceedings and arbitrary deprivation of property.
On 27 June 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant is a company incorporated in Moldova.
On 13 February 2003 the Vadul lui Voda local council adopted a decision concerning the sale of a plot of land with a greenhouse on it to the applicant company. Subsequently, in March 2003, a contract was entered into for that purpose between the local council and the applicant company.
On 15 June 2006 the local council adopted a decision revoking its previous decision. The applicant initiated proceedings against the local council.
On 25 December 2006 the Vadul lui Voda local council introduced a counter action seeking the termination of the contract of sale between it and the applicant company on the grounds that the price asked for the property had been too low and that the land had been sold unlawfully owing to its proximity to a river. The applicant company opposed this action and argued, inter alia, that it was time-barred under the provisions of the Civil Code in force at the time the contract was entered into.
On 13 April 2007 the Ciocana District Court rejected the applicant’s action but accepted that of the local council and declared the contract of sale null and void. The court held that the rules governing time limitation contained in the new Civil Code should apply. The court expressed of its own motion the opinion that the local council’s action had concerned the declaration of the absolute nullity of the contract of sale and that therefore, in accordance with the provisions of Article 217 of the new Civil Code, it could not be time-barred. The applicant appealed.
On 5 September 2007 the Chişinău Court of Appeal upheld the appeal lodged by the applicant company and quashed the judgment of the first-instance court. It upheld the applicant company’s action and dismissed the counter action lodged by the local council. The local council lodged an appeal on points of law.
On 16 January 2008 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the appeal on points of law lodged by the local council. It quashed the judgment of the Court of Appeal and upheld the judgment of the Ciocana District Court of 13 April 2007. The Supreme Court did not state any position in respect of the applicant company’s initial defence concerning the statute of limitations. Only the representative of the local council was present at the Supreme Court hearing. The judgment of the Supreme Court was final.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code in force at the time of the sale of the plot of land provided:
“The general limitation period for protection through a court action of the rights of a [natural] person is three years; it is one year for lawsuits between State organisations, collective farms and any other social organisations.”
“The competent court ... shall apply the limitation period whether or not the parties request such application.”
“Expiry of the limitation period prior to initiation of court proceedings constitutes a ground for rejecting the claim.
If the competent court ... finds that the action has not commenced within the limitation period for well-founded reasons, the right in question shall be protected.”
The relevant provisions of the new Civil Code, in force after 12 June 2003, read:
“(1)  The civil law does not have retroactive effect. It cannot modify or suppress the conditions in which a prior legal situation was constituted or the conditions in which such a legal situation was extinguished. The new law cannot alter or abolish the previously-created effects of a legal situation which has ceased to exist or is in the process of execution.”
“(1)  The absolute nullity of a legal act can be invoked by any person having an interest. The court can invoke it on its own motion...
(3)  An action to declare the absolute nullity is not limited in time.”
In its judgment of 20 April 2005 (case no. 2ra-563/05) the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the plaintiff’s contentions – which were based on the provisions of the new Civil Code – because the facts of the case related to a period before the entry into force of the new Civil Code, and the provisions of the old Civil Code were therefore applicable.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure read as follows:
“Article 105. Service of the summons...
(1)  The summons ... shall be sent by registered mail with confirmation of delivery or through a person authorised by the court. The date of service of the summons ... shall be written on the summons, as well as on the receipt, which shall be returned to the court.
...
(5)  The summons ... addressed to a natural person shall be served on him or her personally and shall be countersigned on the receipt. The summons ... addressed to a legal person shall be served on the authorised employee and shall be countersigned on the receipt; if such a person is absent, the summons shall be served on another employee in the same conditions...”
“Article 441
... (2)  The President of the Chamber [of the Supreme Court of Justice] shall set, within one month, the date for hearing the appeal in cassation and inform the parties accordingly. A copy of the appeal in cassation shall be sent to the other parties together with a summons to attend the hearing, indicating that a written reply should be submitted to the court not later than five days before the hearing.
Article 444
... (2)  The appeal in cassation shall be examined after the parties have been summoned. However, their failure to appear shall not prevent the examination of the appeal.”
On 12 December 2005 the Plenary Supreme Court of Justice adopted a decision “Regarding the application of the rules of the Code of Civil Procedure to the examination of cases by the first-instance courts”. In point 5 of that decision the court noted that examining a case in the absence of a party which had not been properly summoned was contrary to the law. It added that under Article 105 § 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure a person should be considered as lawfully summoned only if he or she had been personally served with the summons and had countersigned the receipt.