The case originated in an application (no. 38797/17) against the Republic of Iceland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Icelandic national, Mr Júlíus Þór Sigurþórsson (“the applicant”), on 26 May 2017.
The applicant was represented by Mr Bragi Björnsson, a lawyer practising in Reykjavík. The Icelandic Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Einar Karl Hallvarðsson, State Attorney General.
The applicant complained in particular that, after having been acquitted of criminal offences at first instance, he had been convicted by the Supreme Court without it rehearing the oral evidence of the accused and witnesses on the basis of which he had been acquitted. He relied on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 18 April 2018 notice of the above-mentioned complaint was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Kópavogur.
At the time of the events, the applicant was hardware item manager in the Timber Sales department of a hardware company, Húsasmiðjan. In 2014, following a police investigation, the Office of the Special Prosecutor issued an indictment against the applicant and twelve other employees of Húsasmiðjan and two other hardware companies, Byko and Úlfurinn Lagersala, charging them with criminal price collusion. The indictment stated that the alleged offences had primarily been committed by telephone and e-mail communications. During the investigation, the Reykjanes District Court had authorised the interception and recording of calls made using certain phone numbers registered to the three companies. The charge against the applicant was based on his receipt of a telephone call from B., an employee of Byko, on 28 February 2011, in which they had allegedly encouraged each other to commit criminal price collusion.
During the proceedings in the District Court the prosecution submitted information about the telephone calls, as well as recordings of some of them, and e-mails and other documentary evidence, concerning in particular exchanges of information about prices. The District Court dismissed the case against one of the accused; the others pleaded not guilty. During the trial they made oral statements before the court in the presence of the other co-accused, irrespective of whether the latter had already testified. They were cross-examined by their defence lawyers and the prosecutors, as well as being asked questions by the judges. Numerous witnesses on behalf of both the prosecution and the defence gave evidence in the presence of the accused. The applicant’s main defence was that he had received an unexpected call which he did not know how to respond to and that he had not made any kind of agreement with B.; he had immediately reported the call to his supervisor and any information given in the call had not affected and could not have affected his work at Húsasmiðjan.
By a judgment of 9 April 2015 the District Court acquitted the applicant of criminal price collusion and inciting such collusion, but convicted one of the co-accused of those offences; the remaining ten co-accused were acquitted of all charges. With regard to the applicant, the court accepted his testimony, which it considered to be supported by the testimony of a co-accused and one of the witnesses, and held that “it had not been shown that, despite his negligence in not ending the telephone call in question immediately, he had not known what to expect or that he could have reacted to the call in any other way than he did” (“Telur dómurinn því ósannað að, þrátt fyrir gáleysi ákærða um að slíta ekki samtalinu strax,  að hann hafi ekki vitað á hverju hann átti von né hafa getað brugðist við símtalinu á annan hátt en hann gerði.”). Furthermore, his decision to notify his superiors immediately suggested that he had not wished to participate in the arrangements proposed by B. The court concluded that the subjective requirement of negligence was not fulfilled due to the manner in which the applicant had reacted to the telephone call.
The prosecution appealed to the Supreme Court against the acquittal of the applicant and certain of the other co-accused and submitted all the tangible evidence which had been before the District Court, as well as a complete transcript of the statements of the accused and the witnesses in the proceedings before the District Court.
In the proceedings before the Supreme Court the defendants and the witnesses were not heard again. The defendants submitted written observations and their representatives made oral presentations at a public hearing before the Supreme Court. In its judgment of 1 December 2016, the Supreme Court upheld the acquittal of two defendants and the conviction of one but overturned the acquittal of the applicant and seven other defendants, convicting them of breaching section 41a(1) and (2), item a of the Competition Act no. 44/2005, together with section 10 of the same Act (see paragraph 13 below). The applicant was given a suspended sentence of 9 months’ imprisonment. The Supreme Court, with reference to section 114(2) second item of the Criminal Procedures Act (see paragraph 12, below), criticised the fact that the District Court had allowed the defendants to be present while their co-accused were making their oral statements, irrespective of whether they had yet to give a statement themselves. It considered that since the conduct of which the defendants were accused was similar and significantly rooted in the same circumstances, it was important (“deemed as urgent”) to prevent them hearing the statements of their co-accused until after they themselves had given evidence. The Supreme Court also criticised the District Court’s failure to differentiate between the defendants as accused and as witnesses, despite the different legal status, some defendants having given statements in respect of the charges against them and then having been given the status of witness when giving statements about other charges in the indictment. On the basis of those considerations, the Supreme Court concluded that the method followed for hearing the statements of the defendants was “not least improper on the grounds it significantly diminishes the evidentiary value of their testimonies in court.”
The Supreme Court considered it proven, on the basis of the evidence submitted in the case, that Byko had initially made enquiries by telephone about prices at Húsasmiðjan. The interaction had developed from being unilateral to being mutual as the two individuals exchanged information about prices of the companies for the same or comparable types of item, and the purpose of the information had obviously been to get a clearer picture of the competition’s prices than each company could have had by only examining the prices using methods that were available to customers. It was deemed that the frequent and regular interaction entailed concerted measures with the goal of distorting the competition between the companies. With regard to the applicant in particular, the Supreme Court considered that in the telephone conversation between him and B. on 28 February 2011 both of them had intentionally and seriously breached section 41a(1) and (2), item a of the Competition Act, as it was beyond doubt that during that conversation they had encouraged each other to keep up the prices of hardware items, including when making bids.
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Procedures Act (Law no. 88/2008, Lög um meðferð sakamála) at the material time were as follows:
 “...
Witnesses in the same case may not hear the defendant give his statement. The judge may furthermore decide that the same shall apply to other defendants if reason renders this appropriate.
...”
“With the limits arising from other provisions of this Act, appeal against a District Court judgment lies to the Supreme Court in order to obtain:
	a. a re-examination of the determination of penalties;
	b. a re-examination of conclusions based on the interpretation or application of rules of law;
	c. a re-examination of conclusions based on the evaluation of the evidentiary value of documentation other than oral statements before the District Court;
	d. quashing of the judgment and remittal of the case;
	e. dismissal of the case by the District Court.
	When a judgment is appealed against, a re-examination may also be sought of rulings and decisions made during the court proceedings before the District Court.
...”
“...
The Supreme Court cannot re-evaluate a District Court’s conclusion on the evidentiary value of oral testimony, unless the witness in question or the defendant have given oral statements before the Supreme Court.
Should the Supreme Court consider that the conclusion of a District Court concerning the evidentiary value of oral testimony in court may be incorrect so as to materially affect the outcome of the case, and the witnesses or defendant in question have not given oral testimony before the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court may quash the judgment of the District Court as well as its procedure to the extent necessary for oral testimony to be given before the District Court, and for the case to be resolved anew. Should a District Court judgment be quashed in such a manner, three judges shall deal with the case in a new trial before the District Court and they may not be the same judges as previously dealt with the case.”
According to the Criminal Procedures Act, judicial proceedings can be reopened under certain conditions. Section 228 of the Act states that when a District Court judgment has not been appealed against or the time-limit to appeal has passed, the Committee on Reopening of Judicial Proceedings can approve a request from a person who considers that he or she has been wrongly convicted or convicted of a more serious offence than he or she committed to reopen the judicial proceedings before the District Court, if certain conditions are fulfilled. The conditions are, inter alia, that there were serious defects in the processing of the case which affected its conclusion (item d). The State Prosecutor can request a reopening to the advantage of the convicted person if he considers that the conditions in paragraph 1 of section 228 of the Act are fulfilled. In accordance with section 229 of the Act, the request for reopening shall be in writing and sent to the Committee on Reopening of Judicial Proceedings. It shall include detailed reasoning on how the conditions for reopening are considered to be fulfilled. According to section 231 of the Act, the Committee on Reopening of Judicial Proceedings decides whether proceedings will be reopened. If a request for reopening is approved the first judgment remains in force until a new judgment is delivered in the case. Section 232 of the Act states that the Committee on Reopening of Judicial Proceedings can accept a request for the reopening of a case which has been finally decided by the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court and a new judgment will be delivered if the conditions of section 228 are fulfilled.
The relevant provisions of Competition Act, no. 44/2005, are as follows:
	“Any agreement or resolution between undertakings, whether binding or guiding, and concerted practices which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition are prohibited. This prohibition includes any agreements, resolutions and concerted practices which:
	a. directly or indirectly affect prices, discounts, margins or any other trading conditions;
	b. limit or control production, markets, technical development, or investment;
	c. share markets or sources of supply;
	d. apply dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions with other trading parties, thereby placing them at a competitive disadvantage;
	e. make the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by the other parties of supplementary obligations which, by their nature and according to commercial usage, have no connection with the subject of such contracts.”
	“Any employee or director of an undertaking or association of undertakings who carries out, incites to or gives instructions on collusion which violates Sections 10 and/or 12 and relates to the issues specified in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be subject to fines or imprisonment up to six years.
	The provisions of paragraph 1 apply to the following violations of Sections 10 or 12 by undertakings or associations of undertakings operating at the same sales stage:
	a. collusion on prices, discounts, margins or other trading conditions;
	b. collusion on restriction or control of supply, production, markets or sales;
	c. collusion on sharing out sources of supply or markets, e.g. by region or customer;
	d. collusion on the preparation of tenders;
	e. collusion on avoiding business with specific undertakings or consumers;
	f. provision of information on the matters in subsections (a) to (e).
	The provision in paragraph 1 also applies to collusion between undertakings which has the purpose of avoiding the commencement of competition between undertakings.
	Collusion in this section refers to agreements, resolutions, decisions or concerted practices of undertakings or associations of undertakings.
	Suspension of licence pursuant to Article 68 of the Penal Code, and confiscation of assets pursuant to Article 69 of the Code, may be adjudged in proceedings that have their origins in violations of sections 10, 12 and 41b of this Act.
	An attempt to commit or participation in violations pursuant to this section is subject to sanctions as prescribed in the Penal Code.”