The case originated in an application (no. 18238/06) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Ms Denka Angelova Yagnina (“the applicant”), on 28 April 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr Y. Grozev, a lawyer practising in Sofia. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Ms M. Kotseva and Ms V. Hristova, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 19 February 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in Voyvodinovo.
The applicant worked as a driver of tractors and other heavy machines for a number of years before 1985. This work led to her developing dysfunctions of the nervous system. In 1985 she was declared to have a “third degree disability” and started receiving a disability pension.
Between 1985 and 2000 the applicant underwent seven medical reexaminations by the local Territorial Expert Medical Commission (“the TEMC”), the body competent to assess the level of disability. The medical examinations serve as a basis for the allocation of disability pensions. She was diagnosed with vegetative polyneuropathy of the upper extremities, coxarthrosis, cervical spondylosis and radiculopathy. On all occasions she was assessed to have a “third degree disability” ─ she had lost between 50% and 70% of her ability to work, which entitled her to receive a disability pension.
On 14 November 2000 the applicant underwent a new regular reexamination by the TEMC. This time she was diagnosed with vegetative polyneuropathy of the upper extremities and myotendinosis. No mention was made of the other diseases diagnosed earlier, namely coxarthrosis, cervical spondylosis and radiculopathy. On that basis the TEMC assessed the applicant’s loss of ability to work at 40%, which was not sufficient to entitle her to a disability pension.
The applicant challenged this decision before the National Expert Medical Commission (“the NEMC”). After re-examining her, the NEMC declared the applicant fully fit to work in a decision of 14 February 2001. Its diagnosis was “spondylosis and related diseases”.
The applicant applied to the Sofia City Court for judicial review of that decision.
The Sofia City Court appointed a medical expert who examined the applicant and concluded that she suffered from the following conditions: cervical spondylarthrosis, vegetative polyneuropathy, myotendinosis of the upper limbs and coxarthrosis of the coxofemoral joint. The expert pointed out that these conditions had a chronic character and had permanently and negatively affected the applicant’s state of health. If anything, some of them had become worse after 1985. The expert pointed out that such conditions typically led to a significant reduction in the affected person’s ability to work.
On the basis of that report, on 27 December 2002 the Sofia City Court quashed the NEMC’s decision of 14 February 2001 as unlawful. It found, on the basis of the expert’s conclusions corroborated by the remaining documents in the case file, that the applicant’s ability to work was reduced. The court concluded that the NEMC had erroneously assessed the applicant’s state of health by failing to consider all relevant elements to her actual state of health. The court remitted the case for a fresh examination, pointing out that it was the NEMC which had to fix the exact percentage of the applicant’s reduced ability to work. The judgment entered into force on 11 February 2003.
The NEMC examined the applicant on 9 October 2003. In its decision of the same date it indicated as a leading diagnosis “spondylosis and related diseases”. It specified that the applicant suffered from cervical spondylarthrosis and cervical radiculopathy, which were occupational diseases, and from myotendinosis of the upper limbs and coxarthrosis, which were not. It considered that she did not suffer from vegetative polyneuropathy of the upper limbs. On that basis the NEMC assessed the applicant’s reduced ability to work at 30%. The decision stated that it was valid for three years.
Once again, the applicant applied for judicial review of the NEMC’s decision. The Sofia City Court appointed a medical expert who concluded that the applicant suffered from the following diseases which he considered occupational: cervical spondylarthrosis, vegetative polyneuropathy, myotendinosis of the upper limbs and coxarthrosis of the two coxofemoral joints. The expert considered that these conditions had a permanent and chronic character and had led to irreversible degenerative changes to the applicant’s locomotor system.
On that basis, on 6 January 2005 the Sofia City Court quashed the NEMC’s decision of 9 October 2003 and remitted the case to it for further examination in accordance with the conclusions of the medical expertise accepted by the court in the case proceedings. The court found that the administrative body had erred when assessing the applicant’s state of disability as it had not taken into account all the relevant circumstances. It considered the NEMC’s opinion that the applicant did not suffer from vegetative polyneuropathy unfounded and concluded that the NEMC’s decision was not based on the applicant’s actual state of health. The court held, like in its judgment of December 2002, that the NEMC was exclusively competent to assess the percentage of disability.
Upon an appeal by the NEMC, the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the Sofia City Court’s judgment in a final judgment of 15 July 2005.
Following that, in a decision of 28 October 2005 the NEMC assessed the applicant’s reduced ability to work at 40% which did not entitle her to a disability pension. In the decision’s entry “occupational deceases”, only vegetative polyneuropathy featured this time. The operative provision of the decision stated that the NEMC “Quashes and decides anew the question of percentage of disability. Confirms the rest of the elements.” The decision stated that it was valid for three years.
The applicant did not apply for judicial review of the above decision.
The payment of the applicant’s disability pension was discontinued as of 2 October 2000 and there is no information about what happened after the 28 October 2005 NEMC decision.
Before 2006 the implementation of administrative court judgments was regulated by the Administrative Procedure Act 1979, as in force until July 2006, and – as regards judgments of the Supreme Administrative Court – by the Supreme Administrative Court Act 1997, as in force until 1 March 2007. Neither the Administrative Procedure Act 1979 nor the Supreme Administrative Court Act 1997 provided for any procedure capable of obliging an administrative body to comply with a final court judgment. However, section 42(3) of the Administrative procedure Act 1979 provided that when an administrative court quashed an administrative act it had to send the case file back to the responsible administrative body with mandatory instructions as to the interpretation and application of the law. Furthermore, section 30 of the Supreme Administrative Court Act 1997 (the “Act 1997”) provided that the decisions of that court had an obligatory force in respect of the parties. Section 32 of the Act 1997 provided that a decision of that court was subject to immediate implementation by the administrative body concerned.
The Supreme Administrative Court held in a decision of 2001 (see decision no. 2572 of 17 April 2001, case no. 4047/2000) that the applicable legislation at the time did not provide for time-limits within which the administrative body had to comply with judicial decisions. The decision as to when the judgment should be implemented was entirely in the hands of the administrative body concerned. The only procedure for forced implementation of administrative court decisions was an administrative pecuniary sanction (in accordance with section 53 and following of the Administrative Procedure Act 1979, and section 51 and following of the Supreme Administrative Court Act 1997). The party aiming at having the judgment complied with did not need to appeal against an explicit or tacit refusal to implement the judgment, but instead had to bring a separate complaint before the courts asking for the imposition of a pecuniary sanction on the administrative body which had not complied with the court’s judgment (see decision no. 3922 of 19 June 2000, case no. 1580/2000; decision no. 2572 of 17 April 2001, case no. 40472000).
.  The Code of Administrative Procedure 2006 (“the Code”), which is currently in force, was adopted in 2006 and, with effect from 1 March 2007, it repealed the Supreme Administrative Court Act 1997. It also repealed the Administrative Procedure Act 1979 with effect of July 2006.
.  According to Article 173 (2) of the Code, when an administrative court quashes an administrative act, be it as unlawful or as null and void, it sends the case to the administrative body with mandatory instructions about the interpretation and application of the law. Article 290 of the Code regulates the implementation of administrative court judgments in respect of an administrative body obliged in a court judgment to deliver a nonsubstitutable action. If the responsible official fails to act, the bailiff imposes on him/her weekly pecuniary sanctions, in the amount of between BGN 50 and BGN 1200, for so long as the act remains uncompleted. Under Article 294 of the Code, the bailiff’s actions or failure to act can be appealed before the administrative courts. If the court quashes an action or declares it unlawful, it may order that specific measures be carried out by the administrative body within a fixed time-frame. In addition, Article 304 stipulates that an official who does not comply with a final judicial decision can be fined with a sum of between BGN 200 and BGN 2000.
Section 1(1) of the State and Municipalities Liability for Damage Act 1988 (SMRDA) provides that the State is liable for damage suffered by individuals or legal persons as a result of unlawful decisions, actions or omissions by civil servants, committed in the course of or in connection with administrative action. Under Article 204 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Procedure 2006, such a claim can only be brought if the administrative decision has been duly set aside.
The establishing of temporary or permanent disability is done on the basis of a medical expert report (section 101 of the Health Act 2004). Disability is calculated in percentage terms of the estimated capacity of a healthy individual.