The applicant complained under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention that the domestic proceedings concerning his administrative arrest had been unfair.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Baku. He was represented by Mr R. Mustafazade and Mr A. Mustafayev, lawyers based in Azerbaijan. Mr R. Mustafazade was given leave by the President of the Section to represent the applicant in the proceedings before the Court (Rule 36 § 4 (a) in fine of the Rules of Court).
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr. Ç. Əsgərov.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
At approximately 4 p.m. on 12 March 2011 the applicant was arrested by four police officers and taken to Sabail district police station no. 9 in Baku.
The police officers stated the following in a report (raport) submitted to their superior officer:
“... at around 4 p.m. we arrested the four persons listed below for deliberately disobeying lawful orders of the police during an unlawful demonstration and brought [them] to police station no. 9: ... Agayev Kheyrulla Ibrahim oglu ...”
An administrative-offence report (inzibati xəta haqqında protokol) was drawn up by police officer E.Q., which stated that by deliberately failing to comply with lawful orders of the police during the unauthorised demonstration, the applicant had committed administrative offences under Articles 298 (breach of the rules on the organisation and holding of assemblies, demonstrations, protests, marches and pickets) and 310.1 (deliberate failure to comply with lawful orders of the police) of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”). The applicant stated that he had been arrested while passing a street on the way to meet an old friend and that he had repeatedly informed the police officers of this.
According to the applicant, he was not given access to a lawyer either after his arrest or while he was in police custody.
At 7.30 p.m. that evening he was brought before the Sabail District Court.
According to the applicant, he refused State-funded legal assistance and insisted on choosing his own lawyer, but his request was disregarded. The hearing was closed to the public and was very brief.
The Government provided a copy of a pre-printed form addressed to the judge (ərizə) stating that the applicant refused the legal assistance of a State-funded lawyer and chose to represent himself. The form was signed by the applicant and the State-funded lawyer.
The applicant told the court that he was not guilty of the offences in question and that he had not participated in the demonstration, as he had been merely passing the street on the way to meeting a friend.
The only witness questioned during the court hearing was the police officer who had drawn up the initial report at the police station.
At 7.30 p.m. that evening the Sabail District Court found that the applicant had failed to obey police orders to stop participating in the unauthorised demonstration. The court convicted him under Article 310.1 of the CAO and sentenced him to seven days’ administrative detention.
On 15 March 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Baku Court of Appeal, arguing that his conviction was unlawful as he had not participated in the demonstration. He requested that the police officers who had arrested him be called to give evidence. He also complained that he had been deprived of access to a defence lawyer and that the hearing before the first-instance court had not been fair. He urged the appellate court to quash the first-instance court’s decision.
The applicant was represented before the Baku Court of Appeal by a lawyer of his own choosing.
On 17 March 2011 it dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the first-instance court, stating that its findings had been correct.
The relevant provisions of the CAO are described in detail in the Court’s judgment in Gafgaz Mammadov v. Azerbaijan (no. 60259/11, §§ 3238, 15 October 2015).