The case originated in an application (no. 342/09) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Ms Larisa Muhina (“the applicant”), on 27 November 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Doicov, a lawyer practising in Chișinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Apostol.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic courts had examined a court action against her despite the expiry of the limitation period established by law.
On 25 January 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Chișinău.
Since 1989 the applicant has rented an apartment from the State (social housing). In 1996 her apartment was seriously damaged and was found to be unsuitable for living purposes. On an unknown date she lodged a court action against the State authorities, requesting allocation of an alternative apartment. She explained that the apartment which she rented was the property of the State. On 25 April 2000 the Botanica District Court accepted her claims and ordered the Chişinău municipality to allocate her another apartment. It found that the applicant was renting her apartment and that it was owned by the Chișinău municipality. However, that judgment was not enforced for many years.
After 25 April 2000 the applicant stopped paying any bills for the apartment, considering that since it was officially no longer habitable, she could not incur expenses in relation to it. Moreover, she claimed that most of the services (heating, hot water, building repairs, etc.) were no longer being provided.
On 11 January 2007 the Municipal Company for Administering the Housing Fund no. 14 (“the MCAHF-14”) lodged a court action against the applicant, claiming that she had failed to pay for the services provided to her, thereby accumulating a debt of 9,606 Moldovan lei (MDL, the equivalent of 568 euros (EUR) at the time). It subsequently increased the sum claimed to MDL 11,954 after discovering that two people were living in the apartment and not just the applicant.
The applicant submitted to the court, inter alia, that some of the MCAHF-14’s claims were time-barred on account of the three-year limitation period (see paragraph 17 below).
The MCAAF-14 submitted that it had not missed the limitation period protecting its rights in court because it had itself been faced with court actions initiated by various service providers (heat, electricity, water, etc.) in 2004-2005. This meant that it had had to lodge court actions against individuals who had used the relevant services but had failed to pay the service providers for them through the intermediary of the MCAHF-14. According to some of the judgments submitted to the file (for instance, those of 22 July 2004, of 25 April 2005 and of 23 October 2006), it was established that contracts had been concluded between MCAHF-14 and various service providers for the provision of heating, water and electricity to the apartment blocks administered by MCAHF-14.
On 17 May 2007 the Buiucani District Court accepted the MCAHF-14’s initial claims. It found, in respect of the applicant’s submissions about the limitation period, that:
 “[The court] cannot accept [the applicant’s] argument concerning the limitation period, since pursuant to Article 276 of the Civil Code, no limitation period starts to run ‒ and if one has started to run it must be suspended ‒ between a person who, by virtue of a law, a court judgment or a legal act, is administering the property of another person and the person whose property is being thus administered, provided that the administration has not ceased and the final calculations have not been made and approved.”
The applicant appealed. In respect of the limitation period she noted that the lower court had applied a legal provision which could not apply to situations such as hers. She added that the first-instance court had failed to deal with most of her arguments, such as the de facto failure to provide her with the services for which she was being asked to pay.
On 28 November 2007 the Chişinău Court of Appeal upheld the lower court’s judgment. The court found that the applicant had failed to submit any evidence in support of her contention that she had not been provided with the relevant services. It did not deal with the issue of the expiry of the limitation period.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, relying on the same arguments as earlier, including the expiry of the limitation period and the failure of the Chişinău Court of Appeal to deal with that argument.
By its final judgment of 7 May 2008 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the lower courts’ judgments, finding that they had been properly reasoned and based on the evidence in the file. The court relied on Article 17 of the “Regulation concerning the manner of offering housing services, utility-related services and non-utility-related services to the housing fund...” (see paragraph 18 below). It did not respond to the applicant’s submission concerning the expiry of the limitation period.
According to the applicant, she challenged Judge S.M., who had sat on the three-judge panel of the Supreme Court of Justice when her previous case had been examined in 2000. Her challenge had been accepted at the time and another judge had examined the case.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code, as in force at the relevant time, read:
Article 267
“The general limitation period for protection through a court action of a person’s rights is three years.
...”
Article 271
“A court action for the protection of a right may be rejected on the basis of expiry of the limitation period only where there has been a request from the party in whose favour the prescription runs, submitted before the end of the hearing concerning the merits of the case.”
Article 276
“No limitation period starts to run ‒ and if one has started to run it shall be suspended ‒ between a person who, by virtue of a law, a court judgment or a legal act, is administering the property of another person and the person whose property is being thus administered, provided that the administration has not ceased and the final calculations have not been made and approved”.
The relevant provisions of the “Regulation concerning the manner of offering housing services, utility-related services and non-utility-related services to the housing fund, installing metering equipment in apartments and the conditions for disconnecting them from, and reconnecting them to, the heating and water systems”, adopted by Government Decision no. 191 of 19 February 2002 read:
“2.  In the present Regulation, the terms used have the following meaning:
owner – a natural or legal person or group of persons possessing, using and disposing of property (an apartment in an apartment block, a habitable room in a dormitory, ...) in accordance with the law in force;
renter – a natural person who rents accommodation on the basis of a rental agreement concluded with the administrator of the housing fund for a determinate or indeterminate period in return for a fee, in accordance with the law in force;
housing fund administrator – a municipal company for administering the housing fund [or other associations or business agents] on the balance sheets or in the administration of which there is a housing fund;
The payment for housing services, utility-related services and non-utility-related services shall be received from the owners, renters, ... of apartments ... in accordance with the contracts, on the basis of monthly calculations for each service issued by the administrating providers or service providers.”
By a judgment of the Economic Court of Appeal on 25 April 2005, the MCAHF-14 was ordered to settle its debt with a heating provider. The MCAHF-14’s argument that part of its debt did not have to be settled due to the applicability of the three-year limitation period was accepted. Its debt was accordingly reduced from MDL 9.8 million to MDL 6.2 million.