The case originated in an application (no. 47081/06) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr M.T.B. (“the applicant”), on 8 November 2006. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr F. Algan, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not had a fair trial, in that he had been tried and convicted in absentia and had not been able to obtain a rehearing thereafter.
On 26 August 2013 the above complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Istanbul.
On 10 May 1999 a certain İ.Ö. lodged a criminal complaint against the applicant, claiming that he had issued an uncovered cheque dated 26 April 1999.
On the same date the Bakırköy public prosecutor’s office indicted the applicant in the Bakırköy Criminal Court of First Instance under section 16 (1) of Law no. 3167 – in force at the material time – for issuing an uncovered cheque. The cheque bore the applicant’s name underneath the name of the company of which he was president of the executive board, and the address of the company on the cheque was indicated as being “... Bakırköy / Istanbul”.
On 2 September 1999 the trial court held a preparatory hearing (tensip) and ordered that a summons be served on the applicant.
On 6 October 1999 the trial court sent a copy of the bill of indictment, together with the notice of the first hearing, to the address written on the cheque. On the same day the trial court asked the Bakırköy public prosecutor’s office to confirm the applicant’s identity and enquire about his full address and provide it with this information.
On 7 October 1999 the summons was returned on the grounds that the applicant had left that address, leaving “P.K. [post box] 5 Bakırköy” as an alternative address.
Within the context of the enquiries to find out what the applicant’s new address was, it appears that the Bakırköy public prosecutor’s office asked the police and the mayor of the neighbourhood (muhtarlık) to collect information. In that connection, the police went to the address written on the cheque and concluded that the applicant had left it. According to the information received from the mayor of the neighbourhood, the applicant had left that address without giving any notification.
On 14 February 2000 the trial court held the first hearing in the absence of the applicant. The court decided to authorise his detention in absentia (tevkif müzekkeresi) with a view to obtaining his statements, under Article 223 of the former Code of Criminal Procedure, in force at the material time.
Between 14 February 2000 and 13 October 2004 the trial court waited for the detention order to be executed.
On 11 October 2001, while the criminal proceedings were ongoing, another court in Istanbul, namely the Bağcılar Criminal Court of First Instance, sent a summons to the applicant’s home address – “... Avcılar / Istanbul” – requiring him to give evidence as a complainant in another set of criminal proceedings.
On 16 July 2001, in another set of criminal proceedings, the Küçükçekmece public prosecutor’s office delivered a decision not to prosecute, in which it also indicated the applicant’s address as being “... Avcılar / Istanbul”.
On 26 May 2003 the trial court once again attempted to serve the summons at the address written on the cheque, but failed to do so for the same reasons.
On 21 June 2004 the trial court decided to serve the summons at the same address, in accordance with section 35 (4) of the Notification Act (Law no. 7201).
On 13 October 2004 the trial court convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to a fine (ağır para cezası) of 500,000,000 Turkish liras (TRL). That judgment was served on the applicant on 30 October 2004. The seven-day time-limit for lodging an appeal against the judgment expired, and in the absence of an appeal it became final.
On an unspecified date in 2006 several police officers from the Firuzköy police station in Avcılar, Istanbul, went to the applicant’s apartment with an arrest warrant and invited him to attend the police station. At the police station, the applicant was informed that an arrest warrant had been issued against him following his conviction by a criminal court, and that he would be put in prison unless he paid the 500 Turkish liras (TRY) fine previously imposed by the court. The applicant, who was unaware of any criminal proceedings against him, requested the details of the judgment in question and applied to the registry of the Bakırköy Criminal Court of First Instance for further information.
Upon examining the relevant case file at the registry of the first-instance court, the applicant discovered that he had been charged and convicted in absentia for issuing an uncovered cheque on 27 April 1999 and sentenced to a fine of TRY 500, an amount corresponding to the amount of the cheque. Moreover, the judgment, which had been delivered on 13 October 2004 by the Bakırköy Criminal Court of First Instance, had become final in the absence of an appeal.
On 5 May 2006 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Bakırköy Criminal Court of First Instance, challenging the judgment in question on the grounds that it had been delivered in his absence and the accusations against him were ill-founded. He emphasised that he had not received any notice of the criminal proceedings or the judgment, not even when he had gone to the Bakırköy public prosecutor’s office three months prior to the delivery of the impugned judgment to obtain his criminal record details for an unrelated matter. He added that the claimant in the criminal proceedings, İ.Ö., was his former girlfriend, and that he had given her a blank cheque as a guarantee that he would discharge their joint debt to a bank. They had in fact signed an official document on 12 March 1998 in the presence of a lawyer confirming that İ.Ö. would only be entitled to cash this cheque if the applicant failed to discharge their joint debt to the bank. Upon settling the debt with the bank, the applicant had requested that İ.Ö. return the blank cheque to him, but İ.Ö. had failed to do so, alleging that she had lost it. He had accordingly reported the cheque as missing to the bank, and had asked to be notified in the event of any attempts to cash it. On 27 April 1999, very shortly after his move to a new address, his former girlfriend had apparently attempted to cash the cheque, and when the cheque had not cleared, had brought a criminal complaint against him. Despite his instructions, he had not been contacted by his bank when the cheque in question had been deposited by İ.Ö., nor had he been advised that the cheque had bounced.
On the same day the Bakırköy Civil Court of First Instance issued a summary judgment dismissing the applicant’s appeal as lodged out of time. It held that the judgment of 13 October 2004 had been duly served on him on 30 October 2004 in accordance with section 35 of Law no. 7201, and the appeal should therefore have been submitted by 8 November 2004.
On 22 May 2006 the applicant appealed against the summary judgment, reiterating the arguments he had previously submitted to the Bakırköy Civil Court of First Instance. He emphasised that, although his accurate address details could easily have been obtained from the mayor of the neighbourhood, the judgment of October 2004 had been served at the address which his company had moved out of on 15 April 1999. In his absence, it had apparently been posted on the door of the building. He therefore requested that the judgment which had been delivered in his absence be quashed or rectified.
On 21 September 2006 the Principal Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation delivered her opinion on the applicant’s appeal, where she requested that the first-instance court’s judgment of 5 May 2006 be quashed on account of the unlawful service of the initial judgment rendered in his absence.
On 2 October 2006 the Court of Cassation upheld the lower court’s decision, holding that the judgment in question had been duly served on the applicant in accordance with section 35 of Law no. 7201 on Notifications.
On 8 November 2006, in accordance with Article 308 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the applicant requested that the Principal Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation lodge an application to have the Court of Cassation’s decision set aside.
It appears that the applicant was imprisoned on 24 November 2006 on account of his failure to pay the fine of TRY 500 imposed by the Bakırköy Criminal Court of First Instance on 13 October 2004.
On 26 November 2006 the applicant was conditionally released.
On 1 December 2008 the Principal Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation rejected the applicant’s application under Article 308 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, maintaining that the applicant’s arguments had already been examined by the Court of Cassation in its decision of 2 October 2006.
Section 16(1) of the Law on the Protection of Payees and the Regulation of Payments by Cheque (Law no. 3167), entitled “Uncovered cheques”, which was in force at the material time, read as follows:
“Account holders or their authorised agents who issue a cheque that is not paid in full or in part, owing to [there being] insufficient funds in the bank account when [the cheque is] presented to the bank ... within the period specified in Article 4 [when the payee is officially able to cash the cheque], shall be sentenced to a ... fine (ağır para cezası) equal to the amount on the cheque, without prejudice to other acts proscribed by the [relevant] legislation.”
Section 35 of the Notification Act (Law no. 7201), as in force at the material time, provided:
“Where a person who has been served with a document personally or at his or her home address in accordance with legally established procedures changes address, he or she must without delay communicate the new address to the judicial authority from which the notification emanated. In such cases, [service of] all subsequent notifications must be effected at the new address.
Where [this] person has failed to communicate his or her new address and the notifying officer has been unable to ascertain this new address, a copy of the document to be served shall be posted at the entrance to the building corresponding to the old address; the date on which the copy is posted shall be treated as the date of notification.
[Service of] subsequent notifications effected in this way at the old address shall be deemed to have been effected vis-à-vis the addressee.
Even if no prior notification has been given [in relation to those addresses], the provisions of this section shall also apply in respect of addresses stated on contracts entered into by parties who have accepted signing [those contracts] before the official authorities, and last addresses that are given to public institutions and organisations, to professional bodies with the status of public institutions, to commercial registries, and to registries of tradesmen and craftsmen.”
Article 223 of the former Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 1412), applicable at the time of the applicant’s trial in absentia, read as follows:
“In the event an accused does not appear before a court, the trial shall not commence, save for in the case of the exceptions provided for under this law.
If no valid reason for [an accused’s] non-appearance is established, an order to compel the accused to attend the hearing to give evidence, or a detention order [in respect of accused], will be issued.
If an accused absconds subsequent to an arrest warrant being issued in his or her presence, and in the event he or she has already been heard and his or her presence has been deemed not necessary by the court, the case may be concluded in absentia.
If it is considered that a decision other than a conviction should be rendered in respect of an accused on the basis of evidence collected, the case may be concluded in absentia even if an accused has not been heard.”
Article 225 § 1 of the former Code of Criminal Procedure, applicable at the time of the applicant’s trial in absentia, read as follows:
“A hearing may be held in the absence of an accused in the event that the offence that is the subject of the prosecution is punishable by a fine, light imprisonment (hafif hapis), confiscation, or a combination of those [punishments]. In such situations, a summons sent to an accused shall include the fact that a hearing may take place in his absence.”
Article 421 of the former Code of Criminal Procedure read as follows:
Matters concerning heavy penalties within the meaning of this law
“In accordance with this Code, matters concerning heavy penalties mean cases concerning offences punishable by the death penalty, heavy imprisonment (ağır hapis) and imprisonment for more than ten years.”
On 1 June 2005 the new Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271) entered into force, repealing the former Code of Criminal Procedure. However, in accordance with Law no. 5320 on the entry into force and application of the [new] Code of Criminal Procedure, dated 31 March 2005, Articles 305326 of the former Code of Criminal Procedure on the procedure for appeals to the Court of Cassation were to remain in force until the regional appeal courts began operating. Article 307, Article 308, Article 315, Article 317, and the relevant parts of Article 318 of the former Code of Criminal Procedure, in force at the material time, read as follows:
Grounds for appeal on points of law
“An appeal on points of law may not concern any issue other than the allegation of unlawfulness of the impugned judgment.
Non-application or erroneous application of a legal rule shall constitute unlawfulness.”
Instances of unlawfulness
Unlawfulness is deemed to be manifest in the following cases:
Where the court is not established in accordance with the law;
Where a judge who has been involved in the decision-making process was barred by statute from participating;
Where a judge, against whom a motion to disqualify him on the basis of a valid doubt submitted and accepted, or rejected unlawfully, has been involved in the decision-making process;
Where a court considers that it has jurisdiction over a case in contravention of the legislation;
Where a hearing has been held in the absence of the public prosecutor or other persons whose presence during the hearings is required by law;
Breach of the requirement to render a public judgment in cases where oral hearings are held;
Where the judgment does not contain reasoning;
Where the judgment has restricted the defence rights as regards crucial issues in the judgment.”
Dismissal of an appeal owing to inadmissibility by the court which delivered the judgment
“In the event that an appeal is lodged after the expiry of a time-limit, or is lodged in respect of a judgment that is not open to appeal, or an appellant does not have the right to appeal, the court whose judgment has been appealed against dismisses that appeal.
An appellant may, within one week of being served with that decision, ask the Court of Cassation to deliver a decision on that matter. In that case, the file will be sent to the Court of Cassation. However, suspension of the enforcement of a sentence shall not be granted on that basis.”
Dismissal of an appeal by the Court of Cassation
“In the event of an appeal being made orally or in writing:
In the event that the Court of Cassation finds that an appeal has not been made, orally or in writing, within the time-limit, or that a judgment is not open to appeal, or that an appellant has no right to appeal, it shall dismiss that request; otherwise, it will pursue its examination.”
Hearings [before the Court of Cassation] in the context of examining offences punishable by heavy penalties
“The Court of Cassation may, of its own motion or upon a request contained in an appeal, decide to hold a hearing when examining offences punishable by heavy penalties (ağır cezaya müteallik hükümler). An accused or his council –upon the latter’s request– shall be informed of the date of the hearing.
...”
Article 40 of the new Code of Criminal Procedure, in force as of 1 June 2005, provides, in so far as relevant, as follows:
Restoration of the status quo ante (Eski hale getirme)
“A person who has failed to comply with a time-limit through no fault of his own may ask for restoration of the status quo ante.”
Article 299 of the new Code of Criminal Procedure, in force as of 1 June 2005, provides, in so far as relevant as follows:
“The Court of Cassation shall, of its own motion or upon a request contained in an appeal lodged by a defendant or an intervening party, decide to hold a hearing when examining judgments that concern ten years of imprisonment or more.”
Article 311 § 1 of the new Code of Criminal Procedure, entitled “Grounds for reopening criminal proceedings in favour of convicted persons”, reads as follows:
“Criminal proceedings terminated by a final judgment shall be re-examined by way of reopening the proceedings in favour of convicted persons if:
a)  it is understood that a document used during the trial that affected the judgment was false;
b)  it is understood that a witness or an expert who testified under oath gave false evidence or voted against the convicted person in a way that affected the judgment;
c)  one of the judges who [was on the bench that] convicted the person was at fault in relation to the performance of his or her duties to an extent that necessitated his or her criminal prosecution or conviction, save for in cases where the fault was attributable to the convicted person;
d)  a civil court judgment that was relied on as the basis for the criminal conviction has been rendered null and void by another final judgment;
e)  new facts or new evidence are presented which either alone or in relation to the previous evidence may lead to the acquittal of the person who was convicted, or to his conviction on the basis of a more lenient criminal-law provision;
f)  the European Court of Human Rights finds a violation of a right protected by the Convention and its Protocols and establishes that the criminal conviction is based on that violation. In that case, a request to reopen the proceedings may be made within one year of the date of the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights becoming final.
...”