The case originated in an application (no. 11691/06) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Vladimir Vasilyevich Gavrilov (“the applicant”), on 10 March 2006.
The applicant was represented by Ms E.V. Boyko, a lawyer practising in Simferopol. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently, Mr I. Lishchyna of the Ministry of Justice.
On 10 April 2013 the application was communicated to the Government. Mrs G. Yudkivska, the judge elected in respect of Ukraine, was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28 of the Rules of Court). The President of the Fifth Section decided to appoint Mr S. Goncharenko to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 1(b)).
The applicant, a retired military officer, was born in 1947 and lives in the city of Simferopol, Ukraine.
.  In December 2004 the applicant instituted proceedings before the Simferopol Garrison Military Court against a local military enlistment office seeking an order to recalculate his pension.
.  On 20 May 2005 the court found against the applicant. On 11 August 2005, following his appeal, the Navy Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the first-instance court.
.  On 30 August 2005 the applicant appealed on points of law.
.  On 17 October 2005 the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine allowed the applicant a time-limit until 1 November 2005 to rectify the procedural shortcomings of his appeal on points of law. The relevant part of the decision reads as follows:
“The [present] appeal on points of law does not comply with the requirements laid down in Article 213 of the Code of Administrative Justice, as the applicant failed to pay the court fee and to provide a number of copies of the appeal on points of law corresponding to the number of persons involved in the proceedings ...
[The court decides to] set for Gavrilov V.V. a deadline of 1 November 2005 for rectifying the shortcomings of the appeal on points of law submitted by him.
[The court brings to] the attention of Gavrilov V.V. that if he fails to rectify the above shortcomings, in accordance with Article 108 of the Code of Administrative Justice, the appeal on points of law will be returned to the applicant and considered not submitted.”
.  The applicant dispatched his rectified appeal on points of law by registered post on 24 October 2005. It appears that the applicant resubmitted several copies of the appeal dated 30 August 2005 accompanied, in accordance with the instructions of the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine, with proof of payment of the court fee.
.  According to the acknowledgment of receipt form, the letter was received by the court registry on 27 October 2005.
.  On 7 November 2005 the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine adopted a decision which stated, inter alia, as follows:
“Gavrilov V.V. failed to rectify the shortcomings indicated in the ruling [of 17 October 2005] within the time-limit granted by the court, the appeal on points of law should, therefore, be considered as not submitted and be returned to the applicant.”
.  On 10 November 2005 the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine adopted another decision, the relevant part of which read as follows:
“When the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine received the [applicant’s] appeal on points of law, it was established that the above appeal on points of law had been lodged outside the statutory time-limit for lodging such an appeal as provided for by Article 212 of the Code of Administrative Justice ... In particular the challenged ruling of the Navy Court of Appeal was delivered on 11 August 2005, the appeal on points of law was dated 30 August 2005, and, according to the postmark, was dispatched to the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine on 24 October 2005, the applicant failed to submit a request for an extension of the time-limit for lodging an appeal on points of law, his appeal on points of law should therefore be left without examination.”
The relevant extracts from the Code, in force at the material time, read as follows:
“9. A time-limit is not considered to have been missed, where before its expiry a claim, a complaint or other documents ... have been deposited by post ...”
“2. An appeal on points of law against a judicial decision should be lodged within one month of the entry into force of [the relevant] decision of a court of appeal, except when this Code provides otherwise ...
An appeal on points of law lodged after the expiry of the period set up in paragraph 2 of this Article should be left without examination unless a court of cassation at a request of a person who has lodged an appeal on points of law finds grounds to restore the time-limit ...”
“1.  An appeal on points of law shall be lodged in writing.
An appeal on points of law shall include:
...
A document confirming payment of the court fee and a number of copies of the appeal on points of law corresponding to the number of persons who are taking part in the proceedings shall be attached to the appeal on points of law.”
“1.  Parties to the proceedings ... have the right to challenge in the light of exceptional circumstances before the Supreme Court of Ukraine judicial decisions in administrative cases after [those decisions] have been reviewed in cassation, as well as the decisions delivered by a court of cassation ...”
“1.  Judicial decisions in administrative cases may be reviewed in the light of exceptional circumstances by the Supreme Court of Ukraine if they are appealed against on the [following] grounds:
(1)  divergent application of the law by a cassation court (or courts);
(2)  a finding by an international judicial authority, whose jurisdiction has been recognised by Ukraine, that a [domestic] judicial decision is in conflict with the international commitments of Ukraine.”