The case concerns under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (d) of the Convention the alleged unfairness of the criminal proceedings conducted against the applicant on account of the manner in which the principal evidence was obtained and used against him and in view of the refusal of the domestic courts to question in court the only potential defence witness.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Zestaphoni. The applicant was represented by Mr L. Kupatadze, a lawyer practising in Tbilisi.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr B. Dzamashvili of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 3 March 2006 T.M., an officer from the anti-drug unit at the Special Operations Department of the Ministry of the Interior (hereinafter “the SOD”), prepared a report stating that, after checking operational information, he had learned that someone identified as Lavrenti Bakradze – who was originally from the city of Zestaphoni but was currently residing in Tbilisi at a certain address – was a drug addict. That person had been systematically procuring, storing and selling narcotic substances. In the same report it was noted that on 3 March 2006 at around 10 p.m. he would be at home and would have a large quantity of Subutex pills on him. Criminal proceedings were immediately initiated against the applicant under Article 260 § 3 (a) of the Criminal Code in respect of the unlawful purchase, storage and sale of drugs in particularly large amounts.
On the same date at 9 p.m. a group of SOD officers was dispatched to the address indicated in the above report. SOD officers entered the applicant’s flat at around 10 pm. The search of the flat started at 10.05 p.m. and lasted until 11.30 p.m. According to the search report, the applicant was denied, with reference to Article 102 § 4 of the Criminal Code of Procedure (hereinafter “the CCP”), his right to invite attesting witnesses to be present at the search, which was carried out by three officers (D.J., L.Kh., and T.M.) in exigent circumstances (გადაუდებელი შემთხვევა), without a search warrant, in view of the allegedly real risk of the applicant hiding and destroying narcotic substances.
Among the items recovered in the search were twenty-six and a half Subutex pills found in a water pipe connecting the kitchen with the bathroom. According to the search report, after the search had been completed and “the risks had ceased to exist”, the applicant was given the opportunity to request the presence of attesting witnesses, but he declined.
Immediately after the search of the flat a search of the applicant’s person took place. Two Subutex pills were found on the applicant’s person. According to the report on the search and arrest of the applicant, the applicant sustained bruising to his face while resisting arrest. The same report noted that the applicant had been arrested in flagrante delicto at 10 p.m.; that he had been transferred to a police station at 12.45 a.m.; that he had been denied the right to invite attesting witnesses to attend the search in view of the real risk of his hiding or destroying narcotic substances; and that he had signed the report without making any remarks regarding the accuracy of its content. A subsequent search of the applicant’s vehicle did not uncover any unlawful items.
On 4 March 2006 a forensic examination undertaken by the investigating authorities established that the Subutex pills discovered during the searches of the applicant’s flat and person (“the searches”) contained 0.228 grams of buprenorphine. The applicant was charged with the unlawful purchase and possession of a particularly large quantity of drugs – an offence under Article 260 § 3 (a) of the Criminal Code of Georgia. During his subsequent questioning as an accused he protested his innocence, asserting that the drugs had not belonged to him. He challenged the official version of events, stating that his flat had been broken into by the police. Notably, according to the applicant, on that evening he had been at home with his friend, L.Ts. At around 09.40 p.m. he had heard someone knocking on his door. He had looked through the door’s peephole and seen a number of people, who had told him that his brother-in-law had been in a car accident and that he needed help. They had asked him to open the door; however, he had become scared and instead had called the police. Shortly afterwards, he had seen an armed person trying to gain access to his balcony from a neighbouring flat. The latter had forced his way into the flat by kicking the applicant in the head. The applicant had lost consciousness. Upon regaining consciousness, he had been lying face down on the floor with someone’s feet on his back, while his friend, L.Ts., had been locked in the kitchen. The applicant submitted that he had signed a number of documents after being transferred to the SOD, without being allowed to read them properly. He also stated that he had requested the attendance of independent witnesses and of a lawyer, but that that request had been refused.
On the same date a supervising prosecutor lodged applications with the Tbilisi District Court for the three searches of 3 March 2006 (which he claimed had been urgent) to be validated. The court examined the applications by means of a written procedure (without allowing the applicant to submit observations) before declaring that the searches had been lawful. It concluded that it could be seen from the prosecutor’s applications that the searches had been conducted because of urgent need, and had complied with the rules of criminal procedure. The decisions on the applications, written in a brief and non-detailed manner, did not refer to any factual circumstances and did not contain any reasoning. The decisions specified a seventy-two hour period in which to lodge an appeal. It appears from the case file that the applicant did not avail himself of that opportunity.
A drugs test conducted on 6 March 2006, revealed that at the time of his arrest the applicant had not been under the influence of drugs.
On 12 April 2006, after the applicant had undergone a forensic examination to determine if he was addicted to drugs, an expert concluded that the applicant was indeed a drug addict and that he should be subjected to compulsory treatment for his addiction.
On 23 October 2006 the Tbilisi City Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to fourteen years’ imprisonment. The applicant’s conviction was based on (i) the statements of D.J. and T.M., the two police officers who had arrested the applicant and had conducted the above-mentioned searches, (ii) the reports on the applicant’s arrest and the ensuing searches, and (iii) the results of his subsequent forensic examination.
During the proceedings the applicant requested, in connection with the circumstances of the arrest and the searches, that his neighbours and his friend, L.Ts., be questioned. His request was refused on procedural grounds. He also gave a detailed statement maintaining his innocence; however, the trial court concluded that that statement was not supported by the circumstances of the case and had been made up for the sole purpose of evading criminal responsibility.
The applicant appealed against his conviction. He complained that neither L.Ts. (who had witnessed his arrest) nor his neighbours had been questioned by either the investigator in charge or by the first-instance judge. He furthermore claimed that, given that he had been handcuffed right at the outset of the police operation, there had been no risk of his destroying the evidence, which meant that independent witnesses such as his neighbours should have been allowed to attend the search. In that connection, he maintained that the searches had been unlawful as there had been no exigent circumstances to justify their conduct in the absence of a judicial authorisation.
By a decision of 4 September 2007 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal upheld the applicant’s conviction in full. As regards the alleged unlawfulness of the searches, the court held that there had been a real risk of the applicant hiding or otherwise destroying the evidence; therefore, the searches had been conducted lawfully, in exigent circumstances. As for the applicant’s criticism of the first-instance court’s refusal to question L.Ts. and the applicant’s neighbours, the appeal court simply concluded that the refusal had been lawful.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, maintaining his argument that the courts had not examined any evidence supporting his version of the physical circumstances of the searches. On 9 October 2008 the Supreme Court upheld the conviction.
For the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure of Georgia, see Bregvadze v. Georgia [Committee] (no. 49284/09, § 17, 17 January 2019), and Megrelishvili v. Georgia [Committee] (no. 30364/09, § 23, 7 May 2020).