The case originated in an application (no. 33060/10) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Austrian national, Mr Helmut Blum (“the applicant”), on 11 June 2010.
The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador H. Tichy, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry for Europe, Integration and Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained in particular concerning the lack of an oral hearing in disciplinary proceedings against him.
On 19 December 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 5 December 2014 the parties were invited to submit further written observations on the admissibility and merits of the application in the light of the Supreme Court’s judgment of 20 May 2014.
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Linz. He has been a lawyer since 1986 and he practises in Linz.
In 2006 criminal investigation proceedings were pending before the Linz Regional Court against O.G., a regional politician from Upper Austria, and a Moldovan citizen, T.S., who was in detention pending trial. Both were suspected of human trafficking. O.G. was also suspected of fraud. During the investigation proceedings, T.S. accused O.G. of having accepted money for facilitating the illegal entry or transit of nineteen nationals from Moldova to Austria or through Austria to Italy.
E.W., an association of which O.G. was president, commissioned the applicant to represent T.S. in the criminal proceedings. The applicant’s fees were covered by this association. Having accepted the mandate the applicant remained in close contact with O.G. and transmitted to him information concerning the criminal investigation proceedings against T.S. He did not represent O.G. in the proceedings.
On 17 August 2006 the applicant visited T.S. in prison in order to prepare for the trial on that day. During this visit an affidavit (Eidesstättige Erklärung), prepared in advance by the applicant, was signed by T.S. in which she submitted that her former allegations against O.G. had been untrue.
On the same day, the Linz Regional Court convicted T.S. of the crimes as charged and sentenced her to fifteen months’ imprisonment. T.S. did not retract the statements she had made to the investigating authorities, nor was the affidavit submitted to the court. Instead, the applicant transferred it to the lawyers of O.G.
On 21 August 2006 the lawyers of O.G. transferred T.S.’s affidavit to the public prosecutor to be taken into consideration in the proceedings against O.G.
On 31 October 2006 and 4 December 2006, in the course of the criminal proceedings against O.G., the judge of the Linz Regional Court reported to the Upper Austrian Bar Association (Rechtsanwaltskammer, hereinafter “the Bar Association”) that he suspected the applicant of double representation. The judge stated that the applicant had kept close contact with O.G. and had transferred to him information concerning the investigation proceedings regarding T.S. The judge further stated that the applicant had asked T.S. to submit the affidavit, whose contents were untrue but in favour of O.G., to the court.
On 11 July 2007, upon a request by the Linz public prosecutor, the Linz Regional Court instituted a preliminary investigation into allegations of attempting to aid the perpetrator (versuchte Begünstigung), false testimony (Falsche Beweisaussage) and falsifying evidence (Fälschung eines Beweismittels) against the applicant, and informed the Bar Association.
On 17 July 2007, 17 August 2007 and 6 September 2007 the Linz public prosecutor requested that the court conduct further preliminary investigations in the case, in particular the questioning of several witnesses and to put the applicant on the stand. The Linz Regional Court took the requested evidence and heard evidence from the applicant.
On 24 September 2007, the Linz public prosecutor requested the inclusion of a further file regarding the falsification of evidence in a case not related to that of O.G. The file was included in the preliminary investigation against the applicant and the requested evidence was gathered.
Because of the reform of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which entered into force on 1 January 2008, the investigating judge transmitted the file to the Linz public prosecutor, who took charge of the case.
On an unspecified date the Linz public prosecutor decided not to file a formal indictment (Anklageschrift, Strafantrag) against the applicant until a final court decision in the case against O.G. had been taken. There is no indication that a formal decision on the postponement was taken on this matter or sent to the applicant.
On 4 February 2009 the Linz public prosecutor ordered the suspension of the criminal proceedings against the applicant since the criminal proceedings against O.G. were still pending. Again, it appears that no formal decision was sent to the applicant in this regard.
On 5 May 2009 the applicant lodged a request with the Linz public prosecutor for the discontinuation of the investigation proceedings.
On 6 July 2009 the criminal proceedings against the applicant were resumed and he was charged with the offence of attempted aiding of the perpetrator and falsifying evidence.
The Linz Regional Court summoned the applicant on 17 July 2009 for trial on 22 September 2009. The applicant lodged a request to have more witnesses questioned on 10 September 2009 and submitted a statement.
On 22 September 2009 the first hearing in the criminal proceedings against the applicant was held before the Linz Regional Court.
The next hearing was held on 24 November 2009. The hearing was adjourned until the final decision in the case of O.G. had been taken.
As the criminal proceedings against O.G. were still pending, the Linz Regional Court continued criminal proceedings against the applicant and a further hearing was held on 27 April 2011, with a new judge presiding.
On 17 June 2011 the Linz Regional Court acquitted the applicant on all counts.
On 8 November 2011 the Linz Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal by the public prosecutor. This judgment was served on the applicant on 30 November 2011.
Following the notice of the investigating judge of 31 October 2006 the Disciplinary Prosecutor (Disziplinaranwalt) on 13 December 2006 applied to introduce disciplinary proceedings against the applicant on charges of double representation and falsification of evidence.
Accordingly, on an unspecified date, the Disciplinary Council of the Bar Association (Disziplinarrat der Oberösterreichischen Rechtsanwaltskammer, hereinafter “the Disciplinary Council”) initiated disciplinary proceedings against the applicant.
On 24 September 2007 the Disciplinary Council held an oral hearing and adjourned the disciplinary proceedings until the criminal proceedings at the Linz Regional Court had become final.
On 25 September 2007 the Disciplinary Prosecutor applied for the withdrawal of the applicant’s right to represent clients before the Linz courts in criminal cases as an interim measure.
The applicant was informed of this application and submitted his written comments on 4 October 2007 and 30 October 2007 in which he opposed the measure.
On 17 December 2007 the Disciplinary Council, without holding a hearing, withdrew the applicant’s right to represent before the Linz District Court, the Linz Regional Court and the Linz Court of Appeal in criminal law cases as an interim measure by virtue of section 19 of the Disciplinary Act (Disziplinarstatut für Rechtsanwälte und Rechtsanwaltsanwärter). It held that because of the accusations against the applicant the imposed interim measure was proportionate.
The applicant appealed on 5 February 2008 against this interim measure and complained that the preconditions for it had not been met, that the Disciplinary Council had failed to hear evidence and that it had not held an oral hearing. Furthermore the measure had not been proportionate to the accusations.
On 28 August 2008 the Appeals Board (Oberste Berufungs- und Disziplinarkommission) dismissed the applicant’s appeal without having held an oral hearing. It found that it was the task of the criminal courts to hear evidence. The applicant had submitted his comments and had therefore been able to sufficiently present his arguments. Moreover, the measure imposed upon the applicant had been proportionate.
On 28 October 2008 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Constitutional Court (Verfassungsgerichtshof) and again complained about the lack of an oral hearing and that the measure was disproportionate.
On 25 November 2008 the applicant lodged a request for information (Auskunftsbegehren) with the Disciplinary Board and asked if the interim measure of 17 December 2007 would automatically expire after six months. If not, he asked to have the interim measure withdrawn as the criminal proceedings were still pending. He claimed that it was disproportionate to sustain the interim measure over such a long period of time.
On 2 December 2008 the Disciplinary Board replied to the request of 25 November 2008 and informed the applicant, that the interim measure would not expire automatically but would remain in force.
On 1 December 2009 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint and held that the reasoning of the authorities had been sufficient and therefore the imposed measure was not arbitrary. Furthermore it found that the proceedings had overall been fair. As the preliminary measure imposed on the applicant had not been a “criminal charge” in the sense of Article 6 of the Convention, an oral hearing had not been compulsory.
On 9 December 2010 the Bar Association asked for information about the state of the criminal proceedings. A written reply was sent on 14 January 2011.
On 17 June 2011, after the applicant had been acquitted on all counts by the Linz Regional Court, he lodged another request with the Bar Association to have the interim measure withdrawn referring to the court’s decision.
This request was dismissed by the Bar Association as the public prosecutor had appealed against the decision of the Linz Regional Court.
The applicant appealed on 18 July 2011 against this decision and complained about the length of time the imposed measure had already been in force.
On 14 November 2011 the interim measure imposed on the applicant, prohibiting him from representing clients before the Linz courts in criminal cases was lifted by the Bar Association.
On 30 January 2012 he was summoned to a hearing by the Disciplinary Council on 27 February 2012.
The applicant filed statements in preparation of the hearing on 8 and 22 February 2012 denying that there was a case of double representation and referring to the decision of the Linz Court of Appeal of 8 November 2011.
On 11 March 2013 the Disciplinary Council of the Bar Association found that the applicant had not knowingly organised for T.S. to submit an affidavit that was untrue. However, he had acted in double representation within the meaning of section 10 of the Lawyers Act (Rechtanwaltsordnung) in criminal proceedings, as he had acted in the interests of O.G. and the association E.W. as well as in those of T.S., whom he had represented. The Disciplinary Council stated that the fact that the disciplinary proceedings had lasted almost seven years and the fact that the right of the applicant to represent before certain courts in criminal cases had been withdrawn for about four years had to be taken into account. Therefore it found it reasonable to impose a fine of 1,000 euros (EUR) in addition to another disciplinary fine he already had been ordered to pay for another case of violation of the Lawyers Act.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law and an appeal against the fine.
The Supreme Court, acting as the highest court in disciplinary proceedings against lawyers, held a hearing on 20 May 2014 and dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law, but reduced the additional disciplinary fine to EUR 500. It explicitly mentioned the length of disciplinary proceedings as a violation of the applicant’s rights under Article 6 of the Convention and took account of the fact that the applicant’s right to represent before the Linz Courts in criminal cases had been withdrawn for four years. The Supreme Court found that a different set of disciplinary proceedings had been already pending when the present incident occurred. Therefore, the applicant should have acted with special caution. A total waiver of the fine would not be adequate in this situation.
The Supreme Court’s judgment was served on 11 August 2014 on the applicant.
Section 10(1) of the Lawyers Act (Rechtsanwaltsordung) provides that a practising lawyer is not obliged to accept a mandate from a party and that he/she can refuse a mandate without giving reasons. Furthermore, he/she has a duty to refuse to represent or to advise if he represents the opponent in the same case or has represented the opponent in a previous case, which is connected to the present case. Furthermore he/she must not represent or advise both parties.
Section 1(1) of the Disciplinary Act (Disziplinarstatut für Rechtsanwälte und Rechtsanwaltsanwärter), provides as follows:
“A lawyer who negligently or intentionally breaches his or her professional duties or whose professional or private conduct adversely affects the reputation or standing of the profession shall be deemed to have committed a disciplinary offence.”
The other relevant sections of the Disciplinary Act in force at the material time read as follows:
“16(1) Disciplinary sanctions shall take the form of:
a written reprimand;
a fine of up to EUR 45,000;
a ban on practising as a lawyer of up to one year or, in the case of trainee lawyers, extension of the period of practical work experience by a maximum of one year;
striking off the register
...
(6) In imposing a sanction, particular account should be taken of the degree of culpability and the resulting damage, particularly to members of the public; when determining the amount of the fine, the person’s income and financial situation should also be taken into consideration.
...
19(1) The Disciplinary Council may adopt interim measures in respect of a lawyer where:
criminal proceedings are pending against him or her;
the lawyer has been finally convicted of a punishable offence by a court; or
the lawyer has been struck off the register as a disciplinary sanction
and the interim measure is necessary in view of the nature and seriousness of the disciplinary proceedings against the lawyer concerned, on account of the potential for serious damage to, in particular, the interests of the public or the standing of the profession.
(2) Before a decision is taken to adopt an interim measure, the lawyer concerned must have been afforded an opportunity to comment on the accusations against him or her and on the conditions required for ordering an interim measure. Derogation may be made from this requirement if a delay would entail danger; however, in this case the lawyer must be given an opportunity to comment immediately after the decision is adopted.
(3) Interim measures shall take the form of:
in the case of lawyers ...
(b) withdrawal of the right to act as representatives before certain courts or administrative authorities, or before all courts and administrative authorities ...
(d) a temporary ban on practising as a lawyer ...
(4) Interim measures shall be lifted, amended or replaced where it transpires that the conditions required for ordering them do not apply or no longer apply, or the circumstances have altered substantially. An interim measure ordered in respect of a lawyer entailing a temporary ban on practising on account of pending criminal proceedings against him or her shall cease to be applied after six months at the latest. However, it may be extended by a decision of the Disciplinary Council where it is essential in order to prevent serious damage to the interests of the public; each extension shall also cease to apply after a maximum of six months.
(5) When the disciplinary proceedings are finally terminated any interim measures adopted shall in any event cease to apply, without prejudice to section 72(3) ...
(7) Where a disciplinary sanction is imposed, any interim measures shall be taken into account in the appropriate manner. The period of a temporary ban on practising as a lawyer shall count towards the length of a ban on practising imposed as a disciplinary sanction; the period for which trainee lawyers are temporarily barred from admittance to practical work experience shall count towards the period of any ban on admittance imposed as the result of a disciplinary sanction.
23(1) ...
(2) If criminal proceedings are being conducted relating to the same facts as those underlying the disciplinary offence, no disciplinary decision can be issued prior to the final conclusion of the criminal proceedings conducted because of that offence ...”