The case originated in an application (no. 24430/94) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Austrian national,  Bernhard Lanz (“the applicant”), on 23 March 1992.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented before the Court by Mr. R. Soyer, a lawyer practising in Vienna (Austria). The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador H. Winkler, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that in criminal proceedings against him, his contacts with his defence counsel during the detention on remand had been under surveillance, that the written observations of the Procurator General on his plea of nullity and of the Senior Public Prosecutor on his appeal had not been communicated to him and that in the proceedings concerning his requests for release the prosecution made submissions to which he had no possibility to reply.
On 21 May 1998 the Commission decided to communicate to the respondent Government the above complaints by the applicant and declared the remainder of the application inadmissible
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court.
By a decision of 30 January 2001 the Court declared the applicant’s remaining complaints admissible.
As from 1 November 2001 the application was reallocated to First Section of the Court. Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court.
Neither the applicant nor the Government filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
On 25 October 1991 the Investigating Judge at the Graz Regional Court (Landesgericht) issued a warrant of arrest against the applicant on suspicion of having committed fraud and falsification of documents. The suspicion related to the applicant’s business activities, and in particular two real estate investment projects. The Investigating Judge issued a search warrant ordering a house search at the premises of the SDBV company, a private company (Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung) for which the applicant acted as general manager. The seizure of documents relating to the real estate investment projects was also ordered. That same day the warrant, search and seizure were executed, the latter in the presence of the Investigating Judge. Later in the day the Investigating Judge questioned the applicant and ordered his detention on remand as he found that there existed a danger of the applicant absconding and collusion. As regards the risk of collusion, the Investigating Judge found that there was the danger that the applicant would attempt to influence the employees of the SDBV company and to remove documents which had not been found at the house search.
On 27 October 1991 the applicant requested his release from detention on remand.
On 6 November 1991 the Review Chamber (Ratskammer) of the Graz Regional Court, after an oral hearing in the presence of the applicant, his defence counsel and the Public Prosecutor, dismissed his request. The Review Chamber found that no danger of absconding existed. However, the danger of collusion continued to exist as the applicant might try to influence witnesses not yet heard and to remove any traces of the offence. There was also a danger of his committing further offences. On 20 November 1991 the applicant appealed. At an unspecified date also the Public Prosecutor appealed, arguing that detention on remand should also be based on the risk of the applicant absconding.
Meanwhile, on 11 November 1991, the Investigating Judge ordered that the applicant’s contacts with his defence counsel should take place under the surveillance of the court because of the existence of a danger of collusion. The Investigating Judge found that this measure was necessary because co-suspects were still at large, several witnesses had not yet been heard and there was a risk that the applicant could influence them. The Investigating Judge stated that the validity of this order would expire at the latest when the two-month statutory time-limit for detention on remand based on the risk of collusion would end. The applicant appealed against this decision. He submitted that he did not oppose this measure in principle, however, the measure constituted an unnecessary limitation on his defence rights and the Investigating Judge had failed to order this measure within 14 days as prescribed by law.
On 21 November 1991 the Review Chamber dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the Investigating Judge’s search warrant and the order for surveillance of the applicant’s contacts with his defence counsel. As regards the complaint about the surveillance of the applicant’s contacts with counsel, the Review Chamber found the Investigating Judge’s decision to be correct. This order did not involve any criticism of counsel or any reproach of conduct contrary to law or the disciplinary rules of the members of the bar, but merely had the purpose of preventing any contact whatsoever with third persons in order not to endanger the success of the criminal investigation. The present case concerned the complicated business relations of the SDBV and several other companies managed by the applicant, and the flow of money between them. Further witnesses could only be identified after all the documents seized had been examined and the applicant was to be prevented from influencing them. Furthermore, the decision had been taken within the time limit prescribed by S. 193 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Review Chamber also found the applicant’s complaint that he did not have sufficient access to his case-file unfounded. The Investigating Judge had granted access to the file to the official receiver of the SDBV company and the applicant’s defence counsel, the latter also being given the possibility to make copies of the documents in the file. The applicant’s counsel visited him repeatedly and could have given him copies if he so wished. Moreover, when questioned by the Investigating Judge, the applicant was informed of the contents of the file and about the statements of witnesses already heard.
On 28 November 1991 the Graz Senior Public Prosecutor commented on the applicant’s appeal of 20 November 1991. These comments were not served on the applicant.
On 12 December 1991 the Graz Court of Appeal (Oberlandesgericht) dismissed the appeal lodged by the applicant but granted the Public Prosecutor’s appeal. It found that a serious suspicion existed against the applicant and referred to the details of the criminal investigation. There also existed a danger that the applicant would abscond.
On 15 January 1992 the Review Chamber, after having held an oral hearing, dismissed a further request of the applicant for release. On 13 February 1992 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal. On 11 March 1992 the Review Chamber dismissed a further request for release by the applicant.
After his conviction on 21 June 1992, the applicant filed further requests for release from detention on remand. Such requests were refused by the Review Chamber on 3 February 1993 and 6 April 1993. Appeals were dismissed by the Court of Appeal on 18 February 1993 and 29 April 1993 respectively.
On 14 February 1992 the Graz Public Prosecutor filed a bill of indictment against the applicant charging him with aggravated fraud.
On 21 April 1992 the trial against the applicant started before the Graz Regional Court. It lasted until 21 June 1992. In the course of the trial the Regional Court heard 52 witnesses, some of them repeatedly on the applicant’s request. Furthermore 5 experts on book-keeping, building and construction matters, real estate assessment, medicine and psychiatry were heard. The applicant frequently requested that the trial be adjourned for lengthy periods and, towards the end of the trial, requested that the trial be repeated or that the case be remitted to the Investigating Judge. On 21 June 1992 the court convicted the applicant of aggravated fraud and sentenced him to four and a half years’ imprisonment. It also acquitted the applicant of an additional charge of fraud raised by the Public Prosecutor at the trial.
On 9 September 1992 the judgment of some 150 pages and the transcript of the trial of some 1400 pages were served on the parties.
On 1 October 1992 the Public Prosecutor filed a plea of nullity and appeal against that part of the sentence concerning the applicant’s acquittal. On 5 October 1992 the applicant filed a plea of nullity and appeal.
On 22 October 1992 the applicant commented on the plea of nullity lodged by the Public Prosecutor. Since he claimed that until the expiration of the time-limit for filing his plea of nullity the defence had had insufficient possibilities to inspect the file, the Supreme Court, on 24 December 1992, decided that the applicant should be granted a new time- limit for filing his plea of nullity and appeal.
On 19 February 1993 the applicant again filed a plea of nullity and an appeal against sentence. The writ repeated in substance the arguments raised earlier.
On 30 March 1993 the Graz Public Prosecutor withdrew the plea of nullity.
On 27 April 1993 the Procurator General (Generalprokurator) submitted the following comments on the applicant’s plea of nullity:
"In the view of the Procurator General the plea of nullity of the accused Bernhard Lanz can be dealt with under Section 285d of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The transmission of a decision is requested. The plea of nullity lodged by the Public Prosecutor’s Office has been withdrawn by the attached declaration of 30 March 1993."
On 9 June 1993 the Supreme Court, sitting in camera, rejected as inadmissible the applicant’s plea of nullity.
On an unspecified date, the Senior Public Prosecutor submitted written comments on the applicant’s appeal.
On 30 August 1993 the Graz Court of Appeal, after an oral hearing in which the applicant and his defence counsel participated, granted the Public Prosecutor’s appeal against the applicant’s sentence and increased it to five and a half years’ imprisonment. In weighing the mitigating and aggravating circumstances, the court found that a higher sentence was called for.
The following account of the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Strafprozeßordnung) is based on the law in force until 1 January 1994.
According to S. 12 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Review Chamber at the First Instance Court supervises all measures taken by the Investigating Judge in the course of preliminary investigations.
According to S. 45 § 3 a person remanded in custody may meet his defence counsel in the absence of the Investigating Judge. However, if detention on remand has been ordered on the ground of a danger of collusion, the Investigating Judge may, during the first 14 days of the detention, be present when the remand prisoner meets his defence counsel. If due to specific circumstances a danger exists that contact with defence counsel may interfere with evidence, the Investigating Judge may order the extension of such surveillance until the bill of indictment is served. Surveillance of contact with defence counsel may only be exercised as long as the detention on remand is based on a danger of collusion (SS. 180 and 193 § 3).
Under S. 180 §§ 1 and 2, a person may be held in detention on remand if he is seriously suspected of having committed a criminal offence and if there is a risk of his absconding, of collusion, or that the person might commit further offences. According to S. 193, detention may not last more than two months where its sole justification is the risk of collusion; it may not last more than six months where one of the other grounds is relied upon. The Court of Appeal may, however, extend detention if so requested by the Investigating Judge or the Public Prosecutor, and if the difficulty or the scope of the investigation makes it necessary. In such cases the maximum duration of detention is three months where the measure is based on a risk of collusion alone, and one to two years if the term of imprisonment which the suspect risks is ten years or more, for the other grounds.
By virtue of SS. 194 and 195, it is open to the suspect to apply for release at any time. Such an application and any appeal against a decision ordering detention on remand must be examined by the Review Chamber at a private hearing in the presence of the accused or his defence counsel. According to S. 114, there is a further appeal against decisions of the Review Chamber to the Court of Appeal.
Under S. 285 (d) § 1 a plea of nullity may be rejected by the Supreme Court after deliberations in private if the court unanimously finds that the complaint should be dismissed as being manifestly ill-founded without any need for further deliberations.