The case originated in an application (no. 14085/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Yuryevich Smirnov (“the applicant”), on 26 February 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. Gorelishvili, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained of a violation of his right of access to a court.
By a decision of 6 July 2006 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in . He has no fixed place of residence or residence registration.
On 24 May 2002 the applicant asked to hire cutlery and a folding bed from the “Morion” hire agency. Having studied his passport, the manager replied that the company could not hire out anything to him because he had no residence registration.
On 12 August 2002 the applicant lodged a civil action against the “Morion” company, alleging unlawful denial of services. The statement of claim indicated that the applicant had no fixed place of residence and provided an address in  for correspondence.
On 9 October 2002 the Khoroshevskiy District Court stayed the applicant's claim because his place of residence had not been specified. He was invited to specify it by 11 November 2002, failing which his action would be declared inadmissible.
The applicant appealed against the decision of 9 October 2002, alleging an unlawful restriction on his right of access to a court guaranteed by Article 46 of the Russian Constitution on account of his inability to show that he had permanent residence at a specific place.
On 20 December 2002 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision.
On 5 April 2003 the applicant unsuccessfully attempted to subscribe to the services of the MTS telecommunications company. He was refused because he had no residence registration.
On 22 August 2003 he sued the MTS company and the cell phone vendor for subscription to a contract and compensation for non-pecuniary damage. He indicated the city of  as his place of residence and provided a poste restante address for correspondence.
On 8 September 2002 the Taganskiy District Court of Moscow stayed the applicant's claim due to his omission to indicate his address. He was instructed to rectify the omission within ten days, failing which his claim would be declared inadmissible.
The applicant received a copy of the decision by mail at the address indicated in his statement of claim.
The applicant appealed, submitting that he had indicated his address in the statement of claim.
On 18 November 2003 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 8 September 2003.
The RSFSR Code of Civil Procedure (“the old CCP”, in force until 1 February 2003) provided that a civil claim was to be filed with the court with territorial jurisdiction over the defendant's place of residence (Article 117).
The statement of claim was to specify, in particular, the plaintiff's name and place of residence. If such information was missing, the judge had to stay the proceedings and set a time-limit by which the plaintiff would remedy the defects. If the missing information was not supplied, the claim should be declared inadmissible (Articles 126 and 130).
The Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation of 14 November 2002 (“the new CCP”, in force from 1 February 2003) contains identical provisions in Articles 28, 131 § 2 and 136.
The Civil Code defines a place of residence as a place where a person permanently or predominantly lives (Article 20 § 1).
On 17 July 1995 the Russian Government approved the Regulations for registration of temporary and permanent residence of Russian citizens (no. 713). Section 3 of the Regulations defines a place of residence as a place where a person permanently or predominantly lives as an owner or under the terms of a tenancy contract or on other statutory grounds. Section 16 imposes a duty to seek residence registration within seven days of a change of place of residence. Moreover, section 9 imposes a duty to obtain registration at any address where a person intends to stay temporarily for longer than ten days. The person is required to file an application for registration and to submit an identity document, an application form and a document showing the legal basis for residence at the indicated address.