The case originated in an application (no. 1605/14) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Ivan Gogić (“the applicant”), on 18 December 2013.
The applicant was represented by Ms N. Owens, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant complained, in particular, of his lack of access to a court and a breach of his right to the peaceful enjoyment of possessions. He relied on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
On 31 March 2016 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1985 and lives in Zagreb.
On 7 January 2003 the applicant signed a contract as a professional basketball player (hereinafter “the contract”) with a basketball club, D. (hereinafter “the club”).
In 2005 the applicant asked the Competition Committee of the Croatian Basketball Federation (Povjerenstvo za natjecanje Hrvatskog košarkaškog saveza – hereinafter “the Committee”), the Federation’s regulatory body, to cancel his contract and that he be paid what he was owed for playing.
On 18 July 2005 the Committee allowed the applicant’s request, cancelled the contract and ordered the club to pay the applicant 14,500 euros (EUR) or 105,995 Croatian kunas (HRK).
The club lodged an appeal against the decision of 18 July 2005 with the Court of Arbitration of the Croatian Basketball Federation (Arbitraža Hrvatskog košarkaškog saveza; hereinafter “the Court of Arbitration”) and on 29 July 2005 that court upheld the decision of 18 July 2005.
The club failed to comply with the arbitration decision by paying the amount due to the applicant.
On 23 September 2008 the applicant brought a civil action in the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court (Općinski građanski sud u Zagrebu; hereinafter “the Municipal Court”) against the club, seeking payment of EUR 14,500 EUR or HRK 105,995 because the club had failed to comply with the arbitration decision.
On 8 June 2010 the Municipal Court held that the decision of the Court of Arbitration was an enforceable decision (ovršna isprava). It also stressed that the applicant’s claim constituted in substance an application for the enforcement of the decision of the Court of Arbitration, which was to be considered as an enforceable arbitration award (ovršna odluka arbitražnog suda) and which fell under the jurisdiction of the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu; hereinafter “the County Court”). It therefore declined jurisdiction in favour of that court.
After an appeal by the club, on 20 March 2012 the County Court quashed the first-instance court’s decision and declared the applicant’s action inadmissible on the grounds of res judicata. It agreed with the firstinstance court’s conclusion that decisions of the Croatian Basketball Federation constituted enforceable arbitration awards. However, the County Court held that the applicant’s claim could not be considered as constituting an application for enforcement, given that it had not been submitted in the correct manner. In view of its finding that the arbitration decision had the force of res judicata, the County Court dismissed the applicant’s civil action. It also ordered the applicant to pay the club HRK 11,459.50 in costs. That decision was served on the applicant’s representative on 18 June 2012.
On 6 July 2012, relying on the County Court’s decision the applicant lodged an application with that court (sitting as a court of first instance) for the enforcement of the decision of the Court of Arbitration.
On 11 September 2012 the County Court issued an enforcement order against the club, as the debtor.
The club then lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske), and on 14 November 2012 the Supreme Court quashed the enforcement order and declared the application for the enforcement inadmissible. It held that the Court of Arbitration was not an arbitration tribunal within the meaning of the relevant domestic law and that its decision did not constitute a valid basis for enforcement and could not be directly enforced.
On 14 February 2013 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint; on 20 June 2013 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) ruled it inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded.
The decision of the Constitutional Court was served on the applicant’s representative on 10 July 2013.
According to the relevant provisions of the Arbitration Act (Zakon o arbitraži, Official Gazette no. 88/2001), arbitration is a trial before an arbitral tribunal, regardless of whether it is organised or facilitated by an arbitration institution or not (section 2(1)(1)). An arbitral tribunal is a nonState body that draws its mandate to decide cases from an agreement between the parties concerned (section 2(1)(3)). The decision of the arbitral tribunal shall have, in respect of the parties, the force of a final judgment unless the parties have expressly agreed that it may be contested before an arbitral tribunal at a higher instance (section 31).
Under the relevant provisions of the Enforcement Act (Ovršni zakon, Official Gazette no. 112/2012, with further amendments), an enforceable decision of an arbitral tribunal is considered to constitute an enforceable title (section 23(3)).
According to the relevant provisions of the Statute of the Croatian Basketball Federation (Statut Hrvatskog košarkaškog saveza), the Federation’s Court of Arbitration is an independent body which decides on complaints against, inter alia, the decisions of the Committee (section 53(1)).
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedural Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette no. 53/1991, with further amendments) concerning the lodging of an appeal on points of law are set out in the case of Zubac v. Croatia [GC], no. 40160/12, §§ 33 and 101, 5 April 2018).
According to section 371 of the Obligations Act (Zakon o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette no. 53/1991, with further amendments), the general statutory limitation period for vindicating claims is five years.