The case originated in an application (no. 28052/13) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Oleg Petrovych Sabadash (“the applicant”), on 16 April 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr O. Shapovalov, a lawyer practising in Kherson. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained, in the main, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, about the public prosecutor’s unjustified intervention in the domestic civil proceedings and about the unjustified reopening of those proceedings. He also complained under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 that the final judgment in his favour had been quashed and his action dismissed.
On 23 August 2016 those complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Kherson.
Between May and September 2007 the applicant built an extension to the building in which his flats were located, attaching the roof of the extension to a balcony and wall belonging to the flat of his neighbours, Mr and Ms S., who lived upstairs. The lawfulness of his actions was contested by the authorities and his neighbours. In October 2007 his neighbours dismantled part of the impugned construction. In particular, they cut off part of the roof attached to their balcony and their wall. In December 2009 another part of the construction was dismantled by a specialised company on the instructions of the local authorities.
In October 2010 the applicant instituted civil proceedings against his neighbours in the Komsomolskyy District Court of Kherson, seeking compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage caused to him by their dismantling of part of the extension in October 2007. As to the pecuniary damage claimed, the applicant relied on Article 1166 of the Civil Code of 2003 (see paragraph 23 below).
On 14 July 2011 the District Court rejected the applicant’s compensation claim as wholly unsubstantiated, finding that the impugned extension had been constructed illegally and that the applicant had failed to prove that any damage had been caused to his property or to his construction material.
On 27 September 2011 the Kherson Regional Court of Appeal, having examined an appeal lodged by the applicant, quashed the judgment of 14 July 2011 and delivered a new judgment. It noted that the applicant’s neighbours had not denied that they had dismantled part of the extension and that they had not proved that the dismantled material belonging to the applicant had been returned to him or that it had been in a condition enabling it to be reused. Nor had they contested the amount of pecuniary damage allegedly caused to the applicant. The appellate court held that the applicant’s neighbours had acted without lawful authorisation and without having informed the applicant. Relying mainly on Article 1166 of the Civil Code of 2003, the appellate court awarded the applicant 9,659.36 Ukrainian hryvnias (UAH), the equivalent of about 890 euros (EUR) at the material time, for the pecuniary damage suffered, based on the cost of the construction material, and UAH 411.59, the equivalent of about EUR 40 at the material time, for court fees. The applicant’s claim in respect of nonpecuniary damage was rejected as unsubstantiated.
The appellate court’s judgment of 27 September 2011 became binding and enforceable on the same date (see paragraph 24 below).
No further appeal was lodged against the appellate court’s judgment of 27 September 2011 within the twenty-day period provided for in Article 325 of the Code of Civil Procedure of 2004 (see paragraph 24 below).
In March 2012 the applicant’s neighbours paid him the judgment debt in full.
On 5 April 2012 the Kherson regional deputy prosecutor lodged an appeal on points of law (“cassation appeal”, касаційна скарга) with the Higher Specialised Court in Civil and Criminal Matters (“the HSC”) against the appellate court’s judgment of 27 September 2011. He stated that he was intervening on behalf of the defendants because they were pensioners and were in a difficult financial situation, but provided no further explanation in that regard. The deputy prosecutor also asked the HSC to extend the timelimit for lodging such an appeal, arguing that the Kherson regional prosecutor’s office had learned of the contested judgment from an application which Ms S. had lodged with it on 4 April 2012. A copy of that application and copies of the pension certificates of the applicant’s neighbours were joined to the deputy prosecutor’s appeal. The pension certificates stated that the applicant’s neighbours were entitled to a monthly pension totalling UAH 730.71, the equivalent of about EUR 67 at the material time.
As to the merits of the case, the deputy prosecutor contended that the appellate court’s judgment had been erroneous. In particular, the court had disregarded the fact that the applicant had constructed the impugned extension illegally and had failed to submit the necessary documentary evidence that any damage had been caused to his property or to his construction material. The appellate court had also failed to provide reasons for awarding the applicant the specific amount of compensation for pecuniary damage.
On 11 May 2012 the HSC granted the requested extension of the time-limit (see paragraph 13 above), finding that it had been missed for “justifiable reasons”. No further details were given in that regard. The proceedings were accordingly reopened.
On 10 June 2012 the applicant lodged with the HSC his objections to the appeal, arguing that it was unsubstantiated, that the time-limit for lodging the appeal had been extended unlawfully, and that the Kherson regional deputy prosecutor had acted in violation of the principle of legal certainty recognised in the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights.
On 24 October 2012 the HSC allowed the deputy prosecutor’s appeal, quashed the appellate court’s judgment of 27 September 2011 (see paragraph 9 above) and upheld the Komsomolskyy District Court’s judgment of 14 July 2011 (see paragraph 8 above). The HSC held that the first-instance court’s findings – that the applicant had constructed the extension illegally and failed to prove that his neighbours had caused any damage to his property – had been correct and that the appellate court had erroneously quashed the judgment of 14 July 2011. The HSC also found that the applicant had no title to the extension, whereas under Article 386 § 3 of the Civil Code of 2003 (see paragraph 23 below) only owners had the right to compensation for pecuniary damage in the event of a violation of their property rights.
On 12 April 2013 the applicant returned to his neighbours the full amount he had received pursuant to the judgment of 27 September 2011.
According to the applicant, in the proceedings before the courts of first and appeal instances his neighbours had been represented by a lawyer.
In the meantime, in April 2012 the applicant had lodged a civil claim with the Komsomolskyy District Court, seeking compensation for the dismantling of the extension in December 2009 (see paragraph 6 above).
By a decision of 8 April 2013, the Kherson Regional Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s claim as unsubstantiated, holding that as a general rule, anyone who erected a construction illegally acquired no title to such construction and had no right to compensation for any damage caused by the dismantling thereof. The appellate court relied mainly on Article 386 § 3 of the Civil Code of 2003 (see paragraph 23 below).
The applicant stated that he had lodged an appeal on points of law against the decision of 8 April 2013, but provided no information as to its outcome.
The relevant extracts from the Civil Code of 2003, as worded at the material time, read as follows:
Article 386. Principles of protection of the right to property
“...
An owner whose rights have been breached shall be entitled to compensation for any pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage caused to him.”
Article 1166. General grounds for liability for causing pecuniary damage
“1.  ... [D]amage caused to the property of a ... person shall be compensated in full by the person who caused it.
The person who caused the damage shall be released from [the obligation] to compensate for it if he or she proves that the damage caused was not his or her fault.
...”
The relevant extracts from the Code of Civil Procedure of 2004, as worded at the material time, read as follows:
Article 45. Participation of bodies or persons entitled by law to protect the rights, freedoms and interests of others in civil proceedings
“...
A prosecutor may bring a civil claim before a court ... and also intervene at any stage of proceedings initiated by others, lodge an appeal, cassation appeal and an application for review of the judicial decision ... for the purpose of representing a citizen’s or the State’s interests before the court. In this connection, the prosecutor must submit to the court documents confirming that the citizen cannot present his or her own [case].
...”
Article 46. Procedural rights of bodies and persons entitled by law to protect the rights, freedoms and interests of others

 “1.  Bodies and persons who apply to a court in the interests of other persons or those of the State or society shall have the same procedural rights and obligations as the person in whose interests they are acting, except for the right to conclude a friendly-settlement agreement.
...
A prosecutor who did not take part in the case may study the case material at the court in order to decide whether there are grounds for lodging an appeal, a cassation appeal, an application for review of the judgment ...”
Article 67. Types of procedural time-limits
“1.  The time-limits during which procedural measures are to be performed shall be set by law, and if they have not been set by law [the time-limits shall be] set by the court.”
Article 73. Renewal or extension of procedural time-limits
“1.  A court shall renew or extend the time-limit ... at the request of a party ... if it has been missed for justifiable reasons.
The question of renewing or extending an expired time-limit shall be decided by the court ... to which a document or evidence was due to be submitted. The persons taking part in the proceedings shall be informed of the place and time of consideration of that question. Their presence is not compulsory.
The document or other evidence which is the subject of the request [for renewal or extension of the time-limit] may be submitted together with the request ...”
Article 82. Allowing delayed payment or payment by instalments of court expenses, reduction of their amount or releasing [a party from the obligation] to pay them
“1.  Taking into account the party’s financial situation, the court may issue a ruling granting an extension of the time-limit for paying the court fee or allowing [that party] to pay it by instalments during a specified period of time before a judicial decision is adopted in the case.
...
The court may, for the reasons set out in the first paragraph of this Article, reduce the sum of the court expenses related to the consideration of the case or release [the party from the obligation] to pay them.
...”
Article 319. Legal force of rulings and judgments of the appellate courts
“1.  The appellate court’s judgment or ruling shall have legal effect upon pronouncement.”
Article 324. Right to challenge [judicial decisions] in cassation
“1.  The parties and other persons taking part in the case ... have the right to challenge in cassation:
1)  judgments of the court of first instance, after they have been reviewed on appeal, judgments and rulings of the appellate court adopted [in the course of] consideration [of the case] on appeal;
...
The wrongful application by the court of norms of substantive law or a violation of norms of procedural law constitutes grounds for lodging a cassation appeal.”
Article 325. Time-limit for lodging a cassation appeal
“1.  A cassation appeal ... may be lodged within twenty days of the date on which the judgment (ruling) of the appellate court took legal effect.
If the time-limit ... was missed for reasons which the court recognised to be justifiable, the court of cassation instance may, at the request of the person who lodged the cassation appeal, renew that time-limit.”
Article 328. Opening of cassation proceedings
“...
The court of cassation instance shall refuse to open cassation proceedings if the prosecutor’s ... cassation appeal was lodged more than one year after the contested judgment had taken legal effect [had become binding].
...”
Article 335. Scope of consideration of the case by the court of cassation instance
“1.  In the course of consideration of the case in cassation, the court shall verify, within the limits of the cassation appeal, the accuracy of the application of norms of substantive or procedural law by the courts of first or appeal instances, [but it] shall have no power to establish or to hold proven facts which were not established in the judgment or dismissed by it, [or] to decide on the question of the reliability ... of [particular] evidence or of the weight to be attached to certain evidence ...
The court of cassation instance shall [examine the question of] the lawfulness of judicial decisions only within the limits of the claims raised before the court of first instance.
The court shall not be limited by the arguments of the cassation appeal if, in the course of consideration of the case, [it] discerns the wrongful application of norms of substantive law or a violation of the norms of procedural law, constituting grounds for the compulsory quashing of the judicial decision.”
Article 336. Powers of the court of cassation instance
“1.  ... [T]he court of cassation instance has the power to:
(1)  adopt a ruling dismissing the cassation appeal and leaving the [contested] decision in force;
(2)  adopt a ruling fully or partly quashing the decision and remitting the case to the court of first instance or appeal for fresh consideration;
(3)  adopt a ruling quashing the appellate court’s decision and leaving in force the judicial decision which was erroneously quashed by the court of appeal;
(4)  adopt a ruling quashing the judicial decisions and terminating the proceedings in the case or leaving the claim without consideration;
(5)  quash the judicial decisions and adopt a new judgment or vary the judgment [on the merits of the case], without remitting it for fresh consideration.
...”
Article 339. Grounds for quashing judicial decisions and leaving in force the judicial decision which was erroneously quashed
“1.  If it finds that the appellate court quashed a judicial decision which had been adopted in accordance with the law, the court of cassation instance shall quash the appellate court’s decision and leave in force the first-instance court’s decision.”