The case originated in an application (no. 24427/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Sergeyevich Kayankin (“the applicant”), on 14 May 2002.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by lawyers of the Human Rights Centre Memorial. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev and Mrs V. Milinchuk, former Representatives of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment as a result of being drafted into the army in a very poor state of health, that during his military service he had been beaten up by an officer and fellow soldiers, that there had not been an effective investigation into the incidents and that the tort proceedings brought by him had been excessively long.
On 1 March 2006 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in the  in the Leningrad Region.
As transpires from a copy of the applicant’s medical record, submitted by him to the Court, on a number of occasions in 1987 he applied to the Sosnovo village hospital complaining of headaches. On 16 November 1987 he was diagnosed with hypertension. The diagnosis was recorded in his medical history.
In 1996 the Priozersk District Military Board registered the applicant for compulsory military service.
On 12 February 1997 the Priozersk District Military Medical Commission, comprising a surgeon, a general practitioner, a neuropathologist, a psychiatrist, an oculist, a dentist, a dermatologist and an otolaryngologist, examined the applicant for the purpose of making a preliminary assessment of the state of his health to determine whether he was fit for military service. The commission diagnosed the applicant with “hypotrophy of unknown genesis”, and assigned him category “D” on the medical scale of eligibility for service, finding him “temporarily unfit”. The diagnosis was made on the basis of the disproportionate correlation between the applicant’s height of 167 centimetres and his weight of 50 kilograms. The commission concluded that an additional medical examination of the applicant by an endocrinologist was necessary in relation to the diagnosis of hypotrophy. The applicant’s conscription was deferred for six months on medical grounds.
According to the applicant, the commission did not provide him with a medical certificate or any other medical documents directing him to a particular public health institution for further medical examinations, monitoring and, if necessary, treatment, as required by the Instruction on Military Medical Examinations in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, adopted on 22 September 1995 by Decree no. 315 of the Russian Defence Ministry and in force at the material time. However, as transpires from the applicant’s medical history submitted to the Court, on 18 February 1997 he was examined by an endocrinologist, who noted the disproportionate ratio between the applicant’s weight and height, but considered that his state of health was satisfactory. At the same time the endocrinologist diagnosed the applicant with a diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland of the first degree, connected to puberty.
In October 1998 the applicant was again examined by the military medical commission and found to be “fit for military service”. The report of the commission indicated that he had not complained about the state of his health. The applicant’s call-up was scheduled for April 1999.
No further medical examinations of the applicant were performed until April 1999, when the military medical commission re-examined him. The commission concluded that the applicant was fit for military service without any restrictions. As transpires from the applicant’s personal file of a conscript produced to the Court, his height of 175 centimetres and his weight of 63 kilograms meant that the diagnosis of “hypotrophy” was no longer an issue. The applicant countersigned the medical report indicating that he had no complaints pertaining to the state of his health.
On 3 June 1999 the applicant was drafted into the army. He was assigned to military unit no. 22336 in . The applicant alleged that in the unit he had on many occasions been beaten up and harassed by senior conscripts. They had allegedly forced him and other younger conscripts to sleep outdoors at night and had taken away their food. According to the applicant, on 5 September 1999 the head of the military headquarters, Captain Ch., in the presence of the soldier A., hit the applicant five times in the head with an artillery gun shell. On 17 October 1999 a group of senior conscripts allegedly beat the applicant up.
On 25 October 1999 the applicant’s mother arrived at the unit. The applicant told her about the beatings.
Two days later the applicant left the unit without authorisation and travelled with his mother to .
In  the applicant was examined at the Bekhterev Scientific Research Psychoneurology Institute (Научно-исследовательский Психоневрологический Институт им. В. М. Бехтерева). A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, a transcranial scan with Doppler apparatus and an ultrasound scan of the applicant’s head were performed. He was also examined by an oculist, a psychologist and neurologist. On 9 November 1999 the Institute issued the applicant with an advisory opinion, the relevant part of which read as follows:
“[The applicant complains] of headaches, dizziness, fatigability, irritability, a hearing impairment of the right ear, and somniloquence.
[He] has suffered from headaches since the age of nine; [the headaches] have a piercing, squeezing character; [the headache] starts in the morning with the impression that [someone] is applying pressure to the eyes; [the headache] becomes stronger during mental and physical work; it is accompanied by photophobia, degradation of working capacity, and fast fatigability.
Medical history (according to the applicant’s mother and his medical record):
...
[The applicant] was an active child; he frequently fell, hitting his head. At the age of four months he fell from a shelf, hitting his head; he lost consciousness. He hit his head hard a number of times while skating. At the age of nine years he severely hit his forehead; a suture was applied. When he was 12 years old, he was accidentally hit on the head with a hammer.
...
Diagnosis: organic brain disease – the result of craniocerebral traumas sustained [by the applicant], neuroinfections, a perinatal disorder – cerebral arachnoiditis with apparent hypertensive syndrome, cerebral angiodystonia, epileptiform paroxysms ..., bilateral pyramidal signs, psycho-organic and astheno-psychic syndrome. Osteochondropathy of the knee joints.
Recommended: supervision by a neuropathologist and a psychoneuropathologist ... Limitation of physical activity. Placement in a military hospital.”
On 12 November 1999 the applicant applied to the St Petersburg Military Prosecutor’s Office, complaining that his conscription had been unlawful and that he had been ill-treated during his military service. On 15 November 1999, on a recommendation from the prosecutor’s office, he was admitted to the neurology unit of a military hospital, where he stayed until 9 December 1999.
On 7 December 1999 the applicant was examined by the Military Medical Commission of Medical Clinical Hospital no. 442. According to a medical certificate issued by the Commission, the applicant was diagnosed with “long-term effects of neuroinfection in the form of external hydrocephalus with disseminated neurological signs and pseudo-neurasthenic syndrome; 1st degree S-shaped scoliosis of the thoracodorsal region with Schmorl’s nodule in the 4th to 9th vertebral bodies, transitional lumbosacral vertebra, incomplete closure of 2, 3 and 4 vertebral arches of the spine; chronic tonsillitis”. The certificate indicated that the illness had been acquired during the applicant’s military service and that he was “partially fit for military service”.
On 25 January 2000 the applicant was discharged from military service on account of his illness.
On 15 December 2000 the St Petersburg Medical Expert Commission issued the applicant with a medical certificate indicating that he had a third-degree disability as a consequence of the illness.
On 19 January 2000 the applicant brought an action in the  against the Priozersk District Drafting Military Commission and the Priozersk District and Leningrad Regional Military Boards, seeking compensation for damage. He also asked the  to set aside the decision of 3 June 1999 of the Priozersk District Military Board as unlawful, claiming that he should not have been drafted into the army as he had been seriously ill.
The case was assigned to Judge C. on 24 January 2000.
On 4 October 2000 Judge C. delivered a decision, accepting the case for examination on the merits, and scheduled the first hearing for 1 December 2000. On the same day she also sent a letter to the defendants asking to submit the applicant’s personal file of a conscript.
The hearing of 1 December 2000 was adjourned because the applicant wanted to study the case file and to retain a lawyer.
As transpires from the Government’s submissions, the following hearing, which took place on 26 September 2001, was adjourned after the applicant’s representative had successfully petitioned the  for provision of additional evidence.
The next hearing, scheduled for 8 October 2001, was adjourned on a request from the Priozersk District Military Board because its representative could not attend.
On 17 October 2001 the , at the applicant’s request, sent letters to a number of military and medical authorities seeking the production of additional evidence. The latest response was received by the  on 4 December 2001 from the Sosnovo village hospital. The hospital informed the  that it could not submit an extract from a hospital register showing that the applicant’s medical record had been sent to the military medical commission for an examination when the question on his eligibility to the military service was to be decided. The hospital explained that the register in question was missing. At the same time the hospital noted that as a general rule medical records of potential conscripts were sent to the military medical commission.
The following hearing, scheduled for 16 January 2002, was postponed because the defendants failed to appear. The  also afforded the applicant’s representative additional time to prepare written questions to put to a medical expert.
On 21 January 2002 the  sent letters, repeating its requests for provision of evidence, to a number of military authorities which had failed to reply to the first letter of 17 October 2001.
On 18 February 2002 the , in response to its order of 4 October 2000, received the applicant’s personal file of a conscript.
On 20 May 2002 the case was transferred to Judge B. who, in the process of the examination of the case file, sent letters to a number of military and medical officials, asking for additional evidence to be provided. According to the Government, the latest reply was received by the  on 12 July 2002.
In October 2002 the  asked the Priozersk Town Council to submit documents regulating the activities of the Priozersk District Military Board.
At the first hearing fixed by Judge B. for 10 December 2002 the applicant amended his claims. The  issued the applicant and his representative with a written warning that the amendment of the claims would result in a stay of the proceedings. The hearing was rescheduled for 14 January 2003. That hearing was also adjourned on account of a defendant’s failure to attend. In the meantime, the applicant filed an additional amendment to the statement of claims.
The following hearing, scheduled for 29 January 2003, was postponed until 13 March 2003 at the defendants’ request to allow them to study additional documents submitted by the applicant.
The defendants failed to attend the hearing on 13 March 2003 and the  sent a warning, informing them of the consequences of their conduct and ordering them to appear at the following hearing, listed for 14 May 2003.
On 14 May 2003 the applicant’s representative asked the  to adjourn the hearing as she could not attend. The  fixed the following hearing for 16 October 2003. The latter hearing was also rescheduled for 4 December 2003 as the defendants failed to appear.
At the hearing on 4 December 2003 the applicant’s representative successfully asked the  to join the Leningrad Regional and Priozersk District Divisions of the Federal Treasury as co-defendants. The proceedings were stayed until 18 March 2004.
On 18 March 2004, at the hearing, the applicant refused to undergo a medical examination. On the same day the  dismissed the action, finding, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“Having heard the submissions by the parties and third persons and having studied the material in the case file, the file on criminal case no. 14/04/0035-2000D and the [applicant’s] personal file of a conscript with the enclosed medical documents, the court finds [the applicant’s] claims ill-founded and dismisses them.
By virtue of section 26-28 and 30 of the Federal Military Duty and Military Service Act, the district military board, at the expense of the federal budget, is entrusted with the obligation to conscript men for military service, to organise their medical examinations and to provide for exemptions from the duty to serve in the army.
The military board was established by Decision no. 263, issued by the head of the Priozersk District Council of the Leningrad Region on 31 March 1999 for the purpose of organising and implementing conscription for military service; Ms S. was appointed to act as the chief doctor.
In 1999 Decree no. 315 on the procedure for performing military medical examinations in the armed forces of the Russian Federation, issued by the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation on 22 September 1995, regulated the activities of the military board and the procedure for medical examinations of men at the time of their initial inclusion in the military service register and [when they are] drafted into the army.
When included for the first time in the military service register on 12 February 1997 (record no. 5), [the applicant] did not make any complaints; his weight was 50 kilograms, his height 167 centimetres, his diagnosis was ‘hypotrophy of unknown genesis’; according to Article 13-g of Section 1 of the List of Illnesses and the Table of Additional Requirements [laid down] in the Amendment to the Regulations on Military Medical Examinations, adopted on 20 April 1995 by Decree no. 390 of the Government of the Russian Federation, [the applicant] was placed in category ‘D’ – temporarily unfit for medical service for a period of six months. [It was noted that he] needed a medical examination.
When drafted for military service on 16 April 1999 (record no. 8), [the applicant] did not make any complaints about the state of his health. His diagnosis: ‘healthy’. On the basis of Section 1 of the List of Illnesses and the Table of Additional Requirements [laid down] in the Amendment to the Regulations ..., [he was found to belong to category] ‘A’ – fit for military service. [It was decided] to draft him into the army.
On 3 June 1999, when examined by doctors in the Regional Assembly Station of the Military Board in the Leningrad Region, no illnesses precluding his conscription for military service were discovered. [The applicant] was only diagnosed with scoliosis of the first degree. By virtue of Article 66-g of Section 1 of the List of Illnesses and the Table of Additional Requirements..., [the applicant] was found [to belong to category] ‘B-4’ – fit for military service with minor restrictions. [It was decided] to draft him into the army.
By virtue of section 28 § 7 of the Federal Military Duty and Military Service Act, a plaintiff may appeal against a decision of a military board [to draft him into the army].
On 7 December 1999 the Military Medical Commission of Medical Clinical Hospital no. 442 decided that [the applicant] was partially fit for military service... in accordance with Articles 22B and 49D of Section 2 of the List of Illnesses and the Table of Additional Requirements... [It was determined] that his illness had been acquired during his military service.
[The applicant] and his representative argue that the report of ... the Bekhterev Scientific Research Psychoneurology Institute, which states that his illness – ‘organic brain disease – the result of craniocerebral traumas sustained [by the applicant] – neuroinfections, a perinatal disorder’ (which means ‘during or after childbirth’, as the representatives explained and the doctor S. testified), should serve as a basis for quashing the decision of 3 June 1999 of the Priozersk District Military Board to conscript [the applicant].
By virtue of Article 56 of the Russian Code of Civil Procedure, each party should prove the circumstances on which he or she relies as the basis for his or her claims and complaints if a federal law does not establish another rule.
Having regard to the fact that no item of evidence has a pre-established evidentiary value for a court and that by virtue of Article 67 of the Russian Code of Civil Procedure, the court assesses the relevance, admissibility and veracity of evidence as a whole, the plaintiff’s ... refusal to undergo a forensic medical examination in the course of the present judicial proceedings did not allow the court to establish that [the applicant] had those illnesses at the time of the medical examination by the Priozersk District Military Board.
The court cannot accept, as a justification for the [applicant’s] claims, the reference to medical report no. 19 issued on 18 January 2001 by the forensic medical (psychological and psychiatric) expert commission, [in particular] its answers to questions nos. 7 and 8 that unhealthy organic changes in [the applicant’s] central nervous system discovered during the examination were congenital or that they had occurred in early childhood because that expert examination [performed in the course of the criminal case] did not settle the contradictions and did not assess the conclusions made in the decision of the Military Medical Commission of Medical Clinical Hospital no. 442, which had found that [the applicant] had acquired those illnesses during military service, although [the court notes] the reference to that decision in the [criminal] expert examination.
It follows that, in a situation where [the applicant] had refused to undergo an additional expert examination, the court and the parties to the present case concerning [the applicant’s] action did not have an opportunity to make use of their procedural rights, to solve the abovementioned contradictions, to determine how ‘negative emotions experienced during military service and [the applicant’s] response to the existing circumstances surrounding him could have aggravated his chronic diseases’ and to assess the consequences of the deterioration of his health.
Thus, the court was not provided with evidence reliably showing that [the applicant] had had those illnesses when drafted into the army on 16 April 1999.
Moreover, it was established at the court hearing that the records of [the applicant’s] complaints of a headache on 9 November 1987 and of ‘hypertension’ had been included in the [applicant’s] medical history, which had been drawn up on 4 November 1995 and had been handed over to [the applicant’s] mother in October 1998, a fact she does not dispute, and that she had not submitted [his medical history] to the medical specialists of the Priozersk District and Leningrad Regional Military Boards.
The court was also not provided with evidence reliably showing that [the applicant] had complained [about the state of his health] when he had been examined by the Priozersk District Military Medical Commission or by the Leningrad Regional Military Medical Commission; [the court] also did not establish that ... [the applicant had been] forced to produce a handwritten note stating that [he had no] complaints about the state of his health.
The court cannot agree with the applicant’s representative that Ms S. did not fulfil her administrative functions as the chief doctor of the military medical commission as it was established that the conscript had not had any complaints; his mother had had [the applicant’s] medical history; she could have attracted the doctors’ attention [to the alleged medical problems] and could have received necessary consultations by medical specialists.
Thus, the court did not establish any violations during [the applicant’s] medical examinations, either when he had been entered in the military service register or when he had been drafted into the army in compliance with Decree no. 315 on the procedure for performing military medical examinations in the armed forces of the Russian Federation, issued by the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation on 22 September 1995.
The court, therefore, finds manifestly ill-founded [the applicant’s] claim that the decision of the Priozersk District Military Board of 3 June 1999 to draft him into the army was unlawful and that it should be quashed. [The court concludes] that [the applicant’s claims] should be dismissed.
The court dismisses [the applicant’s] claims for compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage as it has found that the tort action itself ... is manifestly ill-founded.
The court cannot accept the argument by the Priozersk District Military Board that [the applicant] had missed the three-month time-limit for lodging [his claims] with the court, as by virtue of Article 200 of the Russian Civil Code, the time-limit only starts to run on the date when an individual has learnt about a violation of his rights. The plaintiff and his representative only learned of the violation of [the applicant’s] rights after [the applicant] had been examined by the doctors of the Bekhterev Scientific Research Psychoneurology Institute on 9 November 1999. The court thus finds that the time-limit was not missed and the request to [dismiss the applicant’s claim for failure to comply with the time-limit] should be disallowed.”
On 2 June 2004 the  upheld the judgment, endorsing the Town Court’s reasoning.
On 6 March 2000, in response to the applicant’s complaint of ill-treatment during his military service, the Military Prosecutor of the Volgograd Garrison instituted criminal proceedings against Captain
An investigator interviewed the applicant on a number of occasions about the circumstances surrounding his alleged beatings by Captain   Similar interviews were performed with Captain Ch. and a number of conscripts who had served with the applicant. On 20 December 2000 the applicant had a confrontation interview with Captain
On 17 January 2001 the Military Prosecutor of the North-Caucasian Military Circuit informed the applicant’s mother that her complaints of ill-treatment had been examined and “necessary measures to stop the procrastination had been taken”. The applicant’s mother was also informed that the criminal case had been transferred to another investigator.
In January 2001 a senior investigator of the Volgograd Garrison Military Prosecutor’s Office authorised a complex forensic medical psychological and psychiatric examination of the applicant to be performed in the Forensic Medical Laboratory of the North-Caucasian Military Circuit of the Russian Ministry of Defence. On 18 January 2001 the experts issued the report, finding that there was no medical data confirming that the applicant had sustained any injuries or traumas in autumn 1999 as a result of the alleged use of force, as described by him. They further stressed that the applicant’s illnesses discovered during the previous medical examinations, in particular the organic brain illness, were congenital or could have developed in early childhood as a result of burdened heredity, difficult childbirth, head injuries or neuroinfections. The experts concluded that those illnesses could not have resulted from blows to the head administered either by Captain Ch. or fellow soldiers as the applicant alleged.
On 7 February and 23 June 2001 the criminal proceedings were discontinued because there was no indication of a criminal offence. Both decisions were quashed on 7 May and 17 September 2001, respectively, by the supervising prosecutor and the investigation was resumed.
On 19 September 2001 another investigator was assigned to the case.
A month later the criminal proceedings were closed because there was no evidence of criminal conduct. The text of that decision was similar to the previous ones and read as follows:
“It was initially established on the basis of the material in the case file that, as follows from [the applicant’s] complaints, on 5 September 1999, at approximately 4 p.m., in the headquarters of the military unit, Captain Ch., being dissatisfied with [the applicant’s] service in the duty unit, had hit [the applicant] at least four times in the head with a metal artillery gun shell.
According [to the applicant], because of those beatings he left the military unit on 25 October 1999 without permission and travelled to the place of his residence in the Leningrad Region.
However, in the course of the investigation Captain Ch. firmly and consistently denied having participated in the beatings of [the applicant] and having caused [the applicant] any injuries.
In the course of the pre-trial investigation [the investigating authorities] started doubting the veracity of [the applicant’s] statements; a forensic medical psychological psychiatric expert examination was ordered in the case. The experts were provided with the complete set of medical documents, [the applicant] agreed to the provision of [those materials].
According to the expert findings, the medical documents submitted do not contain any evidence showing that [the applicant] had sustained any injuries or [had acquired] any illnesses as a result of allegedly having been hit in the head or neck with a heavy object. The unhealthy organic changes in [the applicant’s] central nervous system discovered during the examination were congenital or had occurred in early childhood as a result of his burdened hereditary history, difficult childbirth, possible head traumas and the presence of neuroinfection in his childhood and youth. Negative emotions which [the applicant] sustained during the military service could have aggravated the existing chronic illnesses. Having regard to the foregoing, the experts made the unambiguous finding that [the applicant’s] illnesses were congenital or had occurred in early childhood. They could not have resulted from the alleged beating on the head by Captain 
Moreover, as follows from statements by [the applicant’s] fellow conscripts, soldiers A., Ba. and P., whom [the applicant] identified as eyewitnesses to his alleged beatings by Captain Ch., the latter did not use any physical force against [the applicant]. [The applicant] did not tell [those soldiers] about [the beatings].
As follows from the statements which [the applicant] gave during the pre-trial investigation, Captain Ch. hit him at least five times in the head; after the first blow the applicant could no longer stand on his feet and, leaning against a wall, he started sitting down. Captain Ch. administered the remaining blows when [the applicant] was already near the wall. A forensic investigative simulation was performed in order to reconstruct [the applicant’s] statements and verify the possibility of administering blows with a metal gun shell through a wooden partition. The environment in which, according to [the applicant], Captain Ch. had beaten him up was reconstructed before the forensic investigative simulation. Assistants who anthropologically resemble [the applicant] and Captain Ch. took part in the simulation. As a result of the simulation it was established that a blow could only be administered through the wooden partition when a person stood very closely to it. Owing to the large distance, the assistant who anthropologically resembled Captain Ch. could not even once hit the assistant who anthropologically resembled [the applicant] when the latter was standing on his feet or was sitting down, leaning on the wall. From the above-mentioned facts it can be concluded that the statements made [by the applicant] during the pre-trial investigation are false.”
On 10 January 2002 the Military Prosecutor of the North-Caucasian Military Circuit quashed the decision of 19 October 2001 and authorised an additional investigation, finding that the applicant’s additional complaint that he had been beaten up by senior conscripts had not been investigated.
On 17 June 2002 the criminal proceedings were closed because there was no case to be answered. The decision comprised the text of the decision of 19 October 2001 and additional paragraphs which read as follows:
“[The applicant] explained that on 5 September 1999, at approximately 4 p.m., at the headquarters of the military unit Captain Ch, being dissatisfied with [the applicant’s] service in the duty unit, had punched him in the face. Subsequently, [Captain Ch.] took [the applicant] to a barrack storeroom, where he hit him in the head at least five times with a metal artillery gun shell. Soldier A. was present in the storeroom during the beatings. [The applicant] told solders Ba. and P., who were on duty in the duty unit, about the incident.
Moreover, [the applicant] explained that in the middle of October 1999 soldier B. had offered to exchange military jackets [with the applicant] and when the latter had refused, soldier B. had hit [the applicant] in the nose with his hand or head; [the applicant’s] nose had started bleeding. Soldiers P., M., Pu., Be., D. and G. were present during the beatings.
However, during the questioning Captain Ch. firmly and consistently denied having participated in the beatings of [the applicant] or having caused him any injuries.
During a confrontation interview between [the applicant] and Captain , the latter confirmed his statements, whereas [the applicant] was inconsistent in his testimony and gave different answers to the same questions.
In his statements [the applicant] explained that soldier A ... had witnessed the beatings of the applicant by Captain Ch. in the storeroom. Mr A., questioned at the place of his residence in the capacity of a witness, firmly denied that Captain Ch. had used physical force against conscripts, including [the applicant], in military unit no. 22336. Moreover, he noted that he did not remember [the applicant]. At the same time he knew Captain Ch. ... very well and had never seen Captain Ch. hit anyone. Moreover, Mr A. stated that there had never been a gun shell in the storeroom.
Furthermore, [the applicant] stated that he had told soldier Ba., who had been on duty with him in the duty unit, about the beatings by Captain  However, [Mr Ba.], who was questioned at the place of his residence as a witness, stated that he did not remember [the applicant]. He knew Captain Ch. well and could only describe the latter in positive terms; he had never seen [Captain Ch.] hit anyone. Moreover, he had never been told that Captain Ch. had beaten anyone. As to the gun shell, he had never seen one in the barrack storeroom.
[The applicant] also listed another reason for his unauthorised leave from military unit no. 2236, noting that in the middle of October 1999 soldier B. had offered to exchange military jackets with him; however, [the applicant] had refused. In response [to the refusal] soldier B. had hit [the applicant] in the nose with his hand or head; [the applicant’s] nose had started bleeding. However, Mr B., questioned as a witness, stated that he knew [the applicant]. ...he had rarely met him, as [the applicant] had served in another division of military unit no. 22336. [Mr B.] explained that he had never applied unlawful means of pressure to conscripts; moreover, he had never asked [the applicant] about anything and had not beaten him up when [the latter] had allegedly refused [to comply with the request]. His military jacket was in order and he did not need to change it.
[According to the applicant], soldier D. was present during the alleged beatings by soldier B. ... However, Mr D., questioned as a witness, stated that he had never used unlawful means of pressure against [the applicant] and had not seen [the applicant] being beaten.
During a confrontation interview between [the applicant] and Mr D., the latter gave consistent and unambiguous answers, fully confirming his statements.
Moreover, [the applicant] stated that when soldier B. had beaten him up, soldier P. had been in the duty room with them. Soldier P., having been questioned as a witness, stated that he had never beaten [the applicant] up and had not seen anyone hit [the applicant]. Moreover, Mr P. explained that his fellow conscript, Mr Pu., had told him that in May 2000, when he had been on leave from the service, [the applicant] and his mother had come to his house and had asked to sign papers confirming that [the applicant] had allegedly been beaten up in the military unit by conscripts of Kalmyk ethnic origin.
During a confrontation interview between [the applicant] and Mr P., the latter gave consistent answers which fully corroborated his statements.
Mr M. and Ba., who, according to [the applicant], had been present during the beatings, when questioned [by an investigator] stated that they had never applied force to [the applicant] and had never seen anyone beating him.”
The Government provided the Court with copies of the records of the applicant’s, Captain Ch.’s and witnesses’ questioning and copies of the records of the confrontation interviews.
On several occasions the applicant unsuccessfully complained to higher-ranking prosecutors that the proceedings had been discontinued.
On 27 August 2002 the applicant was informed that the case file had been sent to the  for an examination in the course of the civil proceedings instituted on the applicant’s tort action.
On 11 February 2003 the applicant asked the  to inform him about what had happened to the criminal case file. On an unspecified date the Town Court President informed the applicant that the  needed the file in connection with the applicant’s tort action pending before it.
On 20 August 2003 the military prosecutor of the North-Caucasian Military Circuit informed the applicant that his complaints about the decision of 17 June 2002 had been examined and dismissed. The relevant part of the letter of 20 August 2003 read as follows:
“The preliminary investigation established that Captain Ch. and soldier B. had never caused injuries to [the applicant].
As follows from the report of the composite complex forensic medical psychological psychiatric examination, the complete set of [the applicant’s] medical documents does not contain any information that he sustained any injury or illness as a result of blows to the head or neck with a heavy object. The discovered organic symptoms of an illness of the [applicant’s] central nervous system are congenital or were acquired in early childhood as a consequence of heredity, difficult childbirth, possible head traumas and neuroinfections in his childhood or youth.
Negative emotions during military service could have aggravated [the applicant’s] chronic diseases.
Experts made the unconditional finding that [the applicant’s] illnesses were congenital or had been acquired in early childhood and could not have been caused by blows to the head allegedly inflicted by Captain ”
On 28 April 2006 an assistant to the Chief Military Prosecutor sent a letter to the Main State Centre of Forensic Medical and Criminological Examinations in Moscow (hereinafter “the Expert Centre”), asking it to examine the applicant’s medical history, including the three expert reports: of 9 November 1999 by the Bekhterev Scientific Research Psychoneurology Institute, of 7 December 1999 by the Military Medical Commission of Medical Clinical Hospital no. 442, and of 18 January 2001 by the Forensic Medical Laboratory of the North-Caucasian Military Circuit of the Russian Ministry of Defence, and to reply to a number of questions.
On 4 May 2006 the Expert Centre issued a report which, in so far as relevant, read as follows:
“The experts were asked to reply to the following questions:
What were [the applicant’s] illnesses discovered during his military service (explain the diagnosis): how does impairment of the functioning of organs manifest itself, what are the symptoms of the illness, etc.?
What are the causes and processes of the development of those illnesses and do they result from a trauma (traumas) sustained by [the applicant]? If yes, when were those traumas received?
How long does it take those illnesses to manifest themselves and what is the relationship between them and heredity?
Did [the applicant] have those illnesses when drafted into the army? If so, how were those illnesses discovered and could [the applicant] have been drafted into the army [if he had those illnesses]?
...
Conclusions
According to the medical documents, during his military service [the applicant] had symptoms of ‘organic brain disease, the result of craniocerebral traumas, neuroinfections, a perinatal disorder in the form of cerebral arachnoiditis with apparent hypertensive syndrome, cerebral angiodystonia, epileptiform paroxysms ..., bilateral pyramidal signs, psycho-organic and astheno-psychic syndrome’.
The above-mentioned illness was not accompanied by impairments of motor, sensory or coordination functions or any other functions of the nervous system. The main symptoms of the illness were headaches, fatigability, irritability, and decrease in attention and memory concentration.
The [applicant’s] above-mentioned organic brain illness occurred in his childhood or youth. The causative factors leading to the development of that condition were neuroinfection, acute infectious inflammatory diseases accompanied by high fever response and intoxication, and numerous head traumas which, jointly, served as a basis for the process of the development of that illness. The alleged head injury sustained on 5 September 1999 during [the applicant’s] military service (June to October 1999) does not belong to the priority factors in the development of that polysymptomatic, residual organic disorder of the brain.
The duration of the [applicant’s] brain illness corresponds to repeated exposure to the pathological factors listed in answer no. 2, and observed in the period preceding his conscription for military service. As follows from the medical documents, [the applicant] exhibits signs of a mentally burdened hereditary history in the form of his father’s mental illness, accompanied by the abuse of alcohol and his death as a result of suicide. [The applicant] himself exhibits signs of depression in its hereditary aspect (‘periods of low mood’).
 4. The symptoms of the ‘organic brain disease, the result of craniocerebral traumas, neuroinfections, a perinatal disorder in the form of cerebral arachnoiditis with apparent hypertensive syndrome, cerebral angiodystonia, epileptiform paroxysms ..., bilateral pyramidal signs, psycho-organic and astheno-psychic syndrome’ were present at the time of [the applicant’s] conscription for military service (June 1999). At the same time, having regard to the conclusions of the medical experts of the military board that [the applicant] had had no complaints about [the state of his health], the neurological symptomatology could not be identified in its clinical aspect. According to the explanation and application of Article 22 of the List of Illnesses (‘Regulations on Military Medical Examinations’, adopted on 20 April 1995 by Decree no. 390 of the Government of the Russian Federation), the identification of such an illness and the category of its intensity, ‘a conclusion on the category of individual fitness for military service during initial registration for military service, conscription for military service and recruitment for contractual military service is made after the in-patient examination’.”
On 12 December 1993 the Constitution of the  was adopted. Article 59 of the Russian Constitution imposes a “duty and obligation” on each citizen of the  to protect his or her fatherland. Paragraph 2 of Article 59 provides that Russian citizens are to perform military service in compliance with a federal law.
Russian law gives detailed guidelines for the various stages of the conscription process. These guidelines, found in Federal Law no. 53-FZ on Military Duty and Military Service (hereafter “the Military Service Act”), enacted on 28 March 1998, are applicable without exception to all young men of conscription age. In particular, section 9 of the Military Service Act sets out the procedure for initial registration of citizens for military service. In the year he turns seventeen, a male citizen is entered in the military register. At this time, a preliminary (initial) determination is made as to whether he is fit for military service or has grounds for an exemption. A military commission must organise a medical examination of each individual, must determine, with regard to the state of his health, whether he is fit for military service and must decide whether the individual should be included in the military service register, placed on the reserve list, considered partially fit for military service or excused from serving in the army if considered unfit for military service (section 9 § 6).
Section 16 of the Military Service Act regulates medical examinations, monitoring and treatment of individuals at the stage of their initial registration for military service. In particular, it provides that a medical examination should be performed by a group of medical specialists, comprising a general practitioner, a surgeon, a neurologist, a psychiatrist, an oculist, an otolaryngologist, a dentist and other doctors, if necessary. When the commission is unable to reach a firm conclusion as to the individual’s fitness for military service, the individual is sent to a medical institution for an outpatient or in-patient medical examination. In certain cases, the individual should be admitted to such an institution for treatment.
By virtue of section 23, men who have been declared unfit or partially unfit for military service on health grounds are excused from service. A deferral of military service for up to one year is granted to individuals found to be temporarily unfit for service on account of the state of their health (section 24).
When he turns eighteen, a Russian male receives a summons to appear before his local drafting military commission for the conscription procedure. According to the regulations on conscription, he must be directly handed the summons and must sign it (section 31 § 2). If a young man is handed a draft summons and signs but subsequently does not appear for conscription proceedings, he is considered to be a draft-dodger and is prosecuted under the Criminal Code (section 28 § 2 and section 31 § 4 of the Act). If officials are unable to physically hand a young man a summons, the drafting military commission may request the local police precinct in writing to help “ensure” his presence during the conscription procedure (section 31 § 2).
Section 28 lays down the list of responsibilities imposed on the drafting military commission at the stage of conscription for military service. In particular, the commission must organise a medical examination for each individual and must take one of the following decisions: (a) draft the individual into the army; (b) send him for alternative civilian service; (c) grant him a deferral of military service; (d) excuse him from being drafted to the army; (e) place him on the reserve list; or (f) relieve him of the obligation to serve in the army. It also assigns the candidate to a specific branch of the armed forces.
Section 30, in terms similar to those of section 16, establishes the procedure for the medical examination and monitoring of individuals who are to be drafted into the army. In addition, section 30 indicates that, taking into account the results of the medical examination, the head of the military medical commission should issue a decision identifying the individual’s fitness for military service according to the following five categories:
A – fit for military service;
B – fit for military service with minor restrictions;
C – partially fit for military service;
D – temporarily unfit for military service;
E – unfit for military service.
Section 30 also provides that the procedure for organising and performing medical examinations of individuals liable to be drafted into the army is set out in detail in the Regulations on Military Medical Examinations adopted by the Government of the .
On 20 April 1995 the Government of the  issued Decree no. 390, adopting the Regulations on Military Medical Examinations (hereinafter “the Regulations”). The relevant provisions of the Regulations read as follows:
“20.  On the basis of a military medical commission’s decision, an individual may be sent to a State or municipal medical institution for an outpatient or in-patient medical examination to confirm the diagnosis or to undergo treatment... After such a medical examination (treatment) a record of the examination of the state of the individual’s health should be drawn up...
At the stage of the initial registration for military service or when a decision on conscription is to be taken, in cases where it is necessary to perform a lengthy (for more than three months) [additional] medical examination (treatment) of the individual, the commission should issue a record noting the temporary unfitness of the individual for military service for a period from six to twelve months. After the [additional] medical examination (treatment) is completed, the individual should be subjected to a renewed medical examination by the military medical commission and may be drafted into the army.
If the [additional] medical examination (treatment) of the individual can be completed before the military commission concludes its work (within the current drafting campaign), the report on the individual’s temporary unfitness for military service should not be issued. In that case a specialist doctor draws up a record, noting that an [additional] medical examination (treatment) of the individual is necessary, and indicates the date on which the individual should attend the renewed medical examination by the commission.
After the period of the individual’s temporary unfitness for military service expires, the commission issues the final decision on the category defining his fitness for military service.
If an individual who was considered to be temporarily unfit for military service during his initial registration for service or at the stage of conscription into the army refuses to undergo or evades the [additional] medical examination (treatment), he should be subjected to a renewed medical examination by the commission no later than six months after the decision on temporary unfitness was taken. If during the renewed medical examination by the commission no signs of deterioration of the individual’s health are discovered or there are no apparent injuries (wounds, traumas, contusions) or illnesses which prevent conscription for military service, the individual is considered completely fit or fit with minor restrictions for military service.
Administrations of various divisions of the public health services, heads of State and municipal medical institutions and military commissions should take measures to ensure timely [additional] medical examinations (treatment) of individuals.”
The Regulations also contained the List of Illnesses, on the basis of which a military medical commission could identify to which of the five categories (A to E) of fitness for military service the individual belonged. In particular, Section 22 of the List dealt with illnesses of the nervous system. Clinically apparent hydrocephalus and fluid hypertension were listed among illnesses of the nervous system which placed an individual suffering from them in the category “E – unfit for military service”. Section 22 imposed an obligation to make the final determination of the diagnosis on the basis of medical documents, results of clinical and specific medical examinations and other evidence confirming the diagnosis and showing the negative impact of the illness on the individual’s ability to work or perform military service.
On 22 September 1995 the Ministry of Defence of the  issued Decree no. 315, adopting the Instruction on Military Medical Examinations in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation (hereinafter “the Instruction”), which, while incorporating the provisions of the Regulations, set out even more detailed rules for military commissions in the field of medical examinations of conscripts. The Instruction (in force at the material time), in so far as relevant, read as follows:
“114. Individuals who were considered in need of an additional medical examination (treatment) at the stage of their initial registration for military service should be included by the military commission in one of the two registers:
In register no. 1 – temporarily unfit for military service;
In register no. 2 – fit for military service with minor restrictions.
No later than five days after the military commission has finished its work, the above-mentioned registers should be sent to the public health service authorities and medical institutions which perform additional medical examinations (treatment) of individuals liable for military service.
The individual is served with a card directing him to an additional medical examination (treatment) at the same time when he is notified about the decision of the commission [pertaining to his fitness for military service]. The card should contain the name of the medical institution to which the individual is sent, the diagnosis, the purpose of the additional medical examination and the date when the individual should present himself for the renewed medical examination by the military commission. The individual should be given an explanation as to why it is necessary to perform an additional medical examination.
...
A military commission should ensure that [additional] and repeated medical examinations are performed in good time.”
The Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (in force since 1 July 2002 – “the CCrP”) provides that a criminal investigation can be initiated by an investigator or a prosecutor on a complaint by an individual or on the investigating authorities’ own initiative, where there are reasons to believe that a crime has been committed (Articles 146 and 147). A prosecutor is responsible for overall supervision of the investigation (Article 37). He can order specific investigative actions, transfer the case from one investigator to another or order an additional investigation. If there are no grounds to initiate a criminal investigation, the prosecutor or investigator issues a reasoned decision to that effect which has to be notified to the interested party. The decision is amenable to appeal to a higher-ranking prosecutor or to a court of general jurisdiction within a procedure established by Article 125 of the CCrP (Article 148). Article 125 of the CCrP provides for judicial review of decisions by investigators and prosecutors that might infringe the constitutional rights of participants in proceedings or prevent access to a court.
The relevant extracts from the Human Rights Watch report of November 2002 (vol. 14, no. 8 (D)) entitled “Russia: Conscription through Detention in Russia’s Armed Forces” read as follows:
“Draft Quota Problems
Due in part to conscription’s unpopularity and in part to the deteriorating health of Russia’s youth, recruitment authorities in many cities throughout Russia cannot meet draft quotas, and many of those drafted have been described as in poor health.
...
The deteriorating health of Russia’s youths has compounded the conscription crisis. Poor health has disqualified about 50 percent of Russia’s young men for military service each year in recent years. A Ministry of Defence official told a press conference in April 2002 that in 2001, doctors on draft boards found no less than 54 percent of the young men tested unfit for military service. Another official said that for the 400,000 young men drafted some 600,000 young men are declared unfit each year.
Because Russia’s youth is wracked with poor health, and because many of Russia’s most healthy and educated young men successfully manage to avoid military service, recruitment officials are often left to select conscripts from a group of young men with low education levels and sometimes serious health problems. An unidentified Russian lawmaker told The Moscow Times that, in a speech to the State Duma, Defence Minister Sergei Ivanov said the young men drafted in the fall of 2001 were a ‘pathetic lot, afflicted with drug addiction, psychological problems and malnutrition’. Ministry of Defence statistics indicate that every second conscript had an alcohol problem prior to entering service, and that every fourth had been a drug user.
...
Accelerated Conscription Proceedings
Draft boards failed to process the young men interviewed for this report diligently and fairly. In violation of Russian conscription regulations, medical examinations were superficial, and draft boards frequently refused to consider possible grounds for exemption or deferral. In some cases, local draft boards processed cases of young men whose residence permits were for elsewhere.
...
Medical Examinations
All young men interviewed for this report said the medical examinations at the local and municipal level were conducted in a cursory manner. The doctors refused to listen to their assertions of serious medical conditions, and in some cases the young men did not even see all the required doctors.”
The relevant extracts from the Human Rights Watch report of November 2003 (vol. 15, no. 9 (D)) entitled “To Serve without Health? Inadequate Nutrition and Health Care in the Russian Armed Forces” read as follows:
“Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, a profound public health crisis has plagued . General health in all parts of the population has deteriorated and life expectancy in Russia lags far behind that in Western Europe. A recent countrywide paediatric health study found that 67 percent of 31.6 million Russians eighteen years old and under suffer from health problems, with bronchial and respiratory illnesses being particularly common...
Violations of the rights to adequate nutrition and medical care in the Russian armed forces must be seen in this context. The privations many conscripts suffer may exacerbate the fragile health they were in when they entered the military...
Military medical commissions that determine whether candidate conscripts are fit for military service typically declare more than 30 percent of those examined unfit. Yet, in a crunch to fulfil draft quotas, each year the commissions also declare many young men fit for service despite health problems that, under Russian law, should disqualify them. Human Rights Watch research in the archives of soldiers’ rights organizations in Moscow, St. Petersburg, Volgograd and other Russian cities found numerous cases of young men who were discharged from the armed forces for health conditions that predated their draft order. In interviews, dozens of conscripts told Human Rights Watch that the medical examinations they underwent had been superficial and that physicians had failed to pay due attention to their health problems.
The violent hazing of first-year conscripts that is endemic in many units of Russia’s armed forces further ruins the health of conscript soldiers. Numerous conscripts described to Human Rights Watch how senior conscript soldiers, known as dedy, systematically bullied them in their first year of service, making them perform degrading chores and physical exercises, and demanding money, alcohol, food, and cigarettes from them. Refusal to comply led to beatings, which most said were routine throughout their first year of service. Many conscript soldiers also said that, at times, they faced far more serious ill-treatment or even torture, both in retribution and gratuitously, including beatings with heavy objects, beatings while they were suspended in painful positions, scorching of skin with lit cigarettes, and sexual abuse.”
In October 2004 Human Rights Watch published a report entitled “The Wrong of Passage: Inhuman and Degrading Treatment of New Recruits in the Russian Armed Forces” (vol 16 no. 8 (D)), documenting abuses under a system called dedovshchina, or “rule of the grandfathers”, which hundreds of thousands of new recruits in the Russian armed forces faced at the hands of more senior conscripts. The report resulted from the three years of research in several regions across Russia, including . The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
“Under a system called dedovshchina, or ‘rule of the grandfathers’, second-year conscripts force new recruits to live in a year-long state of pointless servitude, punish them violently for any infractions of official or informal rules, and abuse them gratuitously. Dozens of conscripts are killed every year as a result of these abuses, and thousands sustain serious – and often permanent – damage to their physical and mental health. Hundreds commit or attempt suicide and thousands run away from their units. This abuse takes place in a broader context of denial of conscripts’ rights to adequate food and access to medical care, which causes many to go hungry or develop serious health problems, and abusive treatment by officers...
Dedovshchina exists in military units throughout the . It establishes an informal hierarchy of conscripts, based on the length of their service, and a corresponding set of rights and duties for each group of the hierarchy. As in militaries around the world, newcomers have essentially no rights under the system—they must earn them over time. At the beginning of their service, conscripts are ‘not eligible’ to eat, wash, relax, sleep, be sick, or even keep track of time. Thus, any restrictions placed on these functions are considered permissible. The life of a new recruit consists of countless obligations to do the bidding of those conscripts who have served long enough – a year or more – to have earned rights in the informal hierarchy. Second-year conscripts, called the dedy, have practically unlimited power with respect to their junior colleagues. They can order them to do whatever they like, no matter how demeaning or absurd the task, while remaining beyond the strictures of the Military Code of Conduct or any other set of formal rules. If a first-year conscript refuses to oblige or fails in the assigned task, the senior conscript is free to administer whatever punishment he deems appropriate, no matter how violent.
Dedovshchina is distinguished by predation, violence, and impunity. During their first year of service, conscripts live under the constant threat of violence for failing to comply with limitless orders and demands of dedy. Many conscripts spent entire days fulfilling these orders, which range from the trivial, like shining the seniors’ boots or making their beds, to the predatory, such as handing over food items to them at meal time, or procuring (legally or illegally) money, alcohol or cigarettes for them. First-year conscripts face violent punishment for any failure – and frequently not only for their own individual failure, as punishment is often collective – to conform to the expectations of dedy. As a rule, punishment happens at night after officers have gone home. Dedy wake the first-year conscripts up in the middle of the night and make them perform push-ups or knee bends, often accompanied by beatings, until they drop. First-year conscripts also routinely face gratuitous abuse, often involving severe beatings or sexual abuse, from drunken dedy at night. Dedy sometimes beat new recruits with stools or iron rods.
Dedovshchina has all the trappings of a classic initiation system; indeed, it likely emerged as one several decades ago. Such systems, which exist in many social institutions around the world, including schools, athletic clubs, and especially the armed forces of many countries, can play a legitimate role in military structures by enhancing group cohesion and esprit de corps. Initiation systems license the group to erase a certain degree of individuality in its members, and the possibility of abuse is inherent in that license.
While dedovshchina may once have served the purpose of initiation, it has in the past twenty years degenerated into a system in which second-year conscripts, once victims of abuse and deprivation themselves, enjoy untrammelled power to abuse their juniors without rule, restriction, or fear of punishment. The result is not enhanced esprit de corps but lawlessness and gross abuse of human rights. The collapse of dedovshchina as an initiation system has occurred at both the command level and at the conscript level.
At the command level, abusive practices associated with dedovshchina have persisted due to an almost universal failure on the part of the officers’ corps to take appropriate measures. Our research found that the vast majority of officers either chose not to notice evidence of dedovshchina or, worse, tolerate or encourage it because they see dedovshchina as an effective means of maintaining discipline in their ranks. Indeed, we found that officers routinely fail to send a clear message to their troops that abuses will not be tolerated, reduce existing prevention mechanisms to empty formalities or ignore them altogether, and fail to respond to clear evidence of abuse.
The perversity of this attitude toward ‘maintaining discipline’ in the short run is that it so clearly undermines the effectiveness of Russia’s armed forces over time. Horror stories about dedovshchina motivate tens of thousands of Russian parents every year to try to keep their sons out of the armed forces. As the most affluent and educated families do so most successfully, the armed forces increasingly draw recruits from poor segments of the population, and many of the recruits suffer from malnutrition, ill-health, alcohol or drug addiction, or other social ills even before they start to serve. Moreover, as mentioned above, thousands of the young men who are drafted each year run away from their units, and hundreds commit suicide.
At the conscript level, the degeneration of the system is more contemptible than perverse: instead of initiating new recruits into their new role of soldiers, dedy use dedovshchina primarily as a means of avenging the abuses they themselves faced during their first year of service and of exploiting new recruits to the fullest extent possible, both materially and otherwise...
Although international law requires the Russian government to take immediate measures to end these abuses, it has thus far failed to take the appropriate steps. Instead of taking a clear and public stance against the abuses, government officials have largely ignored the issue in their numerous speeches about military reform. The government has yet to adopt a clear and comprehensive strategy to deal with the abuses. Instead of vigorously examining the reasons why first-year conscripts flee their units, military officials routinely threaten runaways with prosecution for unauthorized departure from their bases. Military commanders and the military procuracy routinely shield their perpetrators from justice, rather than investigate reported incidents of abuse.”