The case originated in five applications (nos. 30226/10, 17880/11, 17887/11, 17891/11 and 5506/16) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Ömer Kerim Ali Rıza, who has dual British and Turkish citizenship, and four Turkish nationals, Mr Fatih Arslan, Mr Şaban Serin, Mr Mehmet Erhan Berber and Mr Serkan Akal, on 20 April 2010, 29 December 2010 and 11 January 2016 respectively.
The first applicant was first represented by Mr S. Bezen, a lawyer practising in Istanbul and, following his resignation, by Mr L. Valloni, a lawyer practising in Zürich. The second, third and fourth applicants were represented by Mr A. Soydan, and the fifth applicant was represented by Mr Z. Edebali, both lawyers practising in Istanbul.
The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
All five applicants complained that the proceedings before the legal committees of the Turkish Football Federation (Türkiye Futbol Federasyonu – “the TFF”) had not satisfied the requirements of independence and impartiality under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. Except for the first applicant, they further complained under the same Article that the proceedings had not been fair, referring to various procedural shortcomings. The second, third and fourth applicants also complained that the proceedings had infringed their right to peaceful enjoyment of possessions within the meaning of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention taken alone and in conjunction with Article 13 of the Convention.
Notice of the above complaints was given to the Government on 6 February and 26 April 2018 respectively, and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The United Kingdom Government, who were informed of application no. 30226/10, did not exercise their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties and as they appear from the documents submitted by them, may be summarised as follows.
At the time of the events giving rise to the present application, the applicant was a professional football player.
The applicant and Trabzonspor Kulübü Derneği (“the Club”), a professional football club in the top Turkish professional league, signed an undated employment contract effective from 17 January 2006 until 30 June 2008. The contract was drafted in English and specified, among other things, the amounts payable to the applicant.
The Government submitted that the applicant and the Club had also entered into a standard employment contract (tek tip sözleşme) in Turkish on 18 January 2006, which had been certified by a notary public in Trabzon. The applicant, however, categorically denied before the domestic authorities and the Court entering into such a contract and claimed that he had not appeared before the notary.
On 4 January 2008 the applicant left the Club and returned to England, his home country. The next day Mr J. Riza, his agent, informed the Club by fax that the Club had breached the terms of the contract and therefore his client would no longer be playing for it.
By decisions of 8 and 14 January 2008, the board of the Club decided to fine the applicant a total of 184,000 Turkish liras (TRY) (equivalent to approximately 109,523 Euros (EUR) at the material time) for leaving the Club without notice, missing training sessions without permission and failing to return to the Club. The Club gave the applicant notice of these decisions through a notary on 14 and 15 January 2008 respectively.
On 18 January 2008 the applicant filed a witness statement with FIFA (the Fédération internationale de football association). He claimed before the Dispute Resolution Chamber of FIFA that the Club had repeatedly defaulted on its payment obligations under the contract and that certain payments had been made with delays of more than four months. The Club had given him post-dated cheques in exchange for some of the payments, put pressure on him to accept those cheques as full payment and made him sign documents evidencing receipt of payment. He further claimed that the Club had asked him to make “donations” for charitable purposes but that he had never been given any proof of those donations. He also complained that the Club had put psychological pressure on him by forcing him to train with the youth team and not selecting him for the senior team. Lastly, he claimed that he had been given a severe training programme which had made it impossible for him to spend time with his family.
On 8 April 2008 the applicant’s representative sent a written notice of termination to the Club and the TFF declaring that the applicant was terminating the contract for just cause because his salary for the month of March had not been paid. It further stipulated that the situation in which he had been placed had made it impossible for him to continue playing for the Club.
On 16 May 2008 the Club lodged an application with the Dispute Resolution Committee of the TFF (Türkiye Futbol Federasyonu Uyuşmazlık Çözüm Kurulu – “the DRC”) against the applicant, seeking damages in the amount of TRY 291,973 (equivalent to approximately EUR 153,670 at the material time) for wrongful termination of the contract, payment of the fines it had issued and the imposition of a transfer ban on account of his breach of the provisions of the Professional Football and Transfer Directive, as in force at the material time (“the former Transfer Directive”), governing termination of contracts.
On 20 May 2008 the applicant submitted his defence and counterclaims to the DRC. He requested the DRC to order the Club to pay his salary arrears for the months of January, February, March and April 2008, his overdue match appearance fees from the first half of the season 2007/8, and the match appearance fees he would have been paid until the end of his contract had it not been terminated.
On 2 December 2008 the DRC dismissed the applicant’s claims and partially granted the Club’s claims. It held that the applicant had wrongfully terminated his contract and therefore ordered him to pay TRY 94,357.95 (equivalent to approximately EUR 46,711 on the date of the decision) in damages for wrongful termination and a fine of TRY 139,022.80 (equivalent to approximately EUR 68,822 on the date of the decision). It also suspended his ability to sign for another club for four months for having wrongfully terminated his contract with the Club in breach of the former Transfer Directive.
On 22 January 2009 the applicant lodged an objection against the DRC’s decision of 2 December 2008 with the Arbitration Committee of the TFF (Türkiye Futbol Federasyonu Tahkim Kurulu – “the Arbitration Committee”).
By a decision of 16 April 2009, the Arbitration Committee partly allowed the applicant’s objection. It upheld the DRC’s finding that he had wrongfully terminated the contract. However, it held that the Club had also failed to terminate the contract within the period prescribed by the former Transfer Directive and, referring to the amounts owed to the applicant under the contract, reduced the amount he had to pay to TRY 129,353.38 (equivalent to approximately EUR 61,596 on the date of the decision). Lastly, it annulled the sporting sanction imposed on him.
The applicant was served with the Arbitration Committee’s decision on 21 October 2009. The law in force at the material time provided that the Arbitration Committee’s decisions were final and binding and could not be reviewed by the ordinary courts (see paragraph 102 below).
On 11 November 2009 the applicant applied to the Court of Arbitration for Sport (“the CAS”) against the Arbitration Committee’s decision of 16 April 2009.
By a decision of 10 June 2010, the CAS declared the application inadmissible for lack of jurisdiction. It held that the dispute between the applicant and the Club had no international element and therefore did not fall within its competence.
On 9 July 2010 the applicant appealed to the Swiss Federal Court, seeking the annulment of the decision of the CAS. By a decision of 19 April 2011, the Swiss Federal Court dismissed the appeal.
On 11 November 2011 the applicant lodged an application with the Court against Switzerland (application no. 74989/11) complaining under Article 6 about the proceedings before the CAS and the Swiss Federal Court (see paragraph 142 below).
The applicants are amateur football players who played at the material time for İçmeler Belediyespor Kulübü, an amateur football club which was in the Muğla super amateur league.
In the final weeks of the season 2009/10, İçmeler Belediyespor and another team, Yeni Milasspor, were competing against each other to win the league championship and be promoted to the upper league.
On 14 March 2010 İçmeler Belediyespor, the applicants’ team, had a match with Armutalan Belediyespor, while Yeni Milasspor faced Bodrumspor. Since İçmeler Belediyespor and Yeni Milasspor were close on points, both matches were scheduled to start at the same time. However, on the actual day, the match between İçmeler Belediyespor and Armutalan Belediyespor (“the Match”) started with a fifteen-minute delay because the previous match played in the same stadium had finished fifteen minutes late. Moreover, ten minutes of injury time were added to the first half of the Match as one of the players of the opposing team had been seriously injured. As a result, by the time the match between Yeni Milasspor and Bodrumspor finished, the Match was still going on. In the seventy-fifth minute, when it was announced that Bodrumspor had beaten Yeni Milasspor, the applicants’ team had a two-goal lead against their opponents. Following the announcement, they scored three additional goals and won the Match 6-1, which put them ahead of Yeni Milasspor on goal difference.
After the Match was over, Yeni Milasspor and another club competing in the same league, Dalyan Belediyespor, lodged a complaint with the TFF alleging that the Match had been unlawfully fixed.
By a letter of 8 April 2010 the General Secretariat of the TFF referred the complaint about the Match to the Ethics Committee of the TFF (Türkiye Futbol Federasyonu Etik Kurulu – “the Ethics Committee”).
By a decision of 28 April 2010, the Ethics Committee found that players of İçmeler Belediyespor and Armutalan Belediyespor had acted in a way that constituted “matchfixing” (hatır şikesi) after the result of the match between Yeni Milasspor and Bodrumspor had been announced. It noted that, following the announcement, the players of Armutalan Belediyespor had intentionally given the ball to the players of İçmeler Belediyespor and had put up no defence in order to allow additional goals be scored against them.
The matter was subsequently referred to the Amateur Football Disciplinary Committee of the TFF (Türkiye Futbol Federasyonu Amatör Futbol Disiplin Kurulu – “the AFDC”) to decide whether the players and coaches of the teams had committed the offence of “match-fixing” as per the findings of the Ethics Committee.
By a letter of 17 May 2010 the AFDC asked the applicants to file their defence against the match-fixing allegations within forty-eight hours.
On 18 May 2010 the applicants filed their written defence submissions. They unequivocally denied the accusation of match-fixing and submitted that all they had done was to score goals as the opposing team had refused to defend their goal due to their frustration with the referee’s decisions.
On 26 May 2010 the AFDC unanimously found that the applicants had committed the disciplinary offence of “influencing the match result” and banned them from participating in any football-related activity for a year pursuant to Article 55 of the former Football Disciplinary Directive (“the former Disciplinary Directive”).
On 3 June 2010 the applicants lodged an objection against the decision of the AFDC with the Arbitration Committee. They argued that there was no evidence to show their involvement in a match-fixing scheme and that they had been punished on the basis of a mistaken assumption. They also asked the Arbitration Committee to hold a hearing.
By a decision of 1 July 2010, the Arbitration Committee, after hearing the applicants, the referee, the assistant referees and the observer of the Match, unanimously dismissed the applicants’ objection and upheld the AFDC’s decision of 26 May 2010. The Arbitration Committee’s short decision was published on the TFF’s website.
On 23 December 2010 the third applicant asked the Arbitration Committee to provide him with a copy of its reasoned decision. He claimed before the Court that the TFF had responded to his request by stating that the reasoned decision had not yet been drafted. The Government informed the Court that the reasoned decision could not be located in the archives of the Arbitration Committee.
The applicant is a football referee who was a top-level assistant referee (üst klasman yardımcı hakem) between 1 July 2000 and 23 July 2015. Under the TFF rules, top-level assistant referees have the right to referee matches in the top two professional football leagues.
By a decision of 21 July 2015, the Central Referee Committee of the TFF (Türkiye Futbol Federasyonu Merkez Hakem Kurulu – “the CRC”) specified the criteria used to determine the levels of referees in accordance with the Central Referee Committee Directive in force at the material time (“the former CRC Directive”). On that basis, it drew up a list of the toplevel assistant referees for the season 2015/16, which included the names of seventy top-ranking assistant referees. The applicant was, however, ranked at seventy-eight out of eighty-three assistant referees in that list, which resulted in his downgrading to the level of “provincial referee” for the season 2015/16.
On 27 July 2015 the applicant lodged an objection against the CRC’s decision to downgrade him to provincial referee level with the Arbitration Committee, seeking his reinstatement as a top-level assistant referee. Relying on the former CRC Directive, in force at the time of the CRC’s decision, he argued that the number of top-level assistant referees had to be twice the number of top-level referees and that as thirty-nine referees had been selected as top-level referees for the season 2015/16, the number of top-level assistant referees had to be seventy-eight. The applicant contended that the CRC’s decision to limit the number of top-level assistant referees to seventy and exclude him from the list of toplevel assistant referees had been contrary to the former CRC Directive. In his view, the CRC had prepared the list by using the 10% margin granted to it under the previous version, which had been repealed and replaced with the former CRC Directive, which entered into force on 11 July 2014.
On 29 July 2015 the applicant asked the Arbitration Committee to hold a hearing and allow him to comment on the submissions of the CRC.
On 30 July 2015 the Arbitration Committee decided that there was no compelling reason to hold a hearing and dismissed the applicant’s objection. It held that the decision whether or not to include an assistant referee in the list of top-level assistant referees belonged exclusively to the CRC. Determining the number of top-level assistant referees for any given season was also a matter which fell within the CRC’s margin of appreciation. Contrary to what the applicant argued, the former CRC Directive did not in any way limit the CRC’s discretion to select only those referees who were most fit for the position. In particular, the expression “kadar” (“up to”) referred to in the former CRC Directive did not mean that the number of top-level assistant referees had to be exactly twice the number of top-level referees. Instead, the said provision set the maximum number of top-level assistant referees and gave the CRC the ability to reduce the number if it so wished. Accordingly, the CRC had been well within its rights to limit the number of top-level assistant referees to only seventy, and the applicant’s downgrading to the level of “provincial referee” had been in accordance with the law and procedure.
On 19 August 2015 the applicant lodged a fresh application with the Arbitration Committee, requesting the reopening of the proceedings and a review of its decision. He reiterated his argument that the wording of the former CRC Directive left no room for interpretation by unequivocally setting out the number of top-level assistant referees. He added that, in any event, the CRC could only downgrade a referee on the limited grounds provided in the former CRC Directive, none of which had applied in his case. He also asked the Arbitration Committee to hold a hearing before it delivered its decision.
By a decision of 20 August 2015, the Arbitration Committee summarily dismissed the applicant’s request for reopening and a hearing, holding that there were no grounds to justify the reopening of the proceedings.
The TFF was established in 1923 to govern football in Turkey. As the sport’s national federation, it is the highest authority regulating and overseeing all aspects of professional and amateur football in the country. It has been a member of FIFA since 1923 and UEFA (the Union of European Football Associations) since 1962.
By operation of law, the TFF is an autonomous entity which has a separate legal personality and is governed by private-law principles. Its headquarters are in Istanbul.
The legal framework governing the TFF has evolved significantly over the course of time.
At the time of the proceedings to which the first applicant was party, Law no. 3813 of 17 June 1992 on the Establishment and Duties of the Turkish Football Federation (“the former TFF Law”), as amended by Law no. 5719 of 29 November 2007 (“Law no. 5719”), was in force.
On 16 May 2009 Law no. 5894 of 5 May 2009 on the Establishment and Duties of the Turkish Football Federation (“the TFF Law”) took effect, thus repealing and replacing the former TFF Law. The TFF Law was in force at the time of the proceedings to which the remaining applicants were parties.
Unlike its predecessor, the TFF Law only provides a broad legal framework. The detailed provisions governing the TFF’s bodies are set out in the statutes of the TFF (“the TFF Statutes”), adopted on 3 June 2008. The provisions of the TFF Statutes, which entered into force simultaneously with the TFF Law and have been amended from time to time, are complemented by the directives (talimat) issued by the Board of Directors.
A summary of the key provisions of the previous and current TFF legal frameworks pertaining to the composition, powers and manner of appointment of the relevant bodies of the TFF and administration and discipline of football activities is provided below.
The main bodies of the TFF which make up its central organisation are the Congress (Genel Kurul), the Board of Directors (Yönetim Kurulu) and the legal committees (hukuk kurulları) (Article 4 of the former TFF Law and the TFF Law and Article 20 of the TFF Statutes).
The legal committees are structured as a two-tier system. The main firstinstance legal committees (ilk derece hukuk kurulları) of the TFF are the DRC, the Disciplinary Committees (Disiplin Kurulları) and the Ethics Committee (Article 5 of the TFF Law and Article 54 of the TFF Statutes).
The Arbitration Committee is the TFF’s highest legal committee. It hears objections lodged against the decisions of first-instance legal committees and settles football-related disputes falling within its jurisdiction as the appellate body (Article 6 of the TFF Law and Article 54 of the TFF Statutes).
Neither the first-instance legal committees nor the Arbitration Committee have a legal personality or a budget separate from the TFF. They are considered an integral part of the TFF’s central organisation and use the TFF’s staff for secretarial and administrative work. Until 17 April 2019, they were located in the same building as the TFF’s headquarters.
The TFF also has consultancy and administrative units, which consist of the General Secretariat and the standing committees (yan kurullar), with the CRC being one of the standing committees (Article 43 of the TFF Statutes).
The Congress is the main decision-making authority of the TFF. It has the power to adopt and alter the TFF Statutes, which are the main piece of secondary legislation governing the functioning of the TFF’s bodies and are published in the Official Gazette. It also elects the fourteen members of the Board of Directors and the president of the TFF (Türkiye Futbol Federasyonu Başkanı – “the President”), who acts as the chairman of the Board of Directors. The quorum of the Congress consists of the simple majority of the delegates, and decisions are taken with more than half of the votes of the delegates present at the general assembly meeting (Article 6 of the former TFF Law and Articles 21 to 25 of the TFF Statutes).
Article 5 of the former TFF Law provided that the following individuals were eligible to become members of the Congress and participate and vote in the general assembly meeting, which took place every four years:
(a) 	the chairman of each club in the top Turkish professional football league and six delegates chosen by their board of directors;
(b) 	the chairman of each club in the Turkish professional first league and one delegate chosen by their board of directors;
(c) 	the chairman of each club in the groups of the Turkish professional second league;
(d)	the chairman of the top five ranking clubs in each group of the Turkish professional third league;
(e) 	individuals who had served as president of the TFF for more than two years;
(f) 	the president of the National Olympic Committee and one delegate chosen by its board of directors;
(g) 	Turkish citizens who had actively served for at least five years on the Executive Committees of FIFA and UEFA;
(h) 	Turkish citizens who had been coaches of the national team for at least two years;
(ı) 	football players who had been capped for the senior national team at least seventy-five times and who had retired more than six months prior to the date of the general assembly meeting;
(i) 	the president of the Professional Footballers Association (Profesyonel Futbolcular Derneği);
(j) 	the general president of the Amateur Sports Clubs Confederation of Turkey (Türkiye Amatör Spor Kulüpleri Konfederasyonu) and four delegates chosen by its board of directors;
(k) 	the president of the Football Coaches Association of Turkey (Türkiye Futbol Antrenörleri Derneği);
(l) 	retired referees who had refereed at least the finals in the Olympic, world and continental football federation championships in adult categories and at least the semi-finals in the European championships;
(m)	one additional delegate from each club which had won the top Turkish professional football league;
(n) 	the presidents of disabled sports federations which had football in the scope of their activities; and
(o) 	the general president of the Active Football Referees and Observers Association of Turkey (Türkiye Faal Futbol Hakemleri ve Gözlemcileri Derneği).
Article 9 of the TFF Statutes provides that the following entities or individuals are eligible to become members of the TFF:
(a) 	clubs in the Turkish professional football leagues;
(b) 	the Amateur Sports Clubs Confederation of Turkey;
(c) 	the Professional Footballers Association;
(d) 	the Football Coaches Association of Turkey;
(e) 	the Active Football Referees and Observers Association of Turkey;
(f) 	disabled sports federations which have football in the scope of their activities;
(g) 	individuals actively serving on the Executive Committees of FIFA or UEFA;
(h) 	individuals who have actively served on the committees of FIFA or UEFA for at least ten years;
(i) 	individuals who have served as president of the TFF; and
(j) 	other individuals accepted as members by the Congress.
Article 22 of the TFF Statutes provides a list of members of the Congress. The delegates of the Congress nominated by legal person (nonindividual) members of the TFF are as follows:
Amendments made to the TFF Statutes on 29 June 2011 brought about important changes to the criteria provided in the former TFF Law to determine who among players, referees and coaches were eligible to become members of the Congress.
Article 22 of the TFF Statutes since provides that the following individuals are eligible to become members of the Congress:
(a) 	five individuals who are retired football players and who have been capped most for the senior national team;
(b) 	five individuals who have coached the national team the longest;
(c) 	five individuals who are retired referees and who have refereed the most matches in the UEFA Champions League, except for the qualifying rounds, or before that league was established, in the corresponding organisations.
In addition, individuals actively serving on the Executive Committees of FIFA or UEFA, individuals who have actively served on the committees of FIFA or UEFA for at least ten years and former presidents of the TFF are also automatically eligible to become members of the Congress.
The delegates of the Congress are entitled to participate and vote in general assembly meetings of the Congress and elect the President and the Board of Directors of the TFF.
The Board of Directors is the TFF’s executive body, which consists of the President and fourteen members, all of whom are elected by the Congress. The President serves for a four-year term and acts as the chairman of the Board of Directors. To become the President, the prospective candidate must fulfil the conditions set out in the TFF Statutes and have the support of at least one fifth of the delegates of the Congress. The President is elected with the simple majority of the delegates present in the general assembly meeting of the Congress (Article 9 of the former TFF Law and Articles 33 and 38 of the TFF Statutes).
Being a member of the Congress is not a prerequisite to becoming a member of the Board of Directors. Turkish citizens who are at least twentyfive years old are eligible to sit on the Board of Directors, provided that they have not received any disciplinary sanctions from the TFF or been convicted of certain crimes (Article 33 of the TFF Statutes).
Once elected to the Board of Directors, any individual who is the chairman or a member of the board of a professional football club must resign from his or her position. Members are also precluded from sitting on any other bodies of the TFF or becoming a member of the Congress during the term of their office (Article 10 of the former TFF Law and Articles 33 and 38 of the TFF Statutes).
The Board of Directors has the power to appoint some or all members of the legal committees of the TFF as well as the standing committees of the TFF, such as the CRC, upon the recommendation of the President and determine the amount of per diem, remuneration, accommodation expenses and allowances payable to members of some of those bodies (Article 10 of the former TFF Law and Article 35 of the TFF Statutes).
The Board of Directors also has the power to issue and enforce directives which govern the functioning of the various bodies of the TFF as well as the administration and discipline of football (Article 10 of the former TFF Law and Article 35 of the TFF Statutes). Once adopted by the Board of Directors, the directives enter into force following their publication on the TFF’s website.
Another power of the Board of Directors is to review and approve the decisions of the CRC which create legal effect and are likely to be challenged before the Arbitration Committee (Article 35 of the TFF Statutes).
The DRC was established by Law no. 5719, which took effect on 4 December 2007, to review football disputes of a contractual nature as a first-instance legal committee of the TFF.
At the time of the events giving rise to application no. 30226/10, Article 12/A of the former TFF Law and the former Dispute Resolution Committee Directive (“the former DRC Directive”) constituted the legal basis of the DRC.
Under the former DRC Directive, the DRC was composed of a chairman and fifteen other members. Its chairman was appointed by the Board of Directors. The remaining members were nominated by the following football associations, which each had the right to nominate five members: (i) the Football Clubs Foundation (Kulüpler Birliği Vakfı); (ii) the Professional Footballers Association; and (iii) the Football Coaches Association of Turkey. Members of the DRC, including the chairman, had to be law graduates with at least five years’ professional experience (Article 12/A of the former TFF Law and Article 3 of the former DRC Directive).
Its decisions were taken by committees of five, which consisted of the chairman, two members nominated by the Football Clubs Foundation and two members nominated by the relevant associations, depending on the subject of the dispute (Article 8 of the former DRC Directive).
Objections against its decisions could be lodged with the Arbitration Committee (Article 14 of the former TFF Law and former DRC Directive).
The Ethics Committee was established to protect the ethical values and brand value of Turkish football and preserve its reputation in the eyes of the public (Article 60 § 1 of the TFF Statutes).
Under the TFF Statutes and the Ethics Committee Directive, which entered into force on 2 December 2009 (Etik Kurulu Talimatı – “the Ethics Committee Directive”), the Ethics Committee is composed of a chairman, four principal and four substitute members, who are appointed by the Board of Directors upon the recommendation of the President. All members must be law graduates with at least five years’ professional experience (Article 60 § 1 of the TFF Statutes and Article 3 § 1 of the Ethics Committee Directive).
The procedure before the Ethics Committee starts with a referral by the Board of Directors which must, either of its own motion or upon receipt of a complaint, refer instances of match-fixing which it considers sufficiently serious (Article 7 § 1 of the Ethics Committee Directive).
Upon referral, the Ethics Committee carries out a preliminary investigation into the allegations of match-fixing. On the basis of the evidence gathered in its investigation, the Ethics Committee prepares a report which is submitted to the Board of Directors, which will then decide whether or not to refer the matter to the relevant disciplinary committee (Article 7 §§ 2 and 6 of the Ethics Committee Directive).
The AFDC, together with the Professional Football Disciplinary Committee of the TFF (Türkiye Futbol Federasyonu Profesyonel Futbol Disiplin Kurulu – “the PFDC”) and the provincial disciplinary committees make up the Disciplinary Committees (Article 57 of the TFF Statutes).
The Football Disciplinary Directive, which entered into force on 11 August 2017 (Futbol Disiplin Talimatı – “the Disciplinary Directive”), provides that the AFDC has power to decide on disciplinary offences committed resulting from the actions of amateur football clubs, their players, coaches, executives and other individuals, as well as referees and other officials involved in amateur football matches (Article 63 of the Disciplinary Directive).
It is composed of a chairman, six principal and six substitute members, who are appointed by the Board of Directors upon the recommendation of the President. Following the amendments to the TFF Statutes, which took effect as of 15 June 2019, all members of the AFDC must be law graduates with at least five years’ professional experience (Article 57 §§ 2 to 5 of the TFF Statutes and Article 62 of the Disciplinary Directive).
Objections against decisions of the AFDC can be lodged with the Arbitration Committee within seven days of receipt (Article 88 of the Disciplinary Directive).
The CRC is a standing committee of the TFF whose main duty is to appoint referees and observers for official and friendly football matches.
One of the main duties of the CRC is to determine the levels of professional referees. The names of those who will be appointed as referees are submitted to the Board of Directors for approval (Article 5 of the former CRC Directive). Moreover, the current CRC Directive, which entered into force on 8 May 2019 (Merkez Hakem Kurulu Talimatı – “the CRC Directive”), expressly provides that the number of the top-level assistant referees is determined by the Board of Directors upon the recommendation of the CRC (Article 43 of the TFF Statutes and Articles 5 and 39 of the CRC Directive).
The CRC is composed of one chairman and eight members, who are appointed by the Board of Directors upon the recommendation of the President. Referees who have retired at least one year prior to the date of their appointment are eligible to become members of the CRC. Three of its members, including the chairman, can be selected among individuals who have not been referees but who possess experience in the field of sports (Article 43 of the TFF Statutes and Article 3 of the CRC Directive).
They are required to act independently when discharging their duties and cannot be removed from office unless they resign or withdraw from membership (Article 43 of the TFF Statutes). Except for the president and two members who serve on a special committee, members of the CRC receive a per diem in an amount determined by the Board of Directors (Article 27 of the CRC Directive).
An objection against the levels of referees published by the CRC may be lodged with the Arbitration Committee within seven days of publication of the list of referees (Article 36 of the CRC Directive).
The Arbitration Committee is the highest legal committee of the TFF. It is the final authority which decides on disputes falling within its jurisdiction as set out in the TFF Statutes and the relevant directives.
At the time of the events giving rise to application no. 30226/10, Articles 13 and 14 of the former TFF Law set out the competence, composition and duties of the Arbitration Committee. Those provisions were complemented by the former Arbitration Committee Directive of April 2008 (“the former Arbitration Directive”).
The rules under the TFF Law, the TFF Statutes and the Arbitration Committee Directive, which entered into force on 11 August 2017 (Tahkim Kurulu Talimatı – “the Arbitration Directive”), are not significantly different from the rules under the previous legal framework. Accordingly, reference will mainly be made to the rules governing the duties, powers, composition and appointment of the Arbitration Committee as laid down in the TFF Law, the TFF Statutes and the Arbitration Directive.
The Arbitration Committee is authorised to review, among other things, objections filed against decisions of the DRC and the Disciplinary Committees of the TFF. It also has the authority to set aside directives issued by the Board of Directors that are incompatible with the TFF Law and/or the TFF Statutes (Article 14 of the former TFF Law, Article 62 of the TFF Statutes and Article 2 of the Arbitration Directive).
The Arbitration Committee has full jurisdiction to examine the facts and law of the case and render a definitive decision on the matter. It has the power to uphold the contested decision in whole or in part or amend it where deemed appropriate (Article 62 of the TFF Statutes and Article 15 of the Arbitration Directive).
The Arbitration Committee is composed of a chairman, six principal and six substitute members, who are appointed by the Board of Directors upon the recommendation of the President. Members must be law graduates with at least five years’ professional experience. Moreover, individuals serving on the board of autonomous sports federations or sports clubs or those who have received a disciplinary sanction of more than six months are not eligible to sit on the Arbitration Committee. In addition, members of the Arbitration Committee may not work in other bodies or organs of the TFF or in any club which is a member of the TFF or any other private-law entity (Article 13 of the former TFF Law, Article 6 of the TFF Law and Article 61 of the TFF Statutes).
Members of the Arbitration Committee are appointed for the term of the Board of Directors and the President. They may not be removed from office unless they have resigned or withdrawn from membership by not attending a certain number of meetings (Article 13 of the former TFF Law and Article 61 of the TFF Statutes).
The TFF legislation does not contain any provision preventing the reappointment of members of the Arbitration Committee for another term.
The law imposes on members of the Arbitration Committee a duty to decide in an independent and impartial manner (Article 13 of the former TFF Law and Article 6 of the TFF Law).
Members of the Arbitration Committee receive a per diem in an amount determined at the beginning of each season by the Board of Directors for each meeting they attend (Article 22 of the Arbitration Directive).
The proceedings must be carried out in accordance with the procedural rules provided for in other legislation, to the extent that they are not contrary to the rules set out in the Arbitration Directive (Article 61 of the TFF Statutes and Article 18 of the Arbitration Directive).
Applications to the Arbitration Committee against decisions of the first-instance legal committees must be made in writing. The Arbitration Committee first examines whether the written submissions meet the formal requirements and, if they are considered complete, serves them on the relevant parties with a request for a reply (Articles 8 and 9 of the Arbitration Directive).
Following the exchange of written submissions, the case is submitted to the Arbitration Committee together with the opinion of the member who examined the case. The Committee, as a general rule, carries out an onpaper examination but where necessary may ask the parties to supply further information and documents or hold a hearing (Article 10 of the Arbitration Directive).
The decisions of the Arbitration Committee are taken by the majority of members present. Where the votes are equal, the chairman has the casting vote. Moreover, the Arbitration Committee must give reasons for its decisions. The operative part of the decision is notified immediately to the General Secretariat of the TFF and the reasoned decision must be served on the parties within three months of the application to the Arbitration Committee at the latest. Furthermore, objections against decisions of the Disciplinary Committees must be decided within one month (Article 61 of the TFF Statutes and Articles 12 and 13 of the Arbitration Directive).
The Arbitration Committee must decide in accordance with substantive Turkish law, having regard to the provisions of the TFF Law (enacted by Parliament), the TFF Statutes (enacted by the Congress), the directives of the TFF (enacted by the Board of Directors), and the rules of FIFA and UEFA (Article 61 of the TFF Statutes and Article 19 of the Arbitration Directive).
The former TFF Law and the former Arbitration Directive expressly stipulated that decisions rendered by the Arbitration Committee were final, not subject to the approval of any administrative or judicial body and could not be challenged before any such authority (Article 14 of the former TFF Law and Article 14 of the former Arbitration Directive).
Article 6 of the TFF Law also originally contained a similar provision, which stated that decisions of the Arbitration Committee were final and not open to judicial review by the ordinary courts.
By a decision of 6 January 2011, the Constitutional Court struck down as unconstitutional the part of that provision excluding the judicial review of decisions of the Arbitration Committee. It held that the immunity of decisions of the Arbitration Committee from judicial review violated the right of access to court guaranteed by Article 36 of the Constitution.
Following the Constitutional Court’s decision, Article 59 of the Constitution on the development of sports was amended on 17 March 2011. The word “arbitration” was added to its heading and a third paragraph was inserted, which reads as follows:
“Decisions of sports federations relating to the administration and discipline of sports activities may be challenged only through compulsory arbitration. Decisions of arbitration committees are final and shall not be appealed to any judicial authority.”
As per Article 59 § 3 of the Constitution, the TFF Statutes and the Arbitration Directive set out that, notwithstanding the rules of civil and criminal procedure on the reopening of proceedings and rectification of factual errors, decisions of the Arbitration Committee are final and binding and not amenable to review before the ordinary courts (Article 62 of the TFF Statutes and Article 14 of the Arbitration Directive).
The mere fact that there has been a breach of the right to a fair hearing does not constitute grounds for the reopening of proceedings under the rules of civil or criminal procedure. A domestic arbitration award can be set aside by way of annulment proceedings (iptal davası) where the principle of equality of the parties and the right to be heard is not respected or the award is against public order. This, however, does not apply to the Arbitration Committee’s decisions because their review by any authority, without exception, is not permitted.
Legal framework governing TFF’s jurisdiction on contractual disputes
Before the amendments introduced by Law no. 5719 entered into force, the Board of Directors had jurisdiction to settle contractual football disputes (see Kolgu v. Turkey (dec.), no. 2935/07, § 10, 27 August 2013).
Following the entry into force of Law no. 5719, the former TFF Law gave the DRC exclusive jurisdiction to settle disputes arising under all kinds of contracts or those relating to football between (i) clubs; (ii) clubs and footballers, coaches, trainers, players’ agents, masseurs and match organisers; and (iii) players’ agents and footballers, coaches and trainers (Article 12/A of the former TFF Law).
Article 5 § 2 of the TFF Law also originally contained a provision similar to Article 12/A of the former TFF Law which provided that the DRC had exclusive jurisdiction to settle disputes arising in connection with the TFF Law, the TFF Statutes and the TFF’s directives. The TFF Statutes also provided that the DRC had exclusive jurisdiction to settle disputes between (i) clubs; (ii) clubs and footballers, professional coaches, trainers and players’ agents; and (iii) players’ agents and footballers, professional coaches and trainers.
Article 59 § 3 of the Constitution, introduced by the constitutional amendment of 17 March 2011, provides that decisions of sports federations relating to the administration and discipline of sports activities may be challenged only through compulsory arbitration (see paragraph 105 above).
The constitutionality of Article 5 § 2 of the TFF Law giving exclusive jurisdiction to the legal committees of the TFF, including the DRC was challenged before the Constitutional Court in proceedings brought by a licensed players’ agent against a football club to recover amounts due to him.
By a decision of 18 January 2018, the Constitutional Court found Article 5 § 2 of the TFF Law unconstitutional. It noted that Article 59 § 3 of the Constitution made arbitration compulsory only for the settlement of disputes arising from the “administration” and “discipline” of sports activities. However, Article 5 § 2 of the TFF Law made no such distinction and provided that disputes arising from all football-related disputes had to be exclusively heard by the legal committees of the TFF, without any possibility of bringing the dispute before the ordinary courts. Accordingly, the Constitutional Court concluded that Article 5 § 2 of the TFF Law was not only contrary to Article 59 § 3 of the Constitution but also impaired the essence of an individual’s right of access to a court.
The Constitutional Court’s decision entered into force within one year of its publication in the Official Gazette, that is, on 3 March 2019.
After the Constitutional Court’s decision of 18 January 2018 entered into force (see paragraph 113 above), the TFF Statutes were amended on 15 June 2019 so as to provide that clubs, footballers, coaches and football managers are free whether or not to accept the DRC’s jurisdiction for the disputes arising out of all kinds of football-related contracts between them, except for those concerning sporting sanctions and training compensation which fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the DRC (Article 56 of the TFF Statutes).
The Dispute Resolution Directive, which entered into force on 17 June 2019 (Uyuşmazlık Çözüm Kurulu Talimatı – “the DRC Directive”), also provides that the DRC has voluntary jurisdiction in contractual disputes unless the dispute arises from sporting sanctions and training compensation (Article 2 of the DRC Directive).
Accordingly, as at the date of this judgment, a dispute between a football player and a club such as the dispute which gave rise to the application of the first applicant (application no. 30226/10) can be brought before the ordinary courts. Moreover, even if the parties choose to first refer such a dispute to the TFF by accepting the DRC’s jurisdiction, they may still file an appeal to the ordinary courts against the decisions delivered by the legal committees of the TFF.
Legal framework of the TFF governing the discipline and administration of football
At the time of the events giving rise to application no. 30226/10, football players who unilaterally terminated their contracts without just cause would be prevented from playing in football matches for a four-month period by suspending their ability to sign for a new club during that period (Article 35 of the former Transfer Directive).
The procedure relating to disciplinary matters before the TFF is primarily governed by a directive issued by the Board of Directors.
The Disciplinary Directive applies to all football matches organised by the TFF or falling within its authority and to clubs, club executives, players (professional and amateur), coaches and other individuals involved in football activities. It provides that clubs or individuals who act contrary to sportsmanship, the rules of the game and decisions and directives of the TFF are punishable by a disciplinary sanction. The Directive further provides that as regards unsportsmanlike conduct or other disciplinary provisions a referee not seeing and making a decision about such conduct does not prevent a person from being sanctioned (Article 58 of the TFF Statutes and Articles 3 and 4 of the Disciplinary Directive).
The Disciplinary Directive also governs instances of match-fixing in football matches. It uses the term “influencing the match result” to describe the act of fixing the match result and contains an absolute ban on influencing or any attempt to influence match results. The former Disciplinary Directive, in force at the time of the proceedings to which the second, third and fourth applicants were parties, provided that anyone who influenced or attempted to influence the result of a match would be banned for one to three years. The Disciplinary Directive, however, provides that anyone found guilty of influencing the match result will be banned permanently. It also defines the scope of the “ban” by stating that those who are banned cannot participate in football matches, cannot carry out administrative, sporting or any other activity relating to football and cannot enter stadiums. Moreover, it specifies that the time period between two seasons cannot be counted towards the duration of the ban (Articles 56 and 97 of the Disciplinary Directive).
The framework of the Disciplinary Directive is complemented by the Football Competition Directive (Futbol Müsabaka Talimatı – “the Competition Directive”), which regulates the rules of the game. The current version of the Competition Directive, which entered into force on 9 August 2017, provides that it is forbidden to influence or attempt to influence a match result in a way contrary to the law or sports ethics, and sets out the consequences for a football club of influencing the match result (Article 25 of the Competition Directive).
The Amateur Players Licence and Transfer Directive, which entered into force on 11 August 2006 (Amatör Futbolcu Lisans ve Transfer Talimatı – “the Amateur Football Directive”), defines amateur players as players who play without receiving any remuneration except for reimbursement of expenses which are essential for their participation in football activities such as accommodation, equipment, insurance and training expenses (Article 4 of the Amateur Football Directive).
The Ombudsman Institution of the Republic of Turkey (“the Ombudsman”) was established in 2012 by Law no. 6328 of 14 June 2012 as an entity affiliated with Parliament.
Article 5 of Law no. 6328 provides that the Ombudsman’s duty is to examine, investigate and make recommendations to administrative authorities in relation to any of their acts and actions upon a complaint lodged against the relevant administrative authority. The Ombudsman assesses the functioning of that entity within the framework of an understanding of human rights-based justice and in terms of its legality and conformity with the principle of fairness. If the Ombudsman concludes that the acts or actions of that entity were not lawful or just and finds in favour of the applicant, it issues a recommendation decision (tavsiye kararı) containing proposals for the remedying of the shortcomings of the administrative practices which gave rise to the application. The recommendation decisions are advisory only.
By a recommendation decision of 27 July 2018, the Ombudsman held that disciplinary proceedings before the TFF were not independent and impartial. The decision originated in a complaint lodged by a former member of the Board of Directors of the TFF who was dismissed and subject to several disciplinary sanctions for comments that he had made about the TFF in private. The Ombudsman held that the PFDC and the Arbitration Committee were not independent of the Board of Directors and recommended that relevant changes be made to the TFF Statutes, the Disciplinary Directive and the Arbitration Directive to ensure the independence and impartiality of disciplinary proceedings before the TFF.
In its decision, the Ombudsman referred to an opinion delivered by an academic on whether proceedings before the PFDC and the Arbitration Committee were independent and impartial. The relevant part of the opinion referred to reads as follows:
“... The PFDC is completely dependent on the Board of Directors and eventually the President. This is why the mandate of the PFDC is limited to the term of office of the Board of Directors. Accordingly, the PFDC members are bound by the instructions of the President and the Board of Directors. They owe the position they are in to the President and the Board of Directors who elected them. Therefore, there are no legal safeguards against the members being subjected to express or implied but generally unofficial wishes, demands, orders and requests of the President and the Board of Directors ...
This analysis is even more true for the Arbitration Committee ... There are no mechanisms in the legislation or regulations to protect the Arbitration Committee from outside pressures. Although Article 61 § 4 of the TFF Statutes provides that the Arbitration Committee shall be independent in carrying out its functions, there are no real assurances for members of the Committee. The applicable law, in particular the Constitution, does not contain any provisions protecting members of the Arbitration Committee from taking orders from public institutions or semi-public institutions like the TFF including the President and the Board of Directors (see, mutatis mutandis, Brudnicka and Others v. Poland, no. 54273/00, § 41, 3 March 2005). Therefore, the abstract and general provision concerning the independence of the members is completely misleading. This misleading appearance is contrary to the principle of “justice must not only be done; it must also be seen to be done” (see, mutatis mutandis, Bramelid and Malström v. Sweden, nos. 8588/79 and 8589/79, report of the Commission of 12 December 1983, para. 35). The members of the Arbitration Committee are bound by the instructions of the President and the Board of Directors. Furthermore, they are determined at the sole discretion of the President and the Board of Directors. This system places members of the Arbitration Committee in an unprotected and weak position which makes them vulnerable to manipulation ...”
The Government provided the Court with two decisions taken by the legal committees of the TFF in which requests to reopen the proceedings were granted.
The first decision concerned a professional football player who had received a sporting sanction of six months. By a decision of 28 December 2017, the Arbitration Committee partly granted the player’s request to reopen on the grounds that an amendment to the Transfer Directive had reduced the maximum period of suspension from six to four months. Holding that the subsequent amendment to the Transfer Directive was in favour of the player, the Arbitration Committee reduced the length of the player’s sanction to four months.
The second decision concerned a former member of the Board of Directors. The PFDC had suspended that individual for a year and six months for having acted contrary to good sportsmanship and insulting the referees of a football match. By a decision of 18 August 2016, the PFDC granted the request to reopen on the grounds that an amendment to the Discipline Directive had reduced the minimum period of suspension for the offence of insult from six to three months. Holding that the change in the directive was in favour of the applicant, the PFDC reduced the length of the total sanction to nine months.
Actions or agreements purporting to fix the result of a football match became a criminal offence with the enactment of Law no. 6222 on the Prevention of Violence and Disorder in Sports (“Law no. 6222”), which came into force on 14 April 2011.
Under Law no. 6222, a person who provides a gain or other interest to another with a view to influencing the result of a sports competition may be punished with one to three years of imprisonment and ordered to pay up to twenty thousand day-fines. The person who benefits from such an arrangement is also criminally liable. Law no. 6222 further provides that the punishment of a person under the law does not remove the relevant sports federation’s right to impose a disciplinary sanction in the same matter.
Article 14 of the FIFA Statutes reads as follows:
“1. Member associations have the following obligations:
(a) to comply fully with the Statutes, regulations, directives and decisions of FIFA bodies at any time as well as the decisions of the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) passed on appeal on the basis of art. 57 par. 1 of the FIFA Statutes;
...
(d) to cause their own members to comply with the Statutes, regulations, directives and decisions of FIFA bodies;
...
(f) to ratify statutes that are in accordance with the requirements of the FIFA Standard Statutes;
...
Violation of the above-mentioned obligations by any member association may lead to sanctions provided for in these Statutes.”
Article 15 of the FIFA Statutes provides:
“Member associations’ statutes must comply with the principles of good governance, and shall in particular contain, at a minimum, provisions relating to the following matters:
...
(d) to ensure that judicial bodies are independent (separation of powers);
...
(f) all relevant stakeholders must agree to recognise the jurisdiction and authority of CAS and give priority to arbitration as a means of dispute resolution ...”
Article 59 § 3 of the FIFA Statutes states:
“The associations shall insert a clause in their statutes or regulations, stipulating that it is prohibited to take disputes in the association or disputes affecting leagues, members of leagues, clubs, members of clubs, players, officials and other association officials to ordinary courts of law, unless the FIFA regulations or binding legal provisions specifically provide for or stipulate recourse to ordinary courts of law. Instead of recourse to ordinary courts of law, provision shall be made for arbitration. Such disputes shall be taken to an independent and duly constituted arbitration tribunal recognised under the rules of the association or confederation or to CAS. The associations shall also ensure that this stipulation is implemented in the association, if necessary by imposing a binding obligation on its members. The associations shall impose sanctions on any party that fails to respect this obligation and ensure that any appeal against such sanctions shall likewise be strictly submitted to arbitration, and not to ordinary courts of law.”
FIFA Circular no. 1010 provides that the minimum procedural standard that an “independent” and “duly constituted” arbitration tribunal should meet in accordance with Article 59 of the FIFA Statutes is as follows:
“- Principle of parity when constituting the arbitration tribunal
The parties must have equal influence over the appointment of arbitrators. This means for example that every party shall have the right to appoint an arbitrator and the two appointed arbitrators appoint the chairman of the arbitration tribunal. The parties concerned may also agree to appoint jointly one single arbitrator. Where arbitrators are to be selected from a predetermined list, every interest group that is represented must be able to exercise equal influence over the compilation of the arbitrator list.
- Right to an independent and impartial tribunal
To observe this right, arbitrators (or the arbitration tribunal) must be rejected if there is any legitimate doubt about their independence. The option to reject an arbitrator also requires that the ensuing rejection and replacement procedure be regulated by agreement, rules of arbitration or state rules of procedure.
- Principle of a fair hearing
Each party must be granted the right to speak on all facts essential to the ruling, represent its legal points of view, file relevant motions to take evidence and participate in the proceedings. Every party has the right to be represented by a lawyer or other expert.
- Right to contentious proceedings
Each party must be entitled to examine and comment on the allegations filed by the other party and attempt to rebut and disprove them with its own allegations and evidence.
- Principle of equal treatment
The arbitration tribunal must ensure that the parties are treated equally. Equal treatment requires that identical issues are always dealt with in the same way vis-à-vis the parties.”
The Circular further provides that members of FIFA are obliged to ensure compliance with the foregoing minimum standard at all times when establishing or recognising an arbitration tribunal in accordance with Article 59 of the FIFA Statutes. Members may specify additional requirements with a view to enforcing the independence and due constitution of the arbitration tribunal.
Article 59 of the UEFA Statutes reads as follows:
“1. Each Member Association shall include in its statutes a provision whereby it, its leagues, clubs, players and officials agree to respect at all times the Statutes, regulations and decisions of UEFA ...
Each Member Association shall ensure that its leagues, clubs, players and officials acknowledge and accept these obligations ...”
Article 60 of the UEFA Statutes, entitled “Obligation to Refer Disputes to Court of Arbitration”, provides as follows:
“Associations shall include in their statutes a provision under which disputes of national dimension arising from or related to the application of their statutes or regulations shall, subject to their national legislation, be referred in the last instance to an independent and impartial court of arbitration, to the exclusion of any ordinary court.”
The relevant parts of the memorandum of understanding entered into between the Council of Europe and UEFA on 9 May 2018 provide as follows:
“1.6. ... Co-operation on enhancing the international system of sport justice is needed with a view to increasing its independence and respect for human rights, while recognising the crucial role of arbitration in resolving sport cases in an effective and efficient manner, in so far as it complies with human rights standards, such as the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
...
5. Promoting good governance in sport, in particular compliance of the football organisations with its key principles, such as democracy, gender balance, stakeholder’s involvement, transparency, accountability, solidarity and checks and balances, as well as with the relevant anti-corruption standards.”
The relevant provisions of the memorandum of understanding entered into between UEFA and FIFPro on 10 December 2007 read as follows:
“2.6 That, in respect of the modernisation of football structures and the reinforcement of internal mechanisms within football for the resolution of conflict, FIFPro Division Europe supports the implementation of arbitration procedures and dispute resolution chambers by associations, operating on the bases defined by FIFA in circular no. 1010, especially in Europe. UEFA is also supportive of the implementation of proper arbitration procedures to deal with disputes in football.
...
2. Subject to national legislation any dispute between the Club and the Player regarding this employment contract shall be submitted to independent and impartial arbitration composed of equal representatives of each party (employer and employee) under the National Association’s statutes and regulations, or to CAS. Such decisions are final. Under the conditions mentioned in the FIFA Regulations for the Status and Transfer of Players, disputes may be settled by the Dispute Resolution Chamber, with an appeal possibility to CAS.”