The case originated in two applications (nos. 69916/10 and 36531/11) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Macedonian nationals, Mr Ivo Poposki (“the first applicant”) and Mrs Violeta Duma (“the second applicant”), on 20 November 2010 and 8 June 2011 respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Ms Z. Ivanoska and the second applicant by Mr S. Ilik, lawyers practising in Skopje. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov.
Mirjana Lazarova Trajkovska, the judge elected in respect of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28). On 26 August 2014 the President of the Chamber decided to appoint Ksenija Turković to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29).
The applicants complained, inter alia, that the State Judicial Council (“the SJC”) that had dismissed them from the office of judge was not an “independent and impartial tribunal”.
On 18 February 2013 the applications were communicated to the Government. It was also decided to apply Rule 41 of the Rules of Court and grant priority treatment to the applications.
The applicants were born in 1963 and 1951, and live in Ohrid and Skopje respectively.
On 24 June 2009 N.H.A., a member of the SJC, a body vested with jurisdiction to decide, inter alia, on the dismissal of judges (see Amendment XXIX to the Constitution, paragraph 23 below) requested that the SJC initiate professional misconduct proceedings in respect of the first applicant. The request was submitted under sections 55 and 58 of the State Judicial Council Act of 2006 (“the 2006 Act”, see paragraph 24 below) and the Rules governing professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge (“the Rules”, see paragraph 30 below), which provided that a member of the SJC could seek the institution of professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge. In the request N.H.A. claimed that the first applicant had violated the rules on legal representation of the parties in a case he had adjudicated. The first applicant replied in writing.
A commission for determination of professional misconduct by a judge (Комисија за утврдување нестручно и несовесно вршење на судиската функција, hereinafter “the Commission”) was set up under section 58 of the 2006 Act, composed of five SJC members. N.H.A. did not participate in the composition of the Commission. On the basis of the N.H.A.’s request, the first applicant’s reply and obtained evidence, the Commission submitted a report to the SJC in which it sought that it initiate professional misconduct proceedings against the first applicant, which the SJC did with a separate decision.
On 10 November 2009 the Commission held a hearing at which it heard evidence from N.H.A. and the first applicant. The first applicant stated that on that occasion he had submitted a written request for the withdrawal of N.H.A., citing lack of impartiality. He provided the Court with a copy of that submission. The record of the hearing held on 23 November 2009 indicates that the first applicant referred to that request in his concluding remarks. No decision was taken in respect of the request. The Government submitted that there was no copy of it in the case file. The records of the hearings of 10 and 23 November 2009 were signed by the first applicant, N.H.A. as the complainant, and the members of the Commission.
On 9 December 2009 the plenary of the SJC, which included N.H.A., dismissed the first applicant from the office of judge for professional misconduct, finding that he had violated the rules on legal representation of the parties.
The first applicant challenged that decision at second instance, namely before an appeal panel formed within the Supreme Court (“the Appeal Panel”). Such panels were set up on an ad hoc basis in each separate case. As specified under section 60 of the 2006 Act (see paragraph 24 below), they were composed of nine judges, of whom three were to be Supreme Court judges, four Appeal Court judges and two judges from the court of the defendant. The applicant also sought the withdrawal of Judge T.S. from the Appeal Panel because of a bad personal relationship with him. On 22 March 2010 the President of the Supreme Court, relying on sections 64 and 67 of the Civil Proceedings Act (see paragraphs 26 and 27 below), dismissed the first applicant’s request, finding no grounds for doubt in respect of Judge T.S.’s impartiality.
On 27 April 2010 the Appeal Panel, which included Judge T.S., dismissed the appeal and upheld the SJC’s dismissal decision of 9 December 2009.
By two separate submissions of 8 June and 26 August 2009 (received by the SJC on 23 June and 9 September 2009 respectively), the Minister of Justice, who was an ex officio member of the SJC (see Amendment XXVIII to the Constitution, paragraph 23 below), requested that the SJC institute professional misconduct proceedings in respect of the second applicant. The requests concerned two separate criminal cases (nos. Кок.бр.7/08 and К.бр.1297/02-I), in which the second applicant had sat as president of the adjudicating panels. It was alleged that she had failed to establish the identity of a convicted person (in case no. Кок.бр.7/08) and that there had been a possible conflict of interests (in case no. К.бр.1297/02I). The second applicant replied in writing.
The SJC set up a Commission in the second applicant’s case, which did not include the Minister of Justice. On the basis of the requests, the second applicant’s reply and obtained evidence, the Commission submitted a report to the SJC in which it sought that it initiate professional misconduct proceedings against her. On 12 March 2010 the plenary of the SJC initiated professional misconduct proceedings in respect of the second applicant and temporarily suspended her from the office of judge. The relevant parts of that decision read as follows:
“The SJC, on the basis of [the Minister’s] requests ... set up (a commission to determine whether there had been professional misconduct on the part of the second applicant) ... (The Commission) ... submitted to the SJC a report (as to whether the request was justified).
The SJC ... discussed the requests and (the Commission’s) report and decided (to initiate professional misconduct proceedings) ...”
This decision was served on the Minister of Justice, as the complainant, the second applicant and the President of the Skopje Court of Appeal in which the second applicant worked as a judge.
On 24 March 2010 the President of the SJC rejected as inadmissible an appeal by the second applicant against that decision.
On the same date, the President of the SJC asked the SJC to initiate professional misconduct proceedings in respect of the remaining judges who had sat, together with the second applicant, on the adjudicating panel of the Skopje Court of Appeal in criminal case no. Кок.бр.7/08. The grounds for the request were the same as those indicated in the request dated 8 June 2009 (see paragraph 13 above). On 25 March 2010 the President of the SJC agreed to act as complainant in respect of the requests dated 26 August 2009 (with regard to the second applicant) and 24 March 2010. It was agreed that the proceedings should be joined.
On 5 May 2010 the president of the Commission set up in the second applicant’s case refused her request for a public hearing. As stated in the decision, professional misconduct proceedings before the SJC were confidential and the public was excluded in order to preserve the reputation of the judge concerned.
On 15 June 2010 the plenary of the SJC, including the Minister of Justice and the President of the SJC, dismissed the second applicant and Judge V.Dž. from the office of judge for professional misconduct. The grounds for the second applicant’s dismissal were as set out in the requests for her dismissal submitted by the Minister of Justice. The SJC stayed the professional misconduct proceedings (запира постапка) in respect of the remaining judges named in the request of 24 March 2010. The decision was served on the second applicant, the complainant and the President of the Skopje Court of Appeal.
The second applicant appealed to the Supreme Court Appeal Panel against her dismissal (see paragraph 11 above). She complained, inter alia, that the Minister of Justice, as an ex officio member of the SJC and the person who had set in motion the dismissal proceedings against her, had been party to the decision to dismiss her. She requested permission to attend the session before the Appeal Panel in order to argue her case.
At a hearing held on 10 December 2010 in the presence of the second applicant, the Appeal Panel formed within the Supreme Court in her case upheld the dismissal decision for the reasons given by the SJC.
The second applicant lodged a constitutional appeal with the Constitutional Court, arguing that her dismissal had violated her rights under Articles 9 (equality of citizens) and 16 (freedom of conscience, thought and public expression of thought) of the Constitution. On 22 June 2011 the Constitutional Court rejected the appeal finding that it had no jurisdiction to review the lawfulness of the SJC’s decision. As to whether the second applicant’s dismissal affected her freedom of expression, the court held that a distinction had to be made between the exercise of the office of judge and freedom of expression. The court ruled that the office of judge entailed a right and duty to adjudicate in accordance with the law, and that that right and duty did not form part of the rights and freedoms for which it had competence to decide under the Constitution (У.бр.18/2011).
In December 2005 Parliament adopted several Amendments to the Constitution. The relevant provisions read as follows:
“1.  ... A judge can be dismissed from office:
- for a serious violation of disciplinary rules which renders him or her unsuitable to exercise the office of judge; and
- for exercising the office of judge in an unprofessional and unconscientious manner, under conditions stipulated by law.”
“... The State Judicial Council is composed of fifteen members. The President of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia and the Minister of Justice are ex officio members of the Council. Eight members of the Council are elected by judges from among their peers ... Five members ... are elected by Parliament.”
The relevant provisions of the 2006 Act read as follows:
“A judge can be dismissed for exercising the office of judge in an unprofessional and unconscientious manner, under conditions specified by law.”
“Disciplinary proceedings may be instituted by a member of the SJC, the president of the court of a judge whose dismissal is being sought, or the president of the higher court or plenary of the Supreme Court ...
Disciplinary proceedings are urgent and confidential. The public are excluded in the interests of the reputation and dignity of the judge concerned.
The SJC sets up a disciplinary commission composed of five of its members.
A judge against whom proceedings have been instituted may respond to the request for disciplinary proceedings in writing or orally within eight days of the date of service of that request.
A judge against whom proceedings have been instituted has the right to a legal representative.
When it receives a request, the Disciplinary Commission collects information and draws up a report, which it submits to the SJC to determine whether the request is justified. On the basis of that report the SJC may initiate or stay disciplinary proceedings.
...
The SJC adopts Rules regarding the proceedings.”
“On the basis of the report [of the Commission] and the deliberations, the SJC may ...
- stay the disciplinary proceedings;
- issue an adequate disciplinary penalty; or
- dismiss the judge for a gross violation of disciplinary rules (потешка дисциплинска повреда).”
The SJC may impose the following disciplinary penalties:
- a written reprimand
- a public reprimand, and
- a salary reduction in the range of 15% to 30% ...”
“Proceedings for determination of professional misconduct of a judge shall be conducted under section 55 by a commission for determination of professional misconduct (“the Commission”).
The Council sets up a commission composed of five of its members.
...
On the basis of a report drawn up under section 55(6) of the Act and the hearing held before the SJC, the latter may:
- stay the proceedings; or
- dismiss the judge for professional misconduct.”
“The judge concerned may challenge the SJC’s dismissal or disciplinary decision before a second-instance panel set up within the Supreme Court (“the Appeal Panel”) ...
The Appeal Panel is composed of nine members, of whom three are Supreme Court judges, four Appeal Court judges and two judges of the court of the judge against whom proceedings have been conducted.
The President of the Supreme Court may not be a member of the Appeal Panel.”
The 2010 Act replaces sections 54-60 of the 2006 Act. It sets out more detailed rules regarding professional misconduct proceedings in respect of judges (sections 77-95). The relevant provisions of the 2010 Act read as follows:
“A judge can be dismissed for exercising the office of judge in an unprofessional and unconscientious manner, under conditions specified by law.”
“Professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge may be instituted by a member of the SJC, the president of the court [of a judge whose dismissal is being sought], the president of the higher court or the plenary of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia (“the complainant”) ...
The proceedings are urgent and confidential. The public are excluded and the reputation and dignity of the judge concerned are respected ...
At the request of a judge, the SJC may decide that the proceedings are to be public ...”
“A request for professional misconduct proceedings specified in section 78(1) of this Act is submitted to the SJC. It contains, inter alia, [personal information] about the judge, address and place of residence ... a description of the alleged violation ... and an outline of the evidence to be admitted at the hearing.
The request shall be accompanied by supporting evidence.”
“The SJC decides whether a request for professional misconduct proceedings is timely, complete and admissible.
...
If the SJC finds the request admissible, it sets up from among its members a commission for determination of professional misconduct (Комисија за утврдување нестручно и несовесно вршење на судиската функција) composed of a chairman and four members ...”
“The Commission communicates the request and supporting evidence to the judge concerned.
The judge may respond in writing or give a verbal statement within eight days of the request being served on him or her.
The judge against whom the request is submitted has the right to a legal representative whom he or she invites to the hearing.
Together with the observations in reply to the request, the judge concerned submits all evidence in support of his or her response ...”
“The Commission seeks information and gathers evidence relevant for [the case].”
“On the basis of information and evidence gathered, the Commission submits a report to the SJC stating whether the request is justified.”
“The SJC examines the request and the Commission’s proposal and decides to institute or stay professional misconduct proceedings.
The SJC takes (this) decision by a majority vote of all its members ...”
“The decision specified in section 84 of this Act is served on the complainant (подносител на барањето), the judge [whose dismissal is sought] and the president of that judge’s court, and the case file is forwarded to the Commission.”
“When the SJC initiates professional misconduct proceedings, it may temporarily suspend the judge concerned.”
“The Commission must schedule a hearing within fifteen days of the institution of professional misconduct proceedings.
All members of the Commission attend the hearing.
The chairman of the Commission presides over the hearing.”
“The complainant and the judge concerned are summoned to a hearing. They are provided with evidence gathered by the Commission.
If they have been duly summoned and fail to attend without providing any justification, the hearing is held in their absence.”
“All the evidence presented by the complainant and the judge concerned and the evidence obtained by the Commission is heard at the hearing.
The judge concerned may argue in relation to all evidence adduced at the hearing.”
“The record of the hearing is signed by the complainant, the judge concerned or his or her representative, the (members of the) Commission and the minute writer ...”
“The Commission draws up a report for the SJC within fifteen days of the hearing with a proposal for (one of the) following decisions:
-  that the proceedings be stayed if there are no grounds for professional misconduct by a judge; or
-  that the judge must be dismissed for professional misconduct.”
“On the basis of the (Commission’s) report and after the hearing, the SJC may ...
-  stay the proceedings if there is no finding of professional misconduct; or
-  dismiss the judge for professional misconduct.”
“The SJC takes the decision specified in section 94 of this Act by a two-thirds majority vote of all its members.
...
A transcript of the decision is served on the judge, his or her representative, the complainant and the president of the court of the judge concerned or the president of the immediate higher court.”
“The judge concerned may challenge the SJC’s dismissal decision before a second-instance panel set up within the Supreme Court (‘the Appeal Panel’) ...
The Appeal Panel is composed of nine members, of whom three are Supreme Court judges, four Appeal Court judges and two judges of the court of the judge against whom proceedings have been conducted.
The President of the Supreme Court may not be a member of the Appeal Panel.
The Appeal Panel may uphold or quash the SJC’s dismissal decision ...”
Section 64 of the 2005 Civil Proceedings Act provides for the withdrawal of a judge. Under section 66(2), a request for withdrawal of all the judges of a court is inadmissible. Under section 67(1), the president of a court decides on a request for the withdrawal of a judge. Under section 67(3) the President of the Supreme Court decides on a request for the withdrawal of a Supreme Court judge. The plenary of the Supreme Court decides on a request for the withdrawal of the President of the Supreme Court.
Section 400 of the 2005 Civil Proceedings Act provides for the possibility of reopening proceedings in respect of which the Court has found a violation of the Convention. In such reopened proceedings the domestic courts are required to comply with the provisions of the final judgment of the Court.
In February 2015 Parliament enacted new legislation providing for the creation of the Council. The new body’s role is to establish relevant facts in proceedings regulated under the Act and decide whether to apply for professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge (sections 2 and 49). It is composed of nine members (retired judges, prosecutors and lawyers, section 6) elected by all judges by direct and secret ballot (section 16). It can, inter alia, request the SJC to institute proceedings to determine the responsibility of a judge or president of a court (section 32). The Act became operational three months after its entry into force (section 53).
In February 2015 Parliament also amended the State Judicial Council Act. Section 16 of the new Act, which replaces section 78(1) of the 2010 Act (see paragraph 25 above), provides that the Council – instead of a member of the SJC, the president of the court [of a judge whose dismissal is being sought], the president of the higher court or the plenary of the Supreme Court – may initiate professional misconduct proceedings before the SJC. This Act became operational three months after its entry into force (section 31).
Until the decision of the Constitutional Court of 15 September 2010 took effect (see paragraph 31 below), professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge were regulated in detail by the Rules. The latter contained procedural rules identical to those set out in the 2010 Act (see sections 78-96 of the 2010 Act above).
By a decision of 15 September 2010 (U.br.56/2010), the Constitutional Court rejected as unconstitutional several provisions of the Rules regarding professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge. The court found that while the SJC was entitled to set out its rules of procedure in internal documents, it had no competence to define genuine procedural rules for which there was no statutory basis.
The relevant provisions of the Opinion read as follows:
“8.  The Council for the Judiciary is intended to safeguard both the independence of the judicial system and the independence of individual judges. The existence of independent and impartial courts is a structural requirement of a state governed by the rule of law.
C. 2. Discipline
The question of a judge’s responsibility was examined by the CCJE in Opinion No.3(2002). The recent experiences of some States show the need to protect judges from the temptation to broaden the scope of their responsibility in purely jurisdictional matters. The role of the Council for the Judiciary is to show that a judge cannot bear the same responsibilities as a member of another profession: he/she performs a public function and cannot refuse to adjudicate on disputes. Furthermore, if the judge is exposed to legal and disciplinary sanctions against his/her decisions, neither judicial independence nor the democratic balance of powers can be maintained. The Council for the Judiciary should, therefore, unequivocally condemn political projects designed to limit the judges’ freedom of decision-making. This does not diminish judges’ duty to respect the law.
A judge who neglects his/her cases through indolence or who is blatantly incompetent when dealing with them should face disciplinary sanctions. Even in such cases, as indicated by CCJE Opinion No. 3(2002), it is important that judges enjoy the protection of a disciplinary proceeding guaranteeing the respect of the principle of independence of the judiciary and carried out before a body free from any political influence, on the basis of clearly defined disciplinary faults: a Head of State, Minister of Justice or any other representative of political authorities cannot take part in the disciplinary body.
The Council for the Judiciary is entrusted with ethical issues; it may furthermore address court users’ complaints. In order to avoid conflicts of interest, disciplinary procedures in first instance, when not addressed within the jurisdiction of a disciplinary court, should preferably be dealt with by a disciplinary commission composed of a substantial representation of judges elected by their peers, different from the members of the Council for the Judiciary, with provision of an appeal before a superior court.”
The relevant provisions of the Magna Carta of Judges read as follows:
“6.  Disciplinary proceedings shall take place before an independent body with the possibility of recourse before a court.”
“13.  To ensure independence of judges, each State shall create a Council for the Judiciary or another specific body, itself independent from legislative and executive powers, endowed with broad competences for all questions concerning their status as well as the organisation, the functioning and the image of judicial institutions. The Council shall be composed either of judges exclusively or of a substantial majority of judges elected by their peers. The Council for the Judiciary shall be accountable for its activities and decisions.”