The case originated in an application (no. 4909/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Ukrainian nationals, Mr Oleksandr Valerianovych Seryavin, Mrs Iryna Mykolayivna Kolomiyets and Mrs Larysa Viktorivna Logvinova (“the applicants”), on 29 December 2003.
The applicants were represented by Mrs I.Y. Cherpak, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the authorities had unlawfully commissioned renovation work on their attic and subsequently transferred it to a third party, and that the courts had adopted arbitrary judgments in respect of their claim in that respect.
On 1 April 2009 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1960, 1960 and 1959 respectively and live in Kyiv.
The applicants are owners and residents of apartments in a multi-apartment building. By 1998 all but three of some fifty apartments located in this building had been privatised by their residents pursuant to the Law of Ukraine “On Privatisation of the State Housing Stock”. The three non-privatised apartments remained in municipal ownership.
On 29 April 1998 the Kyiv City State Administration authorised Mrs N.N. to renovate the attic of the building and construct a mansard floor with a view to obtaining title to the renovated and newly constructed premises on condition that the residents' consent was sought for the project.
On 29 May 1998 Mrs N.N. signed an investment contract for renovation and construction works with the Radyansky District Housing Maintenance Company (Державне підприємство по утриманню житлового фонду Радянського району м. Києва) acting for the building's owner. According to the contract, the building was municipally owned, and the municipality was to grant Mrs N.N. title to the construction on completion of the works. Subsequently Mrs V.G. became party to this contract as the second investor. Neither the applicants nor the other apartment owners were asked for their consent to the project. On a number of occasions the apartment owners unsuccessfully contacted various authorities to object to the construction works.
In July 2001 the apartment owners formed the Apartment Owners Association (“the Association”), which was joined by the applicants.
In April 2002 the investors started the works on the building.
According to the applicants, their apartments suffered damage on account of the construction works (such as cracks in the ceiling and the walls, flooding and pieces of plaster falling off).
In October 2002 the Association instituted civil proceedings in Svyatoshynsky District Court, Kyiv, seeking to annul the investment contract and to restore the attic to its previous state, alleging, in particular, that the municipality owned only three apartments in the building and should have sought the consent of the other apartment owners in order to conclude the contract. The applicants, who were represented by the Association, subsequently also joined the proceedings on their own behalf, along with two other apartment owners.
The Shevchenkivsky District State Administration (the successor of the Radyansky District State Administration; “the Administration”) lodged a counterclaim, seeking to prevent the plaintiffs from interfering with the works and to have their refusal to consent to them declared illegitimate. By way of reasoning, the Administration submitted that the building, and particularly its attic and roof, were old and in very poor condition. They urgently needed investment for renovations. The construction works were therefore beneficial for all the apartment owners and residents of the building.
On an unspecified date  ordered the suspension of the construction works in connection with the dispute. Nevertheless the works continued and were completed by 6 December 2002.
On 26 December 2002 the Shevchenkivsky District Council granted the title to the renovated and newly constructed premises to the investors. On an unspecified date the applicants and the Association amended their claims, seeking to have this decision quashed.
On 29 January 2003 Svyatoshynsky Court dismissed the applicants' and the Association's claims and allowed the counterclaim by the Administration. The relevant parts of the judgment read as follows:
“From the moment of privatisation of the apartments, the plaintiffs and, at the material time, the Radyansky District Administration, which had remained the owner of three apartments, obtained joint divided ownership to the building, including auxiliary premises ...
According to Article 113 of the Civil Code of Ukraine, possession, use and disposal of joint divided property shall be carried out with the consent of all the owners, while in the absence of consent the dispute is to be decided by a court.
Consequently, the question of reconstruction of the attic and renovation of the building had to be decided with the consent of all the co-owners of the house. However, as established by court, the investment agreement was concluded by one of the co-owners of the building without the consent of other co-owners, in connection with which the present proceedings arose.
...
Regard being had to the fact that the investment agreement has been practically completed by the material time, that this has facilitated improvement of the technical state of the entire building and that, in addition to the plaintiffs, the Shevchenkivsky District Administration also owns some apartments in it, the plaintiffs' refusal to consent to the construction works under the investment agreement is unlawful and encroaches on the rights of other co-owners; therefore the initial claim should be dismissed and the counterclaim allowed.
...
Demands to quash the decision no. 114 of the Shevchenkivsky District Council of 26 December 2002 consenting to alienation ... of the premises constructed on the attic ... from municipal property ... shall not be allowed on the following grounds. ... The building was owned at all times by the municipal community represented by the Council, which, according to Article 60 of the Law of Ukraine “On Local Self-Governance”, unilaterally ... executes rights of possession, use and disposal of the objects of municipal property, including housing stock. Therefore, regard being had to the above and that the reconstruction of the attic... was carried out at N. N.'s and V. G.'s expense, the Shevchenkivsky District Council was empowered to take such a decision”.
In February 2003 the plaintiffs appealed, alleging various violations of substantive and procedural law by the trial court. In particular, they maintained that the 's reasoning concerning the District Council's right to transfer the title to the attic had been in manifest disregard of applicable law and in contradiction of the court's own findings that according to Article 113 of the Civil Code the attic was co-owned by the municipality and the plaintiffs.
On 14 April 2003 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal dismissed this appeal. The judgment, in so far as relevant, read as follows:
“... in rejecting the claim... the [district] court reasonably considered that before the creation of the Association (on 26 July 2001) and from the moment of privatisation by the plaintiffs of particular apartments... the building... was in the joint divided ownership of the individual apartment owners and the District Council; the legal status of which parties concerning possession, use and disposal of the building being governed by Article 113 of the Civil Code of Ukraine.
Deciding the present dispute and finding ... the refusal of the plaintiffs – co-owners of the building - to consent to the reconstruction of the attic premises and construction of the mansard floor unreasonable, the court had properly considered ... necessity to carry out such works ... regard being had to the technical state of the roof and the attic premises ..., [and] that ... [in the course of the reconstruction] some other works [were carried out] for the improvement of the living conditions of all the owners and tenants of the residential premises [as well as] the value of the building as a property.
Regard being had to the fact that a mansard floor was constructed at the investors' expense and without the participation of the plaintiffs ... the Shevchenkivsky District Council had lawfully decided the issue of disposal of the above premises, in compliance with Article 119 of the Civil Code of Ukraine.”
The plaintiffs appealed in cassation, maintaining in particular that it was unlawful to deprive them, as they represented over 70% of the apartment owners, of their property on the basis of a reference to its alleged improvement by a third party, to which they had never consented. They also submitted that the condition of the house in general had been made worse as a result of the works.
On 13 August 2003 the Supreme Court rejected the plaintiffs' request for leave to appeal in cassation.
Subsequently the plaintiffs unsuccessfully attempted to obtain an extraordinary review of their claims with reference to inconsistent jurisprudence of domestic courts in application of the law in similar cases.
Relevant provisions of the Constitution of Ukraine read as follows:
Article 13
“... The State ensures the protection of the rights of all subjects of the right of property and economic management, and the social orientation of the economy. All subjects of the right of property are equal before the law.”
Article 41
“Everyone has the right to own, use and dispose of his or her property, and the results of his or her intellectual and creative activity.
...
No one shall be unlawfully deprived of the right of property. The right of private property is inviolable.
The expropriation of objects of the right of private property may be applied only as an exception for reasons of social necessity, on the grounds of and by the procedure established by law, and on the condition of advance and complete compensation of their value. The expropriation of such objects with subsequent complete compensation of their value is permitted only under conditions of martial law or a state of emergency.
...”
Article 124
“...
The jurisdiction of the courts extends to all social interactions falling within the ambit of the law that arise in the State.
...”
Relevant provisions of the Civil Code of Ukraine in force at the material time read as follows:
Article 113 Right of Joint Divided Ownership
“Possession, use and disposal of property held in joint divided ownership shall be carried out with the consent of all the shareholders, and, in the absence of consensus, the dispute shall be decided by court.
...
Every shareholder... according to the size of his share shall be entitled to proceeds from joint property, shall be liable before third parties for obligations regarding the joint property and shall take part in payment of various taxes and dues, as well as in maintenance and safekeeping expenses concerning the joint property.
Every shareholder of a joint divided property shall have right to transfer his share of the joint property to a third person for or without remuneration.”
Article 119 Consequences of construction of adds-on, annexes, or reconstruction in a building held in joint divided ownership
“In the event a person owning a share in a residential building held in joint divided ownership increases its useful area at his own expense by constructing an annex, an add-on or by reconstructing it with the consent of other shareholders and according to established procedure, the shares of the joint divided owners of the building and the use of the premises in it shall be changed accordingly.”
Relevant provisions of the Law of  “On Local Self-Governance” read as follows:
Section 60.  Right of communal (municipal) property
“1.  Territorial (municipal) communities of villages, towns, cities, districts in cities shall hold the right of communal (municipal) property to movable and immovable possessions ... including ... housing stock, non-residential premises ... and other possessions ... determined on the basis of the law as objects of right of communal (municipal) property, as well as proceeds obtained from their alienation.
...
Bodies of local self-governance shall execute, on behalf of and in the interests of the territorial (municipal) communities and in accordance with the law, powers of possession, use and disposal of communal (municipal) property, including all property transactions ..., sell and purchase ..., decide on other issues related to their alienation ...”
Relevant provisions of the Law of Ukraine “On Privatisation of the State Housing Stock” read as follows:
Section 10
“...
Owners of apartments in multi-apartment buildings shall be co-owners of the auxiliary premises of the building... Auxiliary premises (storage rooms, storehouses and so on) shall be transferred into the residents' ownership free of charge and shall not be subject to privatisation separately.
For ensuring effective use of privatised apartments and their management, owners of apartments (houses) may create societies or associations of individual apartment or house owners. In a multi-apartment building whose apartments are not fully privatised, there shall be concluded, between the society (association) of individual owners and owners of non-privatised apartments, an agreement on joint possession of the building and shared participation in expenses for its maintenance.”
The relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“... the basis for consideration of the case ... is the practical necessity of ... the official interpretation of ... paragraph 2 of Article 10 of the Law of Ukraine “On Privatisation of the State Housing Stock”, existence of inconsistent interpretation of these provisions by the State authorities, including the courts and bodies of local selfgovernment...
... provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 10 of the Law of  “On Privatisation of the State Housing Stock” shall be understood as follows:
1.  Auxiliary premises (basements, storehouses, storage rooms, attics, pram storage rooms etc.) shall be transferred to the joint ownership of citizens simultaneously with privatisation of the apartments by them... Confirmation of the right of ownership of the auxiliary premises shall not require any additional actions, in particular, the creation of an association of owners of a multi-apartment building, nor shall there be a requirement to join such an association.
2.  An owner (owners) of non-privatised apartments in a multi-apartment building is a co-owner (are co-owners) of auxiliary premises on an equal basis with the owners of privatised apartments...”
By the decision of 7 August 2003 (case no. 22-3816), the Kyiv City Court of Appeal reversed the judgment of the Pechreskyy District Court of Kyiv of 7 April 2003, acknowledging as lawful the reconstruction of an attic and the transfer of title to it to an investor. The Court of Appeal, in particular, invalidated the reconstruction contract concluded between the District Administration and a third-party investor without consent of the plaintiffs – owners of privatised apartments in a multi-apartment building. On 23 December 2004 the Court of Appeal's judgment was upheld by the Supreme Court of Ukraine and became final. In its judgment, the court referred, in particular, to the following reasons:
“... Having rejected the claim, the [first-instance] court took it that as of the time of transfer of the title to the attic to “S.” [the investor], the right of joint ownership of the attic had not been created for the owners of privatised apartments, as such a right could have been created only upon privatisation of all apartments in the building ... and entry [by the apartment owners] into a contract concerning joint possession of the residential building and participation in its maintenance expenses. Since ... a contract concerning joint possession of [the auxiliary] premises had not been concluded and maintenance of the building was carried out by the ... municipal company, the defendant was not obliged to obtain consent of the owners of privatised apartments for reconstruction of the attic.
However, it is not possible to agree with these conclusions, since the court has reached them as a result of incorrect application of substantive law provisions.
...
The law does not provide that the right of joint ownership of auxiliary premises is created for the owners of privatised apartments of the building only after the creation of an association of the co-owners... Namely, simultaneously with privatisation of apartments, individuals renting an apartment obtain ownership of the apartment and auxiliary premises and there is no need for further formalisation of the ownership of auxiliary premises prescribed by law.
...
According to Article 113 of the Civil Code of Ukraine, possession, use and disposal of property held in joint divided ownership shall be conducted upon consent of all shareholders, lacking which the dispute shall be decided by court.
The multi-apartment building no. 2-4/7 on the P. street in the city of Kyiv, which has 98 privatised apartments, is a joint divided property of the citizens – owners of privatised apartments and the competent State body, which carries out the owner's authority in respect of the non-privatised apartments.
Consequently, the municipal authority does not have a right to sell, lease out or decide on reconstruction, modification of auxiliary premises, in particular, the attic, without consent of the owners of privatised apartments.
In light of the above, allegations of the plaintiffs that the investment contract ... is invalid for the purposes of Article 48 of the Civil Code of Ukraine are well-founded, since such a contract does not comply with the requirements of the law ...”
Several analogous decisions, which, referring to similar reasons, invalidated renovation, ownership transfer and other contracts concerning attics of multi-apartment buildings concluded by the authorities without consent of the privatised apartments owners, were taken by the Shevchenkivsky District Court of Kyiv in 2003-2004 (in particular, judgments of 30 December 2003 in case no. 2-4364; of 4 February 2004 in case no. 2-52/2004 and of 23 March 2004 in case no. 2-170/04).