The case originated in an application (no. 9647/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Anatolyevich Shilyayev (“the applicant”), on 7 February 2002.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 16 March 2004 the Court decided to communicate the complaint about the delays in enforcement of the decisions 20 July and
The applicant is a Russian national, born in 1959 and living in the Perm Region.
By a first instance judgment of 24 October 1997 the  sentenced the applicant to nineteen years’ imprisonment for murder and rape. On 19 February 1998 the judgment was upheld by the Supreme Court and came into force.
On 20 January 1999 the  reversed the conviction by reference to newly discovered circumstances and remitted the case for a fresh investigation to a prosecutor. On 8 February 1999 the prosecutor took a decision fully to acquit the applicant.
Thereafter the applicant brought court proceedings against the State, claiming damages for the wrongful conviction and unlawful detention for twenty months.
On 20 July 2001 the Lysva Town Court of the Perm Region examined and granted his action. The court took account of the circumstances of the criminal proceedings against the applicant and his conviction, including total length of his remand in custody which was of one year, eight months and twenty one days, and related after-effects, such as personal anxiety, anguish and feeling of isolation. The applicant was awarded
On 11 September 2001 the decision was upheld by the  and came into force.
On an unspecified date the applicant obtained an execution writ and forwarded it, together with supporting documents, to the bailiffs’ service. By two letters of 30 March and 21 May 2001 the bailiffs refused to institute enforcement proceedings and returned the writ and documents to the applicant. They stated, in particular, that under the legislation in force execution writs issued against the State should be submitted directly to the Ministry of Finance (see the relevant domestic law section below).
The applicant followed the instruction and applied to the said Ministry. Upon receipt of the documents on 13 November 2001, the Ministry discovered that the address and details of the debtor in the writ had been mistaken. By a letter of 2 June 2002 the Ministry returned the documents to the applicant.
Having obtained an amended writ from the court, on 3 October 2002 the applicant re-submitted the documents. They reached the Ministry on
On 20 June 2003 the applicant sent off the documents and
Under Sections 151 and 1070 of the Civil Code the State is liable for damage inflicted as a result of unlawful conviction, prosecution, detention on remand, imposition of an undertaking not to leave a place of residence and administrative penalties such as arrest and correctional works irrespective of whether any such measure was imposed as a result of relevant officials’ misconduct.
Section 9 of the Federal Law on Enforcement Proceedings of
Under Section 13 of the Law, the enforcement proceedings should be completed within two months of the receipt of the writ of enforcement by the bailiff.
Under Sections 1 to 4 of the special rules governing enforcement of execution writs against the recipients of allocations from the federal budget, adopted by the Federal Government on 22 February 2001
Within the next five days the branch examines the application as well as the supporting documents. It either accepts the application in which case it notifies the debtor of the writ, compelling the latter to abide by the respective court decisions (Sections 7 to 12) or rejects it as inadmissible on formal grounds (see Section 5). In the latter case the branch returns the documents to the creditor within the said time-limit. In case of the debtor’s failure to comply within two months, the branch may temporarily freeze the debtor’s accounts (Section 13).