The case originated in an application (no. 16349/17) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Ms Nelya Igorivna Shtepa (“the applicant”), on 17 February 2017.
The applicant was represented by Mr O.V. Tananakin, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna, from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained, under Article 5 § 3 of the Convention, that her pre-trial detention had been lengthy and unjustified. She further complained, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, that the criminal proceedings against her had been unreasonably long.
On 17 October 2017 the Court rejected the applicant’s request for an interim measure under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, to provide her with necessary medical treatment in detention. On 20 April 2018 the application was granted priority under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
On 11 September 2018 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Slovyansk.
The applicant was the mayor of Slovyansk between November 2010 and April 2014.
On 12 July 2014 criminal proceedings on a charge of infringement of State sovereignty and inviolability were instituted against the applicant. On the same day the investigator requested the court to detain her pending completion of the investigation, relying on the seriousness of the charges against her and the risk that she might abscond and hinder the investigation by witnesses tampering or destroying or concealing evidence, or that she might pursue her criminal activity.
On 13 July 2014 the Kharkiv Chervonozavodskyi District Court (“the District Court”) ordered the applicant’s detention within the framework of the above proceedings. The relevant decision stated that she was accused of a serious offence, and that she might otherwise escape and hinder the investigation or continue with her criminal activity. It was also mentioned in the court decision that the applicant was not living at her registered address in Slovyansk. No further details of the above-mentioned reasons were provided by the court.
In the meantime, additional terrorism charges were brought against the applicant.
On 13 February 2015 the District Court committed the applicant for trial. Given that the parties did not submit any requests to change or revoke the preventive measure, the court ruled that the applicant’s detention was deemed extended until 14 April 2015.
In the course of the pre-trial investigation and the trial, the courts, at the request of the prosecution, extended the applicant’s detention on remand on twenty occasions in total. In their reasoning for the decisions on the applicant’s continued detention the courts referred to the same grounds as those mentioned in the court decision of 13 July 2014 (see paragraph 9 above). In some decisions the courts, without providing further details, additionally noted that:
(i)  the applicant had failed to present evidence confirming that the risks in favour of her detention that had previously been assessed by the courts were no longer pertinent;
(ii)  the applicant as former city mayor might influence witnesses;
(iii)  the applicant’s arguments in favour of her release did not outweigh the public interest in keeping her detained; and
(iv)  the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure barred the use of any preventive measures other than pre-trial detention in her case.
In the course of the court hearing on 20 September 2017, the prosecution, relying on reasons similar to those given earlier (see paragraph 8 above), requested the District Court to extend the applicant’s detention for another term. The court found that the prosecution had failed to prove the existence of the risk that the applicant might abscond and hinder the investigation. The court changed the preventive measure in respect of the applicant to house arrest, having released her from detention. When deciding on the applicant’s release, the District Court took note of the fact that the applicant had a family and a permanent place of residence in Slovyansk (the same place the applicant had prior to her arrest in July 2014, see paragraph 9 above), had no criminal record, had previously served as a city mayor and had a good reputation.
The criminal case against the applicant is currently pending before the trial court.
According to the applicant, in the course of the trial, nineteen of the judges who heard her case withdrew, were disqualified or were dismissed, took sick or paternity leave under pressure from the prosecution, or quit their career entirely. As a result, the trial was restarted four times.
In the course of the trial, the court held 69 hearings in total. On 32 occasions the court dealt with the merits of the case (hearing the parties’ submissions and the witness testimony, and examined the evidence).