The case originated in an application (no. 31731/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national,
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Popeski, a lawyer practising in Ohrid. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, R. Lazareska Gerovska.
On 15 November 2006 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1932 and lives in Gorno Lakocerej.
On an unspecified date in 1991, the applicant, as a successful litigant, instituted enforcement proceedings against the Croatian company “Fruktus”, (“the debtor”), for payment of a debt.
On 6 June 1991 the then Ohrid Municipal Court (“the first-instance court”) upheld the applicant's request ordering the debtor to transfer the amount due on his account (“the 1991 order”).
On 20 June 1991 the  Payment Exchange Bureau (Служба за општествено книговодство Загреб) (“the Bureau”) transferred part of the debt on the applicant's account.
On 4 February 1992 the applicant requested the court to enforce the remainder. On 19 February 1992 the first-instance court granted this request.
On 9 November 1992 it rejected as out of time the debtor's objection on the 1991 order. On 19 March 1993 the Bitola District Court dismissed an appeal of the debtor against this latter decision rejecting its argument that normal communication had been disrupted because of the war conflict in  at the material time.
On 20 September 1993 the first-instance court unsuccessfully requested the applicant to propose an alternative means of enforcement. On 8 November 1994 it stayed the proceedings finding that the enforcement of the remainder, by the means proposed by the applicant, had become impossible due to the dissolution of the then Federal Bureau of Yugoslavia and the creation of the Bureau, as an autonomous institution of the independent Croatia.
On 11 July 1995 the Bitola District Court upheld the applicant's appeal and remitted the case for a fresh consideration. It held that the dissolution of the then Federal Bureau of  could not be regarded as a valid ground for suspending the enforcement. It ordered the lower court to contact the Ministry of Justice so as to establish whether an inter-state agreement existed between the respondent State and  concerning the payment exchange operations. No further decision has been taken.
On 31 August 2001 the case-file was destroyed. According to the Government, all case-files involving a foreign debtor were destroyed on the basis of an internal act of competent courts. There is no evidence that that was brought to the applicant's attention. The queries which he made at an unspecified date in 2003 revealed that the case had been archived.
The Agreement between the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and  on Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil and Criminal Matters (Договор помеѓу Република Македонија и Република Хрватска за правна помош во граѓанските и кривичните предмети) (“the agreement”), was concluded on 2 September 1994 and became applicable as of 26 May 1995.
Section 20 of the agreement stipulates, inter alia, that the contracting parties are bound to recognise and enforce final decisions rendered by courts of the other party.
Under section 22 of the agreement, an interested person can submit a request for recognition and enforcement of a final judgment before the courts of the contracting party, which are called upon to decide the request for recognition and enforcement, or before the court, which rendered the final judgment.