The case originated in an application (no. 33276/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mrs Nina Deordiev and Mr Stanislav Deordiev (“the applicants”), on 28 July 2003.
The applicants were represented by Mr Vitalie Zama, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr Vitalie Pârlog.
The applicants complained that the belated enforcement of the final judgment in their favour violated their right to have their civil rights determined by a court as guaranteed by Article 6 of the Convention and their right to the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions as guaranteed by Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court. On 15 December 2005 the President of that Section decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicants and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the case (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicants, Mrs Nina Deordiev and Stanislav Deordiev, were born in 1953 and 1976, respectively, and live in Orhei.
On 22 December 1995 the Orhei Local Council (the “Local Council”) rented out an apartment to the applicants giving them the possibility to buy it at a reduced price. Since the applicants had left the country in 1999, the Local Council terminated their lease and concluded a similar contract with a third party, who subsequently purchased the apartment from the Local Council.
Between 2001 and 2003 the applicants, the Orhei Local Council and the third party were involved in a legal dispute over the apartment and on 9 June 2003 the applicants obtained a final and enforceable judgment from the Court of Appeal in their favour. In its judgment the Court of Appeal annulled the decision of the Local Council to let and sell the apartment to the third party. The Court of Appeal stated, inter alia, that in order to avoid delay in the enforcement of the judgment, the third party should be evicted without being allocated alternative housing. During the proceedings, the applicants presented a certificate from the Local Council indicating that the third party was the owner of a 100 square metre house. Another certificate confirmed that the disputed apartment had been the applicants' only accommodation.
On 8 July 2003 a Bailiff received the enforcement warrant.
On an unspecified date in July 2003 the third party asked the court to stay the enforcement proceedings since he had allegedly lodged a request for revision of the judgment of the Court of Appeal.
On 17 July 2003 the Orhei District Court issued a judgment and ordered the stay of the enforcement proceedings on the ground that the third party had initiated revision proceedings. The applicants appealed against the order, arguing that the third party had not lodged any request for revision.
On 29 October 2003 the Chişinău Court of Appeal dismissed the applicants' appeal, relying on the same grounds as the District Court. The applicants allege that they were not summoned to attend the hearing.
On 14 November 2003 the applicants complained about the non-enforcement to the Orhei District Court and a Bailiff. They also mentioned that the third party had not initiated revision proceedings either with the Court of Appeal or with the Supreme Court of Justice.
Following several complaints about the non-enforcement of the judgment lodged by the applicants with the Ministry of Justice, the latter informed them that the judgment in their favour would be enforced as soon as the revision proceedings initiated by the third party had been terminated.
On 18 November 2003 the applicants lodged a request with the Orhei District Court asking for a copy of the third party's request for revision, which had served as the ground for the stay of the enforcement proceedings. The District Court did not answer their request.
On 21 November 2003 the applicants lodged a request for revision of the order of 17 July 2003 on the ground that the third party had not initiated any revision proceedings and that the stay of the enforcement proceedings had been unlawful.
Although the applicants had been summoned to attend the hearing on their request for revision scheduled for 14 January 2004, the Chişinău Court of Appeal examined the request on 24 December 2003 and dismissed it as unsubstantiated without giving any reasons. The applicants appealed. They also complained to the Chişinău Court of Appeal and the Superior Council of Magistrates that the judges of the Court of Appeal had misled them about the date of the hearing and that they had not therefore had the chance to present evidence proving that the third party had not initiated any revision proceedings. In reply, on 9 February 2004 the Chişinău Court of Appeal requested the applicants to return to it the copy of its decision of 24 December 2003.
On 20 February 2004 the Superior Council of Magistrates informed them that the registry of the Chişinău Court of Appeal had sent them by mistake the wrong date for the hearing of their revision request.
On 13 and 20 February 2004 the Supreme Court of Justice and the Chişinău Court of Appeal, respectively, issued certificates confirming that the third party had never initiated revision proceedings against the judgment of 9 June 2003 of the Court of Appeal.
By a judgment of 1 June 2004 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the applicants' appeal against the decision of 24 December 2003 and quashed the order of 17 July 2003 of the Orhei District Court. The Supreme Court found that there was no evidence in the case file proving that the third party had initiated revision proceedings and the proceedings concerning the stay of the enforcement of the final judgment of 9 June 2003 were therefore discontinued.
According to a report of 28 June 2004 drafted by the Bailiff in charge of the case and the applicants, the third party was evicted from the applicants' apartment on 22 June 2004. According to the same report, on 28 June 2004 the applicants received the keys to the apartment.
The relevant domestic law was set out in Prodan v. Moldova, no. 49806/99, § 31, ECHR 2004III (extracts).