The case originated in an application (no. 5856/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Milica Ramljak (“the applicant”), on 14 December 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Vukičević, a lawyer practising in Split. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that her right to an impartial tribunal guaranteed under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention had been violated.
On 16 April 2015 the above complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Sinj.
On 29 December 2005 M.R. brought a civil action against the applicant before the Sinj Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Sinju), seeking that a will be declared null and void. M.R. was represented by lawyers, V.Lj. and Ž.V.
On 8 December 2006 the Sinj Municipal Court adopted a judgment in the applicant’s favour.
The plaintiff lodged an appeal with the Split County Court (Županijski sud u Splitu). The Civil Division of that Court has over forty judges. On 27 August 2009 a panel of three judges presided over by Judge D.P., sitting in a closed meeting, reversed the first-instance judgment and upheld the appeal. It held that the first-instance court had correctly established the facts but had wrongly applied the relevant law.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) alleging, inter alia, that she had not had a fair hearing before an independent and impartial tribunal because Judge D.P. was the father of a trainee lawyer working at the law office of V.Lj. and Ž.V., who had both represented the plaintiff in the proceedings.
On 14 September 2011 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law as unfounded and upheld the second-instance judgment. It held in particular:
“The case file shows that N.P., Judge D.P.’s son, did not participate in any manner in the proceedings at issue. This court therefore considers that there are no circumstances which put the impartiality of Judge D.P. in such doubt as to exclude his participation in the adoption of the appeal judgment.”
In a constitutional complaint of 29 June 2012 the applicant argued that even though N.P. had not participated at the hearings held in the proceedings at issue, there were no indications that he had not been otherwise involved in the case. He had been in a relationship of subordination (employer-employee) to the opposing party’s legal representative and the law office concerned had employed only a very small number of people. The applicant noted that the first-instance judgment in her favour had also later been reversed on appeal. The constitutional complaint was declared inadmissible on 3 October 2012 by the Constitutional Court.
Article 29 § 1 of the Constitution (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 41/2001 of 7 May 2001) reads as follows:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991, 91/1992and 112/1999) read as follows:
“A judge shall be disqualified from exercising his functions:
if he or she is a party, a legal guardian or representative of a party ... ;
...
where a judge is in lineal consanguinity within any degree with a party, his or her legal guardian or representative, or in collateral consanguinity with one of those persons within the fourth degree, or where a judge is a spouse, common-law spouse or an in-law within the second degree of one of those persons;
...
where other circumstances are present which cast doubt on his or her impartiality.”
Under section 72 of the Civil Procedure Act, the grounds set out in section 71(1)-(6) are considered absolute grounds for a judge to be automatically disqualified from a case. Subsection 7 concerns situations in which a judge is obliged to inform the president of the court of any circumstances which he or she considers might cast doubt on his or her impartiality. The president of the court must then make a decision regarding possible disqualification, taking account of the circumstances of the case.
Section 72(1) provides that as soon as a judge becomes aware of an absolute ground of disqualification, he or she must take no further part in the case in question. The judge must bring the circumstances which disqualify him or her from sitting to the attention of the president of the court, who then designates another judge.
Section 73(6) provides that parties have to apply for the withdrawal of a judge as soon as they learn of a reason for such a withdrawal. Such an application must be made at the latest before the conclusion of the trial before the first-instance court, or, if there was no trial, before the delivery of a decision.
Section 73(7) provides that the withdrawal of a judge from a case before a higher court may be requested by parties in a legal remedy or in reply to a legal remedy.
Section 75 reads as follows:
“When a single judge, the president of a panel, a member of a panel or the president of the court learns that his or her withdrawal has been requested, he shall immediately stop all work on the case, and, if the withdrawal was requested on the grounds provided in section 71(1), subparagraph 7 of this Act, he or she may undertake only those actions which prevent the risk of delay until the request has been decided.”
The relevant part of decision no. Revr 736/07-2 of 27 September 2005 reads:
“... the Osijek County Court informed the Supreme Court that Z.Z., the son of D.Z. (who was the president of a panel in adopting the impugned judgment), worked at the time the impugned judgment was issued with the plaintiff’s representative (a lawyer called L.M.) as a legal trainee.
Section 71, subsections 1-6, of the Civil Procedure Act sets out the grounds for disqualifying a judge.
...
Subsection 7 of the same section states that a judge shall also be disqualified where other circumstances are present which cast doubt on his or her impartiality.
This court considers that the fact that Z.Z. is employed as a legal trainee with the plaintiff’s representative – the lawyer L.M. – is a circumstance of the kind which casts doubt on the impartiality of his father, D.Z., as a participant in the adoption of the second-instance judgment as the president of a panel in a case in which L.M. represents the plaintiff as lawyer.”
The relevant part of decision Rec 1643/11-2 of 26 March 2013 reads:
“... the appeal on points of law alleges that the first-instance judgment was adopted by a judge whose spouse is employed as a legal trainee in the law office of the plaintiff’s representative ...
...
The participation of the judge in the adoption of the first-instance judgment, even though the judge should have been disqualified for the reasons stated, led to a violation of procedural rules ...”
The relevant part of decision Revr 307/09-2 of 11 June 2009 reads:
“... the appeal on points of law alleges that at some of the recent hearings the plaintiff was represented by N.P., employed in the law office of the plaintiff’s representative Ž.V., and that N.P. is the son of D.P., the president of the second-instance court’s panel ...
...
The fact that the son of the president of the second-instance panel is employed as a legal trainee with the plaintiff’s representative amounts to a circumstance which casts doubt on the impartiality of the panel’s president, which is a ground for disqualification [of a judge] under section 71(7) of the Civil Procedure Act.”