The case originated in an application (no. 28704/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Ivan Rizman (“the applicant”), on 30 May 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mrs M. Okić, a lawyer practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 1 October 2007 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Lipovljani.
On 15 April 1993 the applicant brought a civil action in the Zagreb Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Zagrebu) against his employer, the , seeking damages for an injury sustained in the workplace.
On 21 June 1994 the court gave judgment, which was quashed by the  (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) on 19 September 1999.
In 2002 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint concerning the length of proceedings under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act. On 20 December 2004 the  (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) accepted the applicant’s complaint, finding a violation of his right to a hearing within a reasonable time and awarding him compensation in the amount of 5,100 Croatian kunas (HRK). It also ordered the Zagreb Municipal Court to decide the applicant’s case in the shortest time possible but no later than ten months following the publication of the decision in the Official Gazette. The decision was published on 12 January 2005.
On 1 February 2007 the Zagreb Municipal Court gave judgment dismissing the applicant’s claim. The judgment was quashed on appeal by the Zagreb County Court on 16 October 2007 and the case was remitted to the Municipal Court, where the proceedings are currently pending.
The relevant part of the Constitutional Act on the  (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 49/2002 of 3 May 2002 – “the Constitutional Court Act”) reads as follows:
Section 63
“(1) The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint whether or not all legal remedies have been exhausted if the competent court fails to decide a claim concerning the applicant’s rights and obligations or a criminal charge against him or her within a reasonable time ...
(2) If a constitutional complaint ... under paragraph 1 of this section is upheld, the  shall set a time-limit within which the competent court must decide the case on the merits...
(3) In a decision issued under paragraph 2 of this section, the  shall assess appropriate compensation for the applicant for the violation of his or her constitutional rights ... The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date a request for payment is lodged.”