The case originated in an application (no. 34922/07) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Serbian nationals, Ms Aleksandra Dimitrijević (“the first applicant”) and Ms Suzana Jakovljević (“the second applicant”), on 2 August 2007.
The President of the Chamber gave priority to the application in accordance with Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr M. Pavlović, a lawyer practising in Niš. The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr S. Carić.
On 27 May 2008 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was also decided that the merits of the application would be examined together with its admissibility.
The applicants, a daughter (the first applicant) and a mother (the second applicant), were born in 1993 and 1967, respectively, and live in Niš.
On 6 May 2003 M.D., the first applicant's father, filed a claim with the Municipal Court (Opštinski sud) in Niš, seeking the dissolution of his marriage to the second applicant.
On 12 February 2004 the applicants jointly filed a counterclaim (protvtužba), requesting that M.D. be ordered to pay monthly child maintenance to the first applicant.
On 18 January 2005 the Municipal Court: dissolved the marriage; awarded custody of the first applicant to the second applicant; regulated M.D.'s access rights; ordered him to pay monthly child maintenance; and decided that each party should bear its own costs.
Due to the Municipal Court's failure to properly serve this judgment on the applicants, the latter, who had clearly continued living at the same address, only managed to file an appeal against it on 27 April 2007.
On 18 September 2007 the District Court (Okružni sud) in Niš quashed the Municipal Court's judgment in so far as it concerned the maintenance sought and ordered a retrial.
Having held four separate hearings, on 26 December 2007 the Municipal Court ruled partly in favour of the applicants. In so doing, it ordered M.D. to pay monthly child maintenance, as well as the costs incurred by the applicants.
On 26 February 2008 this judgment was upheld by the District Court on appeal.