The case originated in four applications (nos. 2430/06, 1454/08, 11670/10 and 12938/12) against the Russian Federation, lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Russian nationals, Mr Vladislav Andreyevich Gankin, Ms Olga Ivanovna Shevchenok, Mr Aleksey Dmitriyevich Belkin and Mr Mikhail Viktorovich Kiryushkin (“the applicants”), on 10 November 2005, 1 November 2007, 17 February 2010, and 18 February 2012 respectively.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they were not notified of appeal hearings in civil proceedings to which they were parties.
The applicant, Mr Vladislav Andreyevich Gankin, was born in 1954 and lives in Volzhskiy, the Volgograd Region.
In May 2006 the applicant lodged a civil claim seeking to recover excess service fees paid. On 3 October 2007 the Volzhskiy Town Court of the Volgograd Region heard the case in the applicant’s presence and rejected his claim. The applicant appealed to the Volgograd Regional Court. The Government stated that on 9 November 2007 a judicial summons was sent to the applicant by mail. The applicant did not receive it.
On 29 November 2007 the Volgograd Regional Court upheld the judgment of the Town Court in the applicant’s absence, without addressing the issue of whether he had been notified.
The applicant, Ms Olga Ivanovna Shevchenok, was born in 1958 and lives in Tyumen.
In January 2007 the applicant brought a defamation action against a third party. On 6 March 2007 the Tsentralnyy District Court of Tyumen dismissed the applicant’s claim. The applicant was present and pleaded her case in person. On 18 March 2007 she lodged a statement of appeal, in which she indicated her post-office box number. The Government stated that on 12 April 2007 a judicial summons was sent to the applicant’s postoffice box. She claimed she had not received it.
On 2 May 2007 the Tyumen Regional Court examined and dismissed the applicant’s appeal in her absence, without examining the issue of whether she had been notified.
The applicant, Mr Aleksey Dmitriyevich Belkin, was born in 1952 and lives in Neya, the Kostroma Region.
In April 2009 he lodged a civil claim against traffic police, seeking to obtain a copy of a vehicle registration certificate. On 19 May 2009 the Neyskiy District Court of the Kostroma Region examined the case in the applicant’s presence and satisfied his claim in part. Both parties appealed against the judgment. The Government stated that on 10 August 2009 the Kostroma Regional Court had sent a judicial summons to the applicant by regular mail and had also called the telephone number listed in his statement of claim. He claimed he had not received the summons or the telephone call.
On 19 August 2009 the Kostroma Regional Court quashed the District Court’s judgment and dismissed the applicant’s claim in his absence, without examining the issue of whether he had been notified.
The applicant, Mr Mikhail Viktorovich Kiryushkin, was born in 1975 and lives in Yekaterinburg.
The applicant brought a civil action against his employer for wrongful dismissal. On 1 September 2011 the Kirovskiy District Court of Yekaterinburg heard the case in the applicant’s presence and refused his claim. On 15 September 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Sverdlovsk Regional Court. The Government stated that on 12 October 2011 the Regional Court sent a judicial summons to the applicant by registered mail. Three postal notices were then sent to the applicant inviting him to pick up the letter from the post office: on 18 and 24 October and 7 November 2011. According to the applicant he received the postal notice only on 11 November 2011.
On 1 November 2011 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court rejected the applicant’s appeal claim in his absence and did not examine the issue of whether he had been notified.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure read:
“1. Parties ... are to be summonsed to the court by a letter sent via registered mail with acknowledgment of receipt, a judicial summons with acknowledgment of receipt, by telegram, telephone or fax, or by any other means of communication which guarantees a record of the fact that the judicial summons or notifications were received by the parties.
A summons is one of the forms of court notification. Parties are notified by a summons about the date and place of the hearing or of specific procedural actions ...
A summons or other form of notification is to be served on parties in such a way [as to ensure] that they have enough time to prepare their case and to appear at the hearing.
A notification addressed to a party is to be sent to the address indicated by that party or his/her representative. If the party does not reside at the indicated address, the judicial summons may be sent to his or her place of work ...”
“1. Judicial summonses and other notifications are to be sent by mail or delivered by a person authorised by the court to deliver them. The time of service is to be recorded in compliance with the post office regulations or on a document which is to be returned to the court.
With the party’s consent, a judge can provide that party with a summons or notifications which is to be delivered to another party. A person authorised by the judge to deliver a judicial summons or other notification is to return a counterfoil of the summons or a copy of the notification bearing the addressee’s signature recording receipt.”
“1. A judicial summons ... is to be served on [the parties] against signature on a counterfoil of the summons, which is to be returned to the court ...
If the addressee is absent, a judicial summons is to be delivered to an adult family member living with the addressee ... for a subsequent handover to the addressee ...”
“1. If the addressee refuses to accept a judicial summons ... a special mention is made on the summons, which is then returned to the court.
An addressee who refuses to accept a judicial summons ... is considered duly apprised of the place and date of the court hearing...”
“Parties to the case must inform the court about any changes of address during the proceedings. In the absence of such information, a judicial summons or another notification is to be sent to the most recent address of a party and is considered duly served even if the addressee does not reside at the address”
“Civil cases shall be examined in a hearing upon mandatory provision of information to the parties about the time and place of the hearing.”
“1. The court must take direct cognizance of the evidence in the case, including by hearing the parties and third parties, witness testimony ...
Proceedings are conducted orally before the same judicial formation ...”
“At the scheduled time the presiding judge opens the hearing and announces the case to be examined.”
“1. The clerk to the court reports to the bench which of the summonsed persons are in attendance, whether the absent persons have been notified [of the hearing] and what information is available about the reasons for their absence.”
“1. The participants must inform the court of the reasons for their failure to attend and produce evidence of valid reasons.
If there is no information in the case file that the absent person has been notified [of the hearing], the hearing must be adjourned.
If the parties have been notified of the time and place of the hearing, the court adjourns the proceedings if it finds that they have valid reasons for being absent.
The court may still examine the case in the absence of a party that was notified of the time and date of the hearing if it finds that the party failed to explain the reasons for its absence or does not have valid reasons for the absence.”
“1. If a defendant who has been notified about the date and place of a court hearing does not appear in court, and if he does not provide valid reasons for his failure to attend and does not request a waiver, the court may examine the case in absentia ...
...
If a claimant who is present at the hearing objects to the proceedings being conducted in the respondent’s absence, the court adjourns the proceedings and sends a judicial summons to the respondent.”
“1. The appellate court notifies the parties about the time and place of the appellate hearing.
The appellate court carries out a new examination of the case in a hearing in accordance with the rules of procedure in the first-instance court ...
The parties, their representatives ... may participate in the hearing by means of a video-conference in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 155.1 ...”
“1. Upon receipt of a statement of appeal ... the judge shall:
1) send to the parties copies of the statement and enclosed written evidence no later than the day after their receipt;
2) notify the parties of the time and place of the appeal hearing ...”
“1. The cassation court reviews the lawfulness and reasonableness of the firstinstance court’s judgment on the basis of arguments contained in the statements of appeal. It assesses the evidence in the case file, but also additional evidence if it determines that such evidence could not have been produced before the first-instance court, and ... may establish new facts and circumstances.
In the interests of justice the cassation court may carry out a full review of the first-instance court’s judgment.”
“The hearing in the court of cassation shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of the present Code that govern the conduct of a hearing before the first-instance court ...”
“1. If a party to the case does not appear and if there is no evidence that the party was duly summoned, the hearing must be adjourned ...”
“2. Judicial decisions that have come into force may be reviewed in the following cases:
...
(2) [on account of] new circumstances listed in paragraph 4 of this Article which emerged after the adoption of the judicial decision and which have significant importance for the correct determination of the matter.
...
New circumstances include:
...
(4) the finding of a violation of the European Convention on Human Rights by the European Court of Human Rights with regard to the specific case that was examined by the court, provided that the applicant lodged an application with the European Court of Human Rights in connection with the decision in that case ...”
On 23 December 2015 the Presidium of the Supreme Court of Russia adopted Case-law Review no. 4 (2015). In Section IV “Procedural matters”, the Supreme Court highlighted its judgment of 16 December 2014 (case no. 9-KG14-8) by which it quashed the appeal judgment of a Regional Court for failure to notify duly the parties. After reiterating the contents of Articles 113, 155, 167 and 327 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the Supreme Court held:
“It follows that whichever means of notification is chosen by a court, it must always provide for a reliable proof of delivery of the correspondence to the addressee.
By appeal decision of 1 April 2014 M.’s appeal statement was examined in the parties’ absence. The hearing record does not indicate whether the absent litigants were duly informed about the date and place of the hearing. The case materials do not contain any information as to whether K. received a court summons ... It follows that K. was not duly notified [about the upcoming hearing] ... which amounts to a serious breach of the rules of civil procedure.”