The case originated in an application (no. 17735/06) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Valeriy Grigoryevich Chopenko (“the applicant”), on 14 April 2006.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A.N. Dyatlov, a lawyer practising in Nikopol, Ukraine. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms Nataly Sevostianova, of the Ministry of Justice of Ukraine.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings against him had been unfair on account of a breach of his rights to defence and to personal participation in the appeal hearing.
On 17 October 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 10 December 2013 the Chamber decided, under Rule 54 § 2 (c) of the Rules of Court, that the parties should be invited to submit further written observations on the admissibility and merits of the application.
The applicant was born in 1970. He is currently serving a life sentence in Dnipropetrovsk.
On 23 June 2005 O.K., a young woman, was found hanged on a tree in a forested area near a bus station. It was also discovered that her mobile phone, earrings and ring were missing and that she had had sexual intercourse shortly before her death.
At about 2 p.m. on 27 June 2005, officers of the Apostolovskiy District Police took the applicant to the police station for questioning in connection with the investigation into O.K.’s death.
On the same day, the applicant signed a confession statement according to which on the afternoon of 22 June 2005 he had met O.K. at a bus station and asked her to have sex with him in the nearby forest. O.K. had agreed to his proposal and volunteered her ring and earrings after intercourse. As the applicant was leaving, she had threatened to complain that she had been raped and robbed. In order to get away, the applicant had grabbed her by the neck; O.K., still alive, had lost consciousness and he had taken her mobile phone and left the scene.
According to the applicant, between 27 and 28 June 2005 he remained in police custody without any record being drawn up or his relatives being notified.
On 28 June 2005 the applicant was questioned by an investigating officer of the Apostolovskiy District Prosecutor’s Office and gave further details of his encounter with O.K. He stated that after she had lost consciousness he had taken the cord from her umbrella, tied it round her neck and hung her on the tree. The applicant’s statements were recorded on a form headed “Explanation”, which did not refer to any criminal proceedings against him, but stated that the applicant had been informed of his right under Article 63 of the Constitution not to incriminate himself.
At an unspecified time on the same date an investigating officer of the District Prosecutor’s Office instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant on suspicion that he had committed a non-aggravated murder within the meaning of Article 115 § 1 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine and notified the applicant of his right to legal assistance. He further drafted an arrest report according to which the applicant had been arrested as a suspect at 6.15 p.m. on that date at the premises of the prosecutor’s office.
After the applicant’s arrest he was assigned a legal-aid lawyer, M., and was officially questioned as a suspect in her presence from 6.35 p.m. until 8.50 p.m. During the questioning, the applicant largely reiterated his previous statements.
On the same date the applicant surrendered a gold ring to the police, which, as subsequently confirmed by her relatives, had belonged to O.K. O.K.’s former phone was also either seized from the applicant’s home or surrendered by him.
On 1 July 2005 the Dnipropetrovsk Apostolovskiy District Court ordered the applicant’s remand in custody as a preventive measure. It appears from the case-file materials that that decision was not appealed against.
On 2 July 2005 the applicant, questioned in M.’s presence, provided further details concerning his sexual encounter with O.K. He also stated that all his confessions had been voluntary and no pressure had been applied by the authorities to make him confess. Feeling remorse for his crimes, he wounded himself with a pen top in an attempt to cut his veins and commit suicide, but his cellmate intervened.
On 5 July 2005 M. was replaced by Sh., another legal-aid lawyer.
On the same date the applicant was taken to the site of the crime and participated in a reconstruction of the crime scene in Sh.’s presence.
On 6 July 2005 the applicant was examined by a medical expert, who found that he had a wound on the inner side of his left elbow, inflicted on or about 1 July 2005. The expert further recorded that, according to the applicant, the wound was self-inflicted and he had not been ill-treated by the authorities either during his arrest or in detention.
On 7 July 2005 the applicant was indicted of non-aggravated murder. On the same date he was questioned as an accused in the presence of Sh. and confirmed his previous statements.
On 12 August 2005 the applicant was placed in a psychiatric hospital for an assessment of his mental state, where he stayed until 9 September 2005. According to him, during that period of time he was administered psychotropic drugs.
On 23 September 2005 the charges against the applicant were reclassified as aggravated murder, within the meaning of Article 115 paragraph 2, rape, and robbery.
On 26 September 2005 a new lawyer, N., hired by the applicant’s family, was admitted to the proceedings to replace the legal-aid lawyer Sh. On the same date the applicant, when questioned in presence of N., claimed he was innocent and refused to provide any further explanations.
In the autumn of 2005 the applicant was committed for trial at the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Court of Appeal (“the Regional Court”), acting as a first-instance court.
During the trial the applicant pleaded not guilty. He maintained that on 27 June 2005 he had confessed to murdering O.K. as a result of psychological and physical ill-treatment by police officers; in fact, he had never met O.K. On 22 June 2005 he had purchased a mobile phone, a ring and earrings from a stranger on the street.
On 16 December 2005 the Regional Court found the applicant guilty of rape, theft, robbery and aggravated murder. It referred to various sources of evidence, including the applicant’s confession statements given on 27 June 2005 and during the further course of the investigation, witness statements, forensic assessments, and DNA evidence. The court dismissed the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment as unsubstantiated and sentenced him to life imprisonment.
On 21 December 2005 the applicant received a copy of the Regional Court’s judgment of 16 December 2005.
On 10 January 2006 the applicant submitted a cassation appeal against that judgment. He maintained his innocence and alleged that on 27 June 2005 he had been beaten and given electric shocks by the police officers to break his moral resistance and make him confess to the murder, and that they had also threatened to plant narcotics on his wife if he refused to cooperate.
Subsequently (on 8 February, 2, 6 and 9 March 2006), the applicant submitted supplementary pleadings in which he challenged the validity of the various sources of evidence relied on for his conviction. He also complained that he had not been provided with an opportunity to contact his relatives or with access to a lawyer before his first questioning, and that he had been administered psychotropic drugs during his psychiatric assessment. He also maintained that N., the lawyer hired by his family, had performed his duties in bad faith. In particular, he had hardly visited the applicant and had completely failed to participate in the cassation proceedings.
On 20 January 2006 the applicant received a rectified copy of the judgment of 16 December 2005, as the previous copy had been found to contain some technical errors.
On 17 February 2006 the applicant filed an application with the Supreme Court requesting it to ensure his personal presence at the cassation hearing.
On 6, 14 and 28 March 2006 the applicant lodged further requests to be present at the hearing. He also requested the Supreme Court to summon his first lawyer, M., for the hearing and noted that he had never refused her services and did not know why she had been excluded from the proceedings.
On 27 March 2006 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s request to be present at the hearing, finding that it had been lodged outside the one-month statutory time-limit.
On 14 April 2006 the applicant re-lodged the request to be present at the hearing, stating that he had obtained the final copy of the judgment only on 20 January 2006 and had lodged his request within one month of that date.
On 18 April 2006 the Supreme Court held a hearing in the applicant’s case. The hearing was not attended by either the applicant or a lawyer on his behalf.
On the same date the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s cassation appeal and upheld the previous judgment. It noted, in particular, that there was no evidence that the applicant had been subjected to illtreatment or that his right to defence had been breached in a way incompatible with his right to a fair trial. It further noted that the case file contained sufficient evidence of the applicant’s guilt, including his own confession statements given in the presence of his lawyers. According to the text of the judgment, the prosecutor, who had been present at the hearing, had requested that the applicant’s appeal be dismissed and the first-instance court’s judgment be upheld.
On various dates after his conviction, the applicant unsuccessfully complained to various authorities, including the prosecutor’s office and the Advocate Qualification Commission, about his alleged ill-treatment, the poor performance of his lawyer N., and other alleged breaches of his procedural rights.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
“Everyone has the right to legal assistance. Such assistance is provided free of charge in the cases provided for by law. Everyone is free to choose the defender of his or her rights.
In , advocacy acts to ensure the right to mount a defence against an accusation, and to provide legal assistance during the determination of cases by courts and other State bodies.”
“A person shall not bear responsibility for refusing to testify or to explain anything about himself or herself, members of his or her family or close relatives in the degree determined by law.
A suspect, an accused, or a defendant shall have the right to mount a defence.
A convicted person shall enjoy all human and citizens’ rights, except for the restrictions determined by law and established in court judgments.”
Under paragraph 1 of Article 115, premeditated murder is punishable by imprisonment for a term of seven to fifteen years. Under paragraph 2 of Article 115, premeditated murder in the aggravating circumstances listed in that paragraph is punishable by imprisonment for a term of ten to fifteen years, or life imprisonment.
Article 45 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1960, in force at the material time, provided that legal representation during the inquiry, pre-trial investigation and trial before the first-instance court was mandatory if, inter alia, the possible penalty was a life sentence. It further specified that in such a case legal representation should be provided from the moment of the arrest or the bringing of charges against the person.
The provisions governing the cassation review of criminal cases, as in force before 7 February 2006 and in so far as relevant, read as follows:
“Cassation proceedings may be instituted in respect of:
1)  judgments, decisions and rulings taken by an appeal court acting as a first-instance court;
...”
“Cassation appeals and pleadings with respect to the court decisions listed in paragraph 1 of Article 383 of the present Code may be lodged within one month of the date of delivery of the judgment or pronouncement of the decision or ruling which is being appealed against; a convicted defendant who is held in custody [may lodge an appeal] ... within the same time-limit from the date of receipt of a copy of the judgment or decision.”
“...A request by a convicted defendant who is held in custody to be summoned to submit observations in the course of the cassation review of a court decision listed in paragraph 1 of Article 383 of the present Code shall be binding on the cassation court.
Participants in the court proceedings who appear at the court hearing shall have the right to make oral submissions.”
“The cassation court shall review the lawfulness and reasonableness of the court judgment in the light of the materials on file and additionally submitted materials, within the limits of the appeal. ...”
“Following cassation review of the case the court shall take one of the following decisions:
1)  to uphold the judgment, ... and dismiss the cassation appeal or pleadings;
2)  to quash the judgment ... and remit the case for a new investigation or trial or an appellate review;
3)  to quash the judgment ... and discontinue the proceedings;
4)  to amend the judgment...”
“Grounds for quashing or amending the judgment, decision or ruling shall be as follows:
1)  a substantial breach of the law of criminal procedure;
2)  incorrect application of the criminal law;
3)  incompatibility of the punishment imposed with the gravity of the offence or the character of the convicted defendant.
A judgment given by an appeal court acting as a first-instance court may be quashed or amended on account of bias, an incomplete inquiry, pre-trial or judicial investigation, or where the conclusions of the court stated in the judgment are incompatible with the factual circumstances of the case.
...”
On 12 January 2006 the Law “On Introduction of Changes to the Criminal Procedure Code” which came into force on 7 February 2006, amended Article 391 by adding the following line to the first paragraph: “if it is submitted within the time-limit for lodging a cassation appeal”.