The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) and by the Polish Government (“the Government”) on 23 April 1997 and 13 June 1997 respectively, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 23103/93) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Commission under Article 25 by a Polish national, Mr Antoni Belziuk, on 31 May 1993.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby Poland recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46). The Government’s application referred to Article 48. The object of the request and of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention taken together.

2.  In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 35 § 3 (d) of Rules of Court B, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 31). The lawyer was given leave by the President on 21 October 1997 to use the Polish language in the written and oral proceedings (Rule 28 § 3). 
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr J. Makarczyk, the elected judge of Polish nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), and Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)). On 28 April 1997, in the presence of the Registrar, the President of the Court, Mr R. Ryssdal, drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr Thór Vilhjálmsson, Mr F. Matscher, Mr R. Macdonald, Mr J.M. Morenilla, Mr P. Jambrek, Mr U. Lōhmus and Mr J. Casadevall (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 5). Subsequently Mr C. Russo, substitute judge, replaced Mr Macdonald who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rules 22 § 1 and 24 § 1).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 39 § 1 and 40). Pursuant to the order made in consequence on 4 June 1997, the Registrar received the applicant’s memorial on 9 October 1997 and the Government’s memorial on 13 October 1997.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 27 November 1997. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Marxer, Mr Gałkowski and Mr Drzewicki.
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in Gorlice, Poland.
On 31 May 1992 he was arrested on suspicion of having attempted to steal a car and on 2 June 1992 was remanded in custody.
The trial took place on 24 September, 15 October and 25 November 1992 before the Tarnów District Court (Sąd Rejonowy). The District Court heard as witnesses the owner of the car and his neighbour as well as the police expert, who confirmed that the door lock had been tampered with in an attempt to open it. The court also considered as evidence a bag containing instruments, which could have been used to open the car lock. The bag had been found in the close vicinity of the applicant at the time of his arrest. The applicant was present during the trial. According to the Government the applicant had chosen not to be represented by a lawyer.
On 25 November 1992 the District Court convicted the applicant of attempted theft and sentenced him to three years’ imprisonment. It found the evidence of the witnesses to be exhaustive and logical and their statements consistent.
The applicant filed an appeal against this judgment with the Tarnów Regional Court (Sąd Wojewódzki). He maintained in particular that the first-instance court had disregarded his explanations and had only attached weight to the prosecution evidence. He also requested that his accomplice and the two policemen who had arrested him be heard as witnesses and that he be brought from prison to the hearing before the Regional Court.
On 21 April 1993 the Regional Court refused the applicant’s request to be brought before it, considering that his presence was unnecessary, since he had already given a detailed account of the events at his trial before the District Court. Moreover, in his written statement of appeal he had set out at length his complaints in respect of the contested conviction. Furthermore, in its view he had sufficient time to submit further observations in writing, if he wished to do so.
On 10 May 1993, after a hearing at which the public prosecutor, but not the applicant, was present (see paragraph 14 below), the Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
The Regional Court had heard the prosecutor’s submissions to the effect that the judgment of the lower court should be upheld, and it considered that the District Court had thoroughly assessed the evidence and had carefully considered the applicant’s guilt, as shown by the fact that the applicant had been acquitted on one of two charges. The Regional Court found that the evidence given by the applicant was inconsistent and
The relevant provisions of the Polish Code of Criminal Procedure in force at the material time read as follows:
Article 69
“An accused, who does not have a lawyer of his own choice, may request the assistance of an officially appointed lawyer if he proves that he is not able to incur the costs of defence without detriment to himself and his family.”
Article 399
“A court of appeal shall conduct a hearing when examining a case…”
Article 400 § 1
“A hearing shall be held irrespective of whether the parties are present. However, a hearing shall not be held if the public prosecutor is absent…”
Article 401
“If a case is to be examined at a hearing, the court may order an accused, who is detained, to be brought to the hearing.”
Article 402
“1.	An appellate court cannot take evidence.
However, the court can exceptionally take evidence at a hearing … if it would expedite proceedings…”
The Code of Criminal Procedure provided at the material time for two-instance proceedings. Regional courts considered, inter alia, appeals against judgments of district courts. Only remedies of an extraordinary character were available against a judgment given by a regional court in appeal. Since then the Code of Criminal Procedure has been amended and now provides for cassation proceedings in respect of judgments of appellate courts.

16.  Article 383 of the Code of Criminal Procedure prohibits an appellate court from increasing a sentence imposed by a trial court if the appeal was lodged by a defendant.
The Prosecution Authorities Act 1985 provides that the prosecution service is composed of the Principal Public Prosecutor and subordinate public prosecutors. Public prosecutors are independent in carrying out their duties. However, they are under an obligation to follow the instructions of higher ranking prosecutors.
In a declaration of 1 March 1993, deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe by the Polish Minister for Foreign Affairs, Poland recognised the jurisdiction of the Court in the following terms:
 “The Government of the Republic of Poland, pursuant to Article 46 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, opened for signature in Rome on 4 November 1950, declares that it recognises, for a period of three years with effect from 1 May 1993, as compulsory ipso facto and without special agreement, on condition of reciprocity on the part of the other Contracting Parties, the jurisdiction of the Court of Human Rights in all matters concerning the interpretation and application of the aforementioned Convention.
The validity of this Declaration may be renewed by tacit agreement for periods of three years, if the Government of the Republic of Poland, by notification to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, does not denounce this Declaration by giving at least six months’ notice before the expiry of the first period or of the subsequent periods.”
Mr Belziuk applied to the Commission on 31 May 1993. He raised several complaints under Articles 5, 6 §§ 1, 2 and 3 (c) and (d), 7 § 1 and 14 of the Convention. In particular, he complained that the public prosecutor had not heard his accomplice and alleged that certain letters, which he had written to the public prosecutor and the District Court, had been destroyed by the public prosecutor. He also complained that the public prosecutor had served him with the document containing charges against him on 19 August 1992, although this document was dated 2 June 1992, and that he had been obliged to sign it against his will. The applicant further complained about the partiality of the proceedings before the District Court, its assessment of the evidence and the fact that a more severe penalty imposed on him as a recidivist gave rise to discrimination. He also complained about the proceedings before the Regional Court, submitting in particular that he had been refused leave to be present at the hearing, that the Regional Court had failed to reply to his request for legal aid and that he had not been granted the assistance of an officially appointed lawyer.
On 29 November 1995 the Commission declared the application (no. 23103/93) inadmissible with the exception of the complaint under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) relating to the fairness of the proceedings before the Tarnów Regional Court. In its report of 26 February 1997 (Article 31), it expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been a violation of Article 6 § 1 in conjunction with Article § 3 (c). The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
In his memorial and at the hearing the applicant asked the Court to hold that there had been a breach of Article 6 § 1 read together with Article 6 § 3 (c) of the Convention and to award him just satisfaction under Article 50 of the Convention.
The Government for their part requested the Court both in their memorial and at the hearing to declare the case inadmissible on account of, firstly, the Court’s lack of jurisdiction ratione temporis and, secondly, the failure of the applicant to exhaust domestic remedies. In the alternative, they requested the Court to reject the applicant’s complaint as disclosing no breach of the Convention. 