The case originated in an application (no. 20023/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vasiliy Fedorovich Gulyayev (“the applicant”), on 5 March 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr A.N. Golovachev, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, representative of the  before the European Court of Human Rights.
On 17 November 2008 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1928 and lives in .
On 4 November 1992 the Presidium of the Kursk Regional Council of People's Deputies issued the applicant with a certificate showing that he had participated in mine cleaning in the Kursk Region in 1943-1948.
On 8 December 2000 the Kursk Social Security Office upon applicant's request exchanged the above certificate for a certificate of a war veteran. The new document made the applicant eligible for an increased pension.
In March 2005 the Kursk Social Security Office asked the Kursk Military Commission to remove the applicant's status as a war veteran on the ground that the police had established forgery of the war-time document, in which the applicant's name was mentioned. In May 2005 the Social Security Office stopped paying the increased pension to the applicant and decided to withhold the amount which it had overpaid in the preceding period.
The applicant challenged the discontinuation of payments as unlawful. The Social Security Office counterclaimed, seeking a court order for annulment of the veteran certificate. The Military Commission joined the proceedings as a co-defendant.
On 20 April 2006 the Leninskiy District Court of Kursk found for the applicant. It determined that the allegedly forged document had not been the basis for granting the applicant the veteran status and could not be invoked as a ground for annulment of the certificate. The discontinuation of payments had been therefore unlawful.
Neither the Social Security Office nor the Military Commission filed an ordinary appeal and the judgment became final and enforceable.
In September 2006 the Military Commission lodged an application for supervisory review of the judgment of 20 April 2006.
On 15 November 2006 the Presidium of the  granted the application, quashed the contested judgment and remitted the matter for a new examination by the District Court. In so doing, it held that the District Court had gone beyond the scope of the claims since it had found that the veteran certificate had been lawfully issued to the applicant, whereas the Social Security Office had not raised that issue. It also found that the District Court had not examined the administrative decision to suspend the monthly payments to the applicant and had not indicated the statute regulating seizure of certificates in court proceedings.
On 29 December 2006 the Leninskiy District Court issued a new judgment. On the applicant's claim, it held that the discontinuation of payments had been lawful, but awarded the applicant the amount outstanding and interest on it. The District Court also granted the Social Security Office's counterclaim and annulled the veteran certificate on the ground that he had failed to produce any documents showing that he had taken part in mine cleaning prior to 9 May 1945 (the official date of the end of the war).
The relevant domestic law governing the supervisory review procedure at the material time is summed up in the Court's judgment in the case of Sobelin and Others v. Russia (nos. 30672/03, et seq., §§ 33-42, 3 May 2007).