The case originated in an application (no. 31961/96) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Metin Şahin (“the applicant”), on 7 June 1996.
The applicant was represented by Mr Mehdi Bektaş, a lawyer practising in Ankara (Turkey). The Turkish Government did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings brought against him had not been concluded within a “reasonable time” and that his right to a fair hearing had been breached since he had been convicted on the basis of the statements he had made to the police under duress.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court. Mr Rıza Türmen, the judge elected in respect of Turkey, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28). The Government accordingly appointed Mr Feyyaz Gölcüklü to sit as an ad hoc judge, in his place (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
By a decision of 11 January 2000, the Chamber retained the applicant’s complaint concerning the length of the criminal proceedings against him and declared the remainder of his complaints inadmissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
On 19 September 1979 police officers from the Ankara Security Directorate arrested the applicant on suspicion of membership of an illegal armed organisation, the Dev-Yol (Revolutionary Way).
On 24 September 1979 the Ankara Martial Law Court (sıkıyönetim mahkemesi) ordered the applicant’s detention on remand.
On 5 March 1980 the Military Public Prosecutor filed a bill of indictment with the Ankara Martial Law Court accusing the applicant of membership of an illegal organisation, the Ö.T.K. The Public Prosecutor further alleged that the applicant was the representative of the Dev-Yol within the Ö.T.K.
On 12 June 1980 the applicant was released pending trial.
On 26 September 1980 police officers re-arrested the applicant during his treatment at Y.I.’s house subsequent to his injury in the course of clashes which resulted in the killing of M.V. and M.G.
On 1 February 1981 the police officers questioned the applicant at the Ankara Security Directorate, where he admitted that he had been involved in the Ö.T.K.
On 3 March 1981 the applicant was questioned by the Military Public Prosecutor. The applicant denied the allegation that he was a member of the Dev-Yol but conceded that he had been involved in the Ö.T.K.
On 4 March 1981 the Ankara Martial Law Court remanded the applicant in custody.
On 26 February 1982 the Military Public Prosecutor filed a bill of indictment with the Martial Law Court against the applicant and 722 other defendants. The Public Prosecutor accused the applicant of membership of the Dev-Yol, whose object was to undermine the constitutional order and replace it with a Marxist-Leninist regime. He further charged the applicant with having been involved in a number of crimes such as the killings of M.V. and M.G., opening fire on a house and collecting money for the DevYol.
The prosecution sought the death penalty under Article 146 § 1 of the Turkish Criminal Code. It was further decided that this indictment should be joined to the indictment of 5 March 1980.
In a judgment of 19 July 1989 the Martial Law Court convicted the applicant on account of his involvement in the killing of M.V. and M.G. and his activities in the Ö.T.K. The court sentenced the applicant to 4 years and 6 months’ imprisonment under Article 168 § 2 of the Turkish Criminal Code.
The court also convicted the applicant of membership of the Dev-Yol and sentenced him to lifetime imprisonment (in effect 18 years assuming good conduct) for offences under Article 146 § 1 of the Turkish Criminal Code, permanently debarred him from employment in the civil service and placed him under judicial guardianship. 
As the applicant’s sentence exceeded 15 years’ imprisonment, his case was automatically referred to the Military Court of Cassation (askeri yargıtay).
Following promulgation of the Law of 27 December 1993, which abolished the jurisdiction of the martial law courts, the Court of Cassation (yargıtay) acquired jurisdiction over the case and the case file was transmitted to it.
On 27 December 1995 the Court of Cassation upheld the applicant’s conviction.
Article 146 § 1 of the Turkish Criminal Code provides:
“Whosoever shall attempt to alter or amend in whole or in part the Constitution of the Turkish Republic or to effect a coup d’état against the Grand National Assembly formed under the Constitution or to prevent it by force from carrying out its functions shall be liable to the death penalty.”
Article 168 of the Criminal Code reads:
“Any person who, with the intention of committing the offences defined in Articles ..., forms an armed gang or organisation or takes leadership ... or command of such a gang or organisation or assumes some special responsibility within it shall be sentenced to not less than fifteen years’ imprisonment.
The other members of the gang or organisation shall be sentenced to not less than five and not more than fifteen years’ imprisonment.”