The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 17 April 1996, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 of the Convention (art. 32-1, art. 47). It originated in an application (no. 21522/93) against the  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by a Greek national, Mr Anastasios Georgiadis, on 27 February 1993.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Articles 6 and 13 of the Convention (art. 6, art. 13).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
On 27 April 1996, the President of the Court decided, under Rule 21 para. 7 and in the interests of the proper administration of justice, that a single Chamber should be constituted to consider this case and that of Tsirlis and Kouloumpas v.  (no. 54/1996/673/859-860). The Chamber to be constituted for that purpose included ex officio Mr N. Valticos, the elected judge of Greek nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 4 (b)). On the same date, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr F. Gölcüklü, Mr R. Pekkanen, Mr A.N. Loizou, Mr A.B. Baka, Mr D. Gotchev, Mr P. Kuris and Mr U. Lohmus (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 5) (art. 43).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 6), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Greek Government ("the Government"), the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the Government’s memorial on 25 October 1996 and the applicant’s claims for just satisfaction (art. 50) on 31 October 1996.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 21 January 1997. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
(a) for the Government
Mr P. Georgakopoulos, Senior Adviser,
Legal Council of State,	Delegate of the Agent,
Mrs K. Grigoriou, Legal Assistant,
Legal Council of State,	Counsel;
(b) for the Commission
Mr P. Lorenzen,	Delegate;
(c) for the applicant
Mr P. Bitsaxis, of the Athens Bar,	Counsel.
The Court heard addresses by Mr Lorenzen, Mr Bitsaxis and Mrs Grigoriou and also replies to its questions.
Mr Georgiadis was born in 1963 and lives in .
On 3 January 1989 the applicant was appointed minister of religion for the prefectures of Karditsa and Larissa by the Central Congregation of the Christian Jehovah’s Witnesses of Greece. He was given authority, inter alia, to perform wedding ceremonies between persons of that faith and to notify such weddings to the competent registry offices. By letter of 13 January 1989 the Director of Internal Affairs of the  notified the registry offices of Karditsa of his appointment. By letter of 24 January 1989 the registry offices of Larissa were also notified of it.
On 11 September 1991 the applicant lodged an application with the Serres Recruitment Office ("the Recruitment Office") to be exempted from military service in accordance with section 6 of Law no. 1763/1988 ("the 1988 Law"), which grants such a right to all ministers of "known religions". On 17 September 1991 the Recruitment Office rejected the application on the ground that Jehovah’s Witnesses were not a "known religion".
On 7 October 1991 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Director for Recruitment at the General Headquarters for National Defence ("the Director for Recruitment"). It was rejected on 18 December 1991 on the ground that he was not a minister of a "known religion". On the same day, the Recruitment Office ordered the applicant to report for duty at a military training centre in Nauplia on 20 January 1992.
The applicant presented himself at the Nauplia centre, as ordered, but refused to join his unit, invoking his status as a minister of a "known religion". Taking the view that the applicant had committed the criminal offence of insubordination (see paragraph 19 below), the military commander of the training centre detained him pending trial in the centre’s disciplinary unit and ordered a preliminary investigation into the facts. The investigation completed, the applicant was committed for trial on 29 January 1992. The order for his detention was renewed and he was transferred to the military prison at Avlona.
On 13 February 1992 the applicant brought proceedings in the  (Symvoulio tis Epikratias) to have the Director for Recruitment’s decision of 18 December 1991 quashed.
On 16 March 1992 the Athens Permanent Army Tribunal (Diarkes Stratodikio), composed of one military judge and four ordinary military officers, examined the criminal charges against the applicant. Having heard the evidence and the parties’ submissions on the question of the applicant’s guilt, the tribunal withdrew for deliberations. After the deliberations, the President announced the verdict. The applicant was acquitted because "there was no act of insubordination" as the applicant had no obligation to perform military service, being a minister of a "known religion".
The applicant was immediately released but was ordered to report for duty on 4 April 1992 at the Nauplia centre. On that date the applicant presented himself at the Nauplia centre, where he was ordered to join the military forces. When he refused, he was again charged with insubordination and placed in detention. On 15 April 1992 he was committed for trial.
On 8 May 1992, the Athens Permanent Army Tribunal examined the new criminal charges against the applicant. Having heard the evidence and the parties’ submissions on the question of the applicant’s guilt, the tribunal withdrew for deliberations. After the deliberations, the President announced the verdict. The applicant was acquitted, because there were doubts as to his intention to commit the criminal offence of insubordination. The following order was attached to the tribunal’s verdict and read out with it: "No compensation should be granted to the applicant for his detention pending trial, because his detention was due to his own gross negligence."
The applicant was immediately released from Avlona Prison, given leave of absence and ordered to report for duty at the Nauplia centre on 22 May 1992. He was again ordered to join his unit. When he refused he was charged with insubordination and detained.
On 7 July 1992 the  quashed the Director for Recruitment’s decision of 18 December 1991 on the ground that Jehovah’s Witnesses were a known religion and the administrative authorities had not challenged the evidence produced by the applicant that he was a minister of that religion.
On 27 July 1992 the applicant was provisionally released following a decision of the Salonika Permanent Army Tribunal sitting in chambers. A certificate of provisional exemption from military service was issued on the ground that the applicant was a minister of a "known religion".
On 10 September 1992 the Salonika Permanent Army Tribunal, considered the criminal charges against the applicant. Having heard the evidence and the parties’ submissions on the question of his guilt, the tribunal withdrew for deliberations. After the deliberations, the President announced the verdict. The applicant was acquitted, because he had not had the intention of committing the offence of insubordination. The following order was attached to the tribunal’s verdict and read out with it: "The State is under no obligation to compensate the applicant for his detention pending trial, because his detention was due to his own gross negligence."
Article 70 of the Military Criminal Code provides as follows:
"A member of the armed forces who refuses ... to obey an order by his superior to perform one of his duties is punished ..."
On 16 March 1992 the Athens Permanent Army Tribunal held that a Jehovah’s Witnesses minister of religion who had refused to collect military clothing when first called upon to join the army was not guilty of insubordination. The tribunal considered that there had been no act of insubordination, because the accused had no obligation to perform military service as he was a minister of a "known religion".
Article 434 of the Code provides that where a procedural matter is not regulated in the Military Criminal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure applies.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure read as follows:
Article 533 para. 2
"Persons who have been detained on remand and subsequently acquitted ... shall be entitled to request compensation ... if it has been established in the proceedings that they did not commit the criminal offence for which they were detained ..."
Article 535 para. 1
"The State shall have no obligation to compensate a person who ... has been detained on remand if, whether intentionally or by gross negligence, he was responsible for his own detention."
Article 536
"1. Upon an oral application by a person who has been acquitted, the court which heard the case shall rule on the State’s obligation to pay compensation in a separate decision delivered at the same time as the verdict.  However, the court may also make such a ruling proprio motu ...
The ruling on the State’s obligation to pay compensation cannot be challenged separately; it shall, however, be quashed if the decision on the principal issue of the criminal trial is reversed."
Article 537
"1. A person who has suffered loss may seek compensation at a later stage from the same court.
In those circumstances the application must be submitted to the prosecutor [Epitropos] at that court no later than forty-eight hours after the delivery of the judgment in open court."
Article 539 para. 1
"Where it has been decided that the State must pay compensation, the person entitled thereto may bring his claim in the civil courts, which shall not call in question the existence of the State’s obligation."
Article 540 para. 1
"Persons who have been unfairly ... detained on remand must be compensated for any pecuniary loss they have suffered as a result of their ... detention. They must also be compensated for non-pecuniary loss ..."
Mr Georgiadis applied to the Commission on 27 February 1993. Relying on Articles 3, 5 paras. 1 and 5, 6 para. 1, 9, 13 and 14 of the Convention (art. 3, art. 5-1, art. 5-5, art. 6-1, art 9, art. 13, art. 14), he complained that his detention had been unlawful and amounted to discrimination on account of his religious beliefs, that he had been subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment, and that he did not have a fair hearing in the matter of compensation for his unlawful detention. Lastly, Mr Georgiadis complained under Article 4 para. 1 of Protocol No. 7 (P7-4-1) that he had been twice prosecuted for an offence of which he had been previously acquitted.
On 10 October 1994 the Commission declared the application (no. 21522/93) admissible as to the issues arising from the military tribunals’ rejection without a hearing of the applicant’s claim for compensation and the inadequate reasoning of the relevant decisions. The complaint under Article 5 para. 1 (art. 5-1) was declared inadmissible for failure to exhaust domestic remedies. In its report of 27 February 1996 (Article 31) (art. 31), the Commission expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been a violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) and that it was not necessary to examine whether there had been a violation of Article 13 (art. 13).
The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
At the hearing, the applicant requested the Court to find that, in his case, Articles 6 para. 1 and 13 (art. 6-1, art. 13) had been violated.
The Government, for their part, asked the Court to reject every allegation of a violation of the Convention.