The case originated in 127 applications against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ukrainian and Russian nationals and companies based in , whose details are specified in the appended tables.
The applicants in applications nos. 46250/08, 22257/10 and 36266/10 died. The applications were pursued in their name by the persons of the required standing, their relatives or heirs to their estate.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Nazar Kulchytskyy.
The applications, which mainly concern the issues of lengthy failure to enforce domestic decisions given in the applicants’ favour, were communicated to the Government on various dates.
On various dates the Government submitted to the Court a number of unilateral declarations aimed at resolving the non-enforcement issues. The Government requested the Court to strike the applications concerned out of the list of cases pursuant to Article 37 § 1 (c) of the Convention on the basis of the declarations. The Court examined the declarations and decided to reject the Government’s request.
The Russian Government, having been informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings in respect of the applicants in applications nos. 35071/10 and 53963/10 (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court), indicated that they did not wish to exercise that right.
On the dates set out in the appended tables domestic courts and commissions on labour disputes delivered judgments and decisions according to which the applicants were entitled to various pecuniary amounts or to have certain actions taken in their favour. The decisions became final and enforceable. However, the applicants were unable to obtain the enforcement of the decisions in due time because of State’s failure to comply with these decisions.
Some of the applicants also made submissions concerning factual and legal matters unrelated to the above non-enforcement issues.