The case originated in an application (no. 18499/08) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Ms Radif Shamoyan (“the applicant”), on 12 April 2008.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr R. Ayvazyan, a non-practising lawyer. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she was denied access to the Court of Cassation due to the fact that her appeal on points of law was not lodged by an advocate holding a special licence to act before that court.
On 19 March 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The seat of judge in respect of Armenia being currently vacant, the President of the Court decided to appoint Judge Johannes Silvis to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 2 (a) of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Armavir. She is disabled and is confined to a wheelchair. She depends on her disability pension as a means of subsistence.
On an unspecified date the applicant instituted proceedings against her neighbour, M., seeking to have dismantled a construction that the latter had built in 1987 inside the entrance of their multi-flat house for the purpose of insulating the building. In its place the applicant sought to install a wooden ramp for her wheelchair in order to facilitate her access to her flat, situated on the ground floor.
It appears that during the court proceedings the applicant, who was not represented by a lawyer, modified her claim and asked for the construction in question not to be dismantled but to be allocated to her so that she could install a wooden ramp in its place.
On 26 July 2007 the Armavir Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s claim, finding that the applicant had failed to substantiate with any proof, such as an expert opinion, that it was necessary and possible to dismantle the construction and that it was technically possible to install a wooden ramp in its place.
On 1 August 2007 the applicant, still not represented, lodged an appeal.
On 13 September 2007 the Civil Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s claim on appeal. The court found that the applicant’s request to have the construction allocated to her was ill-founded since the construction had not been built by her and, moreover, belonged to the owner of the underlying plot of land. The court further referred to an opinion issued on 16 January 2007 by the Armavir Municipality, according to which it was technically preferable to build a wooden ramp from the balcony side of the applicant’s flat rather than from the building’s main entrance.
On 7 November 2007 the applicant, still unrepresented, lodged an appeal on points of law with the Court of Cassation.
By a letter of 12 November 2007 the Chief Registrar of the Court of Cassation returned the applicant’s appeal, informing her that the appeal had not been admitted for examination as it had not been lodged by an advocate licensed to act before the Court of Cassation, pursuant to Article 223 of the Code of Civil Procedure (the CCP).
The relevant provisions of the CCP, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“2.  Appeals on points of law against judgments of lower courts which have entered into force can be brought by (1) the parties to the proceedings; [and] (2) persons who were not parties to the proceedings but whose rights and obligations were affected by the judicial act deciding on the merits of the case.”
Persons mentioned in the second paragraph of the present Article lodge their appeals on points of law through an advocate licensed to act before the Court of Cassation. ”
“1.  Appeals on points of law lodged against judgments of the first instance courts, the Commercial Court and the Court of Appeal which have entered into force ... are examined by the Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation (hereafter, Court of Cassation).
The objective of the Court of Cassation’s activity is to ensure the uniform application of the law and its correct interpretation, and to promote the development of the law.”
Article 223 of the CCP, as amended on 28 November 2007 with effect from 1 January 2008, reads as follows:
“1.  Appeals on points of law against the judgments of lower courts which have entered into force can be brought by (1) the parties to the proceedings through an advocate licensed to act before the Court of Cassation.”
According to Article 6, an advocate is entitled to receive remuneration for his services. The amount and mode of payment for legal services are decided by a written contract concluded between the advocate and the client in accordance with the Civil Code. The State guarantees free legal assistance in criminal matters in cases and in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure, as well as in accordance with the Code of Civil Procedure in the following cases: (1) recovery of maintenance payments, (2) infliction of damage to health or compensation for damage caused as a result of the breadwinner’s death. The Chamber of Advocates ensures free legal assistance, which is paid by the State.
According to Article 29.1 (which lost effect following the decision of the Constitutional Court of 8 October 2008), an advocate is granted a licence in order to carry out legal services in the Court of Cassation in cases and according to a procedure prescribed by law.
The Constitutional Court found, inter alia, Article 223 § 1 (1) of the CCP and Section 29.1 of the Advocacy Act incompatible with Articles 18 and 19 of the Constitution as they disproportionately restricted access to the Court of Cassation by making the possibility of obtaining judicial protection of rights conditional on an appellant’s financial means. The Constitutional Court abolished the institute of advocates licensed to act before the Court of Cassation by finding unconstitutional the relevant provisions of the Civil and Criminal Procedure Codes and of the Advocacy Act.