The applicant complained, in particular, that the quashing, upon an extraordinary appeal on points of law filed by the Prosecutor General, of a final and binding judgment in his favour was contrary to his rights under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Budapest. He was represented by Mr T. Keszegh, a lawyer practising in Dunajská Streda.
The Slovak Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The Hungarian Government, who had been invited to submit written observations on the case, did not express any wish to exercise that right (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1).
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
By virtue of a regulation adopted in 1945, the applicant’s ancestors agricultural property had been confiscated; the individual decision of the confiscation committee, which had been registered in the land register, was issued in 1946. According to the Government, the State thus became ex lege the owner of the property in question.
Within the process of renewal of registration of certain plots of land and of the relevant legal relationships, based on Act no. 180/1995 and aimed at renewing the register of existing plots of land, the competent administrative authority decided, on 29 September 2000, to register the applicant’s ancestors again as owners of the impugned property. The applicant inherited ownership rights to that property in 2006.
In 2009, the State brought a civil action for determination of ownership against the applicant, claiming that it had owned and cultivated the land in question for almost 70 years, since the confiscation, and that the renewed registration of the applicant’s ancestors’ ownership was not based on sufficient data.
The courts at two levels of jurisdiction dismissed the State’s action since it had not been proved that the 1946 confiscation decision had been served on the applicant’s ancestors; thus the confiscation process had not been duly terminated. The appellate court added that the State had been member of the commission tasked with the renewal of registration of the land concerned and that through the decision of a public authority issued in 2000 the State had recognised the applicant’s ancestors’ ownership rights. At the same time, it dismissed an application by the State for leave to appeal on points of law (dovolanie), holding that the questions submitted as being of crucial legal importance, which mainly concerned the application of a governmental regulation no. 8/1928 and the effects of the confiscation decision, had already been solved in the case-law. The decision became final on 6 September 2013.
Subsequently, the State asked the Prosecutor General to exercise his discretionary power to challenge the above judgments by way of an extraordinary appeal on points of law (mimoriadne dovolanie) to the Supreme Court, asserting that the judgments were based on an incorrect legal appreciation of the case.
On 4 September 2014, the Prosecutor General lodged such an appeal, being of the view that the courts had not followed the applicable legal provisions and that the plaintiff (the State) had discharged its burden of proof as to its acquisition title ex lege; it had thus been superfluous to examine whether the confiscation decision had been served on the applicant’s ancestors in accordance with the governmental regulation no. 8/1928; moreover, that decision had not been issued in proceedings subjected to the said regulation. He also considered incorrect the appellate court’s argument that the State had recognised the applicant’s ancestors’ ownership rights in 2000 since the process of renewal of registration only aimed at collecting available information about the plots of land and the legal relationships towards them but could not have led to acquisition of the ownership.
The Supreme Court then invited the applicant to submit written comments on the Prosecutor General’s appeal, which he did on 19 December 2014. He claimed that the courts had not breached the law but had only adopted a legal opinion differing from that of the Prosecutor General. In his supplementary comments, the applicant referred to the Court’s case-law regarding the principle of legal certainty.
On 29 September 2015, the Supreme Court quashed the impugned judgments and remitted the matter to the court of first instance. Although it did not share the Prosecutor General’s opinion on the inapplicability of the regulation no. 8/1928, the Supreme Court agreed that the State had duly proven that it had become owner of the property in question in 1945, that the State’s legal certainty could not be challenged after such a long time and that it was not possible to acquire ownership on the basis of Act no. 180/1995 on the renewal of registration.
The applicant challenged the Supreme Court’s decision by a constitutional complaint in which he relied on his right to a fair trial, including the principles of legal certainty and equality of the parties to the proceedings.
By a decision of 8 June 2016 the Constitutional Court accepted the applicant’s constitutional complaint for further examination.
On 29 March 2017 the Constitutional Court (I. US 379/2016) decided that the Supreme Court’s decision of 29 September 2015 had not violated the applicant’s rights to a fair trial and to equality of parties. It found that the Supreme Court had acted within the limits of its competence and in accordance with the relevant procedural provisions in force, which in principle precluded any violation of Article 6. Moreover, it had been the Supreme Court’s obligation to correct the excess, or rather the blatant legal error, of the lower courts which had arbitrarily proceeded to the examination of the conditions of confiscation without a proper analysis of the facts of the case, and to give a specific answer to all decisive aspects of the case. The Supreme Court could only do so in the proceedings on the extraordinary appeal, given that an appeal on points of law was inadmissible ex lege in the case at hand. The Constitutional Court also observed that all parties to the proceedings had had a possibility to submit their comments on the extraordinary appeal and that the adversarial principle had thus been complied with.
After the matter had been remitted by the Supreme Court to the court of first instance, the proceedings were suspended, on 27 February 2019, until the Court’s decision.
The relevant domestic law and practice and European texts have been summarised in the Court’s judgment in, inter alia, the case of DRAFT - OVA a.s. v. Slovakia (no. 72493/10, §§ 39-56 and 58-61, 9 June 2015).
On 18 March 2015, the plenary of the Slovak Constitutional Court adopted a unifying opinion no. PLz. ÚS 3/2015 in which it held that, regard being paid to the principle of legal certainty which was set up by a final decision, to the principle of subsidiarity enshrined in Article 127 § 1 of the Constitution, as well as to the exceptional nature of the extraordinary appeal on points of law lodged by the Prosecutor General, the admissibility of such appeal in civil proceedings was acceptable only if the party to the proceedings exhausted all ordinary and extraordinary remedies which were available to him/her and which he/she could effectively use to protect his/her rights and legitimate interests.
In the joint observations no. 94 of its Civil and Commercial Law Divisions adopted on 20 October 2015, the Supreme Court stated that the procedural admissibility of the extraordinary appeal on points of law filed upon a party’s petition in civil proceedings is conditioned by the fact that the party in question had unsuccessfully used all available ordinary and extraordinary remedies likely to secure him/her a more favourable decision. If such possibility was not used, the extraordinary appeal had to be dismissed.
The new Code of Civil Contentious Procedure (Law no. 160/2015), adopted on 21 May 2015, entered into force on 1 July 2016, i.e. after the relevant procedural steps taken by the applicant in this case. According to its Section 458, the extraordinary appeal on points of law lodged by the Prosecutor General shall be admissible only if a final judicial decision breaches the right to a fair trial or suffers from errors resulting in a severe violation of that right on account of the fact that the legal conclusions reached are arbitrary or untenable, and if the need to quash such decision prevails over the interest in preserving its inalterability and the principle of legal certainty.