The case originated in an application (no. 45580/16) against Ireland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Irish national, Mr Alan O’Leary (“the applicant”), on 2 August 2016. As he lacks legal capacity, the applicant was represented before the Court by his sister and guardian, Ms Charlene O’Leary.
The applicant was legally represented by Denis O’Sullivan & Co. Solicitors, a law firm in Cork. The Irish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr P. White of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
On 30 August 2017 notice of the complaints concerning the length of the proceedings and the lack of remedies in that respect was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1986 and lives in Cork.
He suffers from severe brain damage. It was asserted on his behalf that his condition was caused by the measles vaccination administered to him in 1988 when he was 15 months old.
In November 2002, 14 years after receiving the vaccine, the applicant’s mother instituted proceedings on his behalf against four defendants; the local health authority, the State, the Attorney General (collectively described in the domestic proceedings as the State defendants) and the doctor who had administered the vaccination, H.
On 5 August 2003, the High Court issued a limited order of discovery addressed to the local health authority seeking all relevant records about the applicant in its possession, as well as information about the vaccine used, about any adverse effects noted at the time with this vaccine, about the manner in which the mother’s consent was obtained, and about the health of the other members of the applicant’s family. Although the High Court set a time-limit of 8 weeks for discovery, the local health authority only complied with the order in June 2008, that is to say with a delay of over four and a half years.
The applicant appealed the scope of the order of discovery of 5 August 2003, leading to the grant of a further limited order of discovery by the High Court on 30 January 2004, addressed to all four defendants. The applicant brought another appeal against the order of discovery of 30 January 2004, but in July 2006 the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal, making only a minor amendment to the order granted by the High Court.
The applicant’s mother died in December 2007.
In June 2008 the applicant’s lawyer wrote to the local health authority to complain that the long delays in litigating the case had caused grave prejudice to the case. The applicant’s mother had been a vital witness, and with her death essential evidence had been lost. Settlement of the substantive dispute was proposed but not agreed.
In May 2008 the applicant’s lawyer sought to have the defence of the State defendants set aside. The High Court refused this application on 12 March 2010.
The trial involved ten days of hearings. No factual evidence was called on behalf of the applicant, but independent medical witnesses gave evidence, having read the applicant’s medical records, and documentary evidence provided by way of discovery was before the court. On the eleventh day of the trial, 19 July 2011, the judge accepted an application by the defendants to strike the case out for failure to establish a prima facie case against them.
Regarding the doctor, he noted that the applicant accepted there was insufficient evidence to establish any negligence in the administration of the vaccine. The claim against the doctor H was dismissed. In relation to the State defendants, the judge held that no evidence had been produced that could support the various grounds relied on by the applicant.
The proceedings in the High Court terminated on 19 December 2011. The applicant filed a notice of appeal presenting 30 grounds of appeal. Following the establishment of the Court of Appeal in October 2014, the applicant’s case was transferred to it. Outline written submissions were submitted by H in February 2015 and by the State defendants in September 2015.
The Court of Appeal gave its judgment on 10 February 2016, dismissing the appeal. In its conclusions, the Court of Appeal stated that, by taking the case at its highest, the trial judge had adopted the correct approach on the question of striking the case out. The Court of Appeal concluded by remarking on the many legal hurdles the applicant would have had to overcome in order to succeed. It found no basis for overturning the decision of the High Court.
The proceedings ended on 10 May 2016 when the Supreme Court declined the applicant’s request for leave to appeal.
On 24 October 2016 the Supreme Court gave judgment in the case of Nash v. D.P.P. ([2016] IESC 60) in which the appellant claimed that there had been excessive delay in the criminal proceedings brought against him and sought an award of damages. The Supreme Court addressed the possibility of claiming damages where legal proceedings are not completed within a reasonable time. The judgment referred first to the possibility of a claim for damages under the European Convention on Human Rights Act, 2003, which may be sought only if no other remedy in damages is available.
The Supreme Court then considered the constitutional basis for a claim in damages. The judgment set out that
“2.8  It is, therefore, clear that the constitutional right to a timely trial has been well established for many years. Given that it has also been clear that, in an appropriate case, damages can be awarded for the breach of a constitutional right, it has been clearly established for some time in our jurisprudence that there is, at least at the level of principle and in some circumstances, an entitlement to damages for breach of the constitutional right to a timely trial. However, just as in the case of a claim for damages for breach of the similar right guaranteed by the ECHR, there may well be questions as to the precise circumstances in which such an entitlement to damages may arise.”