The case originated in applications against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by six Ukrainian nationals whose names and dates of birth are listed in the Appendix, on the various dates listed in the Appendix.
The sixth applicant (Ms Vichkanova) was granted leave to represent herself. The other applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr M. Tarakhkalo and Ms O. Protsenko, lawyers practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the domestic courts had failed to adequately inform them of the appeal proceedings in their cases.
On 21 April 2016 the above complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
.  In disputes between the applicants and the domestic pension authorities, the firstinstance courts ruled in their favour, ordering increases of their pensions based on the rise in the average wages in the country since their retirement.
.  The defendant authorities appealed to the Dnipropetrovsk Administrative Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”).
.  Under domestic law (see paragraph 18 below), when an appeal arrived at the Court of Appeal, a judge rapporteur of that court, if he or she believed that it complied with the necessary formal requirements, had to issue a ruling opening appeal proceedings (“the ruling”) and send it to the applicants together with a copy of the appeal.
.  The Government and the applicants disagree as to whether those documents were actually sent to the applicants (see paragraphs 11 to 13 below).
On various dates set out in the Appendix, the Court of Appeal quashed the judgments in the applicants’ favour, dismissing their claims for pension increases holding that the domestic law did not require the pensions to be increased in case of rise in the average wages in the country following retirement. In the fifth applicant’s case the Court of Appeal held a hearing in his presence (see paragraph 14 below). In the other applicants’ cases the court sat in camera without summoning the parties.
.  In the second to sixth applicants’ cases the Court of Appeal’s decisions became effective immediately since no further appeal lay against them (see the related legislative provisions in paragraph 16 below). The first applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Higher Administrative Court. On 26 October 2012 it upheld the Court of Appeal’s decision, without commenting on the complaint she had presented that she had not been informed of the appeal proceedings.
According to the applicants, the domestic courts did not send them either (i) a copy of the defendants’ appeals or (ii) a copy of the rulings opening appeal proceedings in their cases. They therefore had no knowledge of the appeal proceedings prior to the Court of Appeal’s decisions in their cases. They learned of those decisions later, notably after their pensions had been reduced based on the Court of Appeal’s decisions.
.  According to the Government, the applicants were duly informed of the appeal proceedings.
It can be seen from the material before the Court that:
(i)  the first to third and sixth applicants’ domestic case files contain copies of either the rulings opening appeal proceedings in their cases or notification letters from the court clerks addressed to them informing them of the upcoming examination of their cases in camera and referring to the fact that a judge’s ruling and a copy of the appeal were enclosed with the letter;
(ii)  the notification letters addressed to the first and second applicants contain a note to the effect that they were intended to be sent by registered mail with acknowledgement of receipt;
(iii)  the third applicant’s case file also contains a copy of a letter from the first-instance court informing her that her case file with an appeal had been sent to the Court of Appeal;
(iv)  the fourth applicant’s case file does not contain a ruling or notification letter;
(v)  none of the case files contain any postal documents or registers of sent correspondence showing that the documents in (i) to (iii) above had been sent or delivered to the applicants.
On 23 June 2012 the Court of Appeal sent the fifth applicant a summons to attend a hearing on 1 November 2012. The delivery slip is in his domestic case file. At the hearing, which he attended, the court examined the pension authority’s appeal in its absence and quashed the first-instance court’s judgment.
Article 33 distinguishes between court summons (повістки про виклик) and court notification letters (повістки-повідомлення), the former being sent to the parties summoned to appear while the latter are simple notices of procedural events participation in which is not required. Both summonses and notification letters must be sent by registered correspondence (letter or telegram) or by courier, with a delivery receipt, or by fax, telefax, email, telephone or publication in the media.
Under Article 35, both summonses and notification letters require signature on delivery. The person delivering the document must return the signed delivery slip to the court, which will add it to the case file. In the case of an absent addressee, the person delivering the document must make a note on the document to be delivered. A delivery slip or, in the case of an absent addressee or a refusal to accept the document, the document itself must be promptly returned to the court.
Article 183 § 2 provides, inter alia, that claims concerning social and pension payments can be considered by way of an abridged procedure in camera without the parties being summoned. The judgment may be appealed against before an appellate court, whose decision is final.
.  Article 197 provides that an appellate court may consider an appeal sitting in camera on the basis of the material in the case file in particular (i) if the parties have not requested that the court hear the appeal in their presence or (ii) if the case concerns social benefits or pension payments and was decided at first instance by way of an abridged procedure.
At the material time Articles 189 and 190 provided that when a new case arrived at an appellate court, it was to be allocated to a judge rapporteur. The judge, once he or she had decided to open appeal proceedings, had to send the parties within ten days a copy of the ruling opening the proceedings together with a copy of the appeal, and set a timelimit for replying to the appeal.
By Order No. 578/5 of 12 April 2012 the Ministry of Justice approved the List of standard documents produced by public authorities and other organisations. Item 128 of the List provides that registers of sent correspondence had to be kept for at least one year and could be destroyed, subject to a number of conditions, after that period.
By Order No. 22 of 11 February 2010 the State Court Administration approved the List of court files and documents produced by courts. Item 15 of the List provides that documents related to appeal proceedings had to be kept for at least five years and could be destroyed, subject to a number of conditions, after that period.
By Order No. 155 of 5 December 2006 the State Court Administration adopted the instructions on record keeping and case management at local and appellate administrative courts. They were repealed on 17 December 2013.
Paragraph 2.4 provided, in particular, that delivery slips for served or undelivered summons and notification letters were to be added to the relevant case file. Paragraph 7.1.1 listed receipts confirming delivery of a summons or notification letter on the parties to the proceedings among the documents to be added to the case file. Paragraph 7.1.5 required that copies of documents sent to the parties had to contain a note indicating the date on which they had been sent and the signature of the person who had sent them.