The case originated in an application (no. 44150/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Larisa Ivanovna Ryabikina (“the applicant”), on 12 November 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr V.N. Voblikov. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had been denied access to court.
On 22 September 2008 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1947 and lived in . On 29 September 2008 the applicant died. On 3 August 2009 Mr Yaroslav Voblikov, the late applicant’s son (born on 19 August 1977), expressed his wish to pursue the proceedings before the Court.
On 6 April 1999 the applicant brought a claim against the regional social security service for pension arrears.
On 25 December 2000 the Bilibino District Court of the Chukotka Region granted the applicant’s claim in part. The applicant appealed. On 15 February 2001 the  quashed the judgment of 25 December 2000 on appeal and remitted the matter to the District Court for fresh consideration.
On 28 April 2001 the District Court partly granted the applicant’s claims. On 4 October 2001 the  upheld the judgment of 28 April 2001 on appeal.
On 25 October 2001 the applicant obtained a writ of execution. Subsequently the judgment was enforced.
On 17 September 2002 the applicant brought an action against the Treasury of the , seeking compensation for nonpecuniary damage sustained as a result of the excessive length of the proceedings concerning her claim for pension arrears. She argued that the courts had failed to observe the time-limits prescribed by the Russian Code of Civil Procedure.
On 13 January 2003 the Anadyr Town Court of the Chukotka Region partly granted the applicant’s claims.
On 27 March 2003 the  quashed the judgment of 13 January 2003 on appeal and remitted the matter to the  for fresh consideration.
On 9 October 2003 the  dismissed the applicant’s claims without consideration on the merits. Referring to Ruling No. 1-P adopted by the Constitutional Court on 25 January 2001, the court noted that current laws did not determine the grounds or procedure for adjudicating a claim for damages on account of the courts’ failure to comply with statutory timelimits. In particular, the court noted as follows:
“... pursuant to this Ruling of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, claims for compensation for damage arising from unlawful actions of a judge should be adjudicated in accordance with the rules – other than the rules of civil procedure which are yet to be determined by the legislature (including the rules governing the jurisdiction of this type of case). The court does not contest the applicant’s constitutional right to sue the state for compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage. However, given that Ruling No. 1-P of the  refers to certain rules of adjudication, which have not yet been determined, the court considers that it should discontinue the consideration of the [applicant’s] claims.”
On 13 May 2004 the Regional Court upheld the decision of 9 October 2003 on appeal, finding as follows:
“The current rules governing the adjudication of civil claims, as set forth in the Russian Code of Civil Procedure, do not take into account all the specifics of the matters concerning compensation for damage caused by unlawful actions or failure to act on the part of a court (or judge) when the case is not considered on the merits. This is supported by the prescription made by the  for the [Parliament of Russia] to legislate on the issue. Therefore, the current rules [of civil procedure] do not apply to the adjudication of the applicant’s claims.”
Article 1064 of the Civil Code contains general provisions on liability for the infliction of damage. It establishes that damage inflicted on the person or property of an individual shall be reimbursed in full by the person who inflicted the damage (Article 1064 § 1).
Article 1070 of the Civil Code determines liability for the damage caused by unlawful actions of law-enforcement authorities or courts. In particular, it is established that the federal or regional treasury shall be liable for the damage sustained by an individual in the framework of the administration of justice provided that the judge’s guilt has been established in a final criminal conviction (Article 1070 § 2).
By Ruling no. 1-P of 25 January 2001, the Constitutional Court found that Article 1070 § 2 of the Civil Code was compatible with the Constitution in so far as it provided for special conditions on State liability for the damage caused in the framework of administration of justice. It clarified, nevertheless, that the term “administration of justice” did not cover the judicial proceedings in their entirety, but only extended to judicial acts touching upon the merits of a case. Other judicial acts – mainly of a procedural nature – fell outside the scope of the notion “administration of justice”. State liability for the damage caused by such procedural acts or failures to act, such as a breach of the reasonable length of court proceedings, could arise even in the absence of a final criminal conviction of a judge if the fault of the judge has been established in civil proceedings. The  emphasised, moreover, that the constitutional right to compensation by the State for the damage should not be tied in with the personal fault of a judge. An individual should be able to obtain compensation for any damage incurred through a violation by a court of his or her right to a fair trial within the meaning of Article 6 of the Convention. The  held that Parliament should legislate on the grounds and procedure for compensation by the State for the damage caused by unlawful acts or failures to act of a court or a judge and determine territorial and subject-matter jurisdiction over such claims.
The Russian Code of Civil Procedure established that a civil claim should be dismissed, in particular, if it was not amenable to examination in civil proceedings (Article 220).