The case originated in an application (no. 12440/04) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Nikolay Durmanovich Shekhov (“the applicant”), on 2 March 2004.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms S. Davydova, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by their Representative, Mr G. Matyushkin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been denied legal assistance during the appeal proceedings and that his correspondence with the Court had been opened by the staff at the detention facility.
On 28 September 2007 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1959 and is now serving his sentence in a correctional colony in the Chelyabinsk region.
On 14 March 2002 the applicant was arrested and charged with double murder and attempted murder.
During the trial the applicant was represented by State-appointed counsel, Mr A.
On 8 October 2003 the Chelyabinsk Regional Court, in a trial by jury, convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to twenty-five years and eleven months’ imprisonment.
The applicant appealed, unassisted by counsel. He submitted, in particular, that he had acted in self-defence and asked for reduction of the sentence from murder to manslaughter.
On 8 December 2003 the applicant was notified that the appeal hearing would be held on 23 January 2004. According to the Government, his counsel, Mr A., was also informed by telegram of the date of the appeal hearing.
On 23 January 2004 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation held an appeal hearing. The applicant and the prosecutor were present. Counsel Mr A. did not attend. According to the applicant, he had asked for replacement counsel to be appointed for him. According to the Government, no such request had been made. On the same day the court upheld the conviction and reduced the sentence to twenty-five years and five months’ imprisonment.
In April 2004 the applicant was transferred to correctional colony no. 16/9 in Omsk, where he remained until January 2005.
On 8 April 2004 the Court sent the applicant at his request the text of the Convention, an application form together with the explanatory note, an authority form, and the notice to applicants. On 6 May 2004 the letter was received by the Chelyabinsk remand centre where the applicant had been previously held. It was opened, stamped, and then transferred to colony no. 16/9 in Omsk.
According to the applicant, on 6 July 2004 a deputy head of the Omsk Department of Execution of Sentences had summoned him and strongly advised him not to submit an application to the Court. Immediately after this conversation he had been put in a disciplinary cell for eight days. According to the Government’s account, it was the applicant who had asked for a meeting with the official. At the applicant’s request, the official had explained to him the procedure for applying to the Court. He had not made any threats. The applicant had then been put into a disciplinary cell for having sent a letter through informal channels instead of sending it via the detention facility’s administration.
On 10 July 2004 the Court’s letter of 8 April 2004 was received by the staff of colony no. 16/9 and was opened and stamped. According to the applicant, he had received the covering letter of 8 April 2004 and the text of the Convention on 15 July 2004. The other enclosures and the envelope had not been given to him. According to the Government, all the enclosures had been handed over to the applicant on 10 July 2004.
On 23 June 2004 the applicant sent an improvised application form to the Court.
The applicant stated that on 9 August 2004 he had been summoned by the head of correctional colony no. 10 in Omsk, who had issued the threat that if he did not stop complaining, he would regret it. According to the Government, it was the applicant who had asked for a meeting with the head of the correctional colony. No threats had been made to the applicant during the meeting.
On 18 August 2004 the applicant was temporarily transferred to medical correctional facility no. 10 in Omsk for anti-tuberculosis treatment.
The applicant stated that on 15 October 2004 he had handed a sealed envelope containing a letter to the Court to the medical correctional facility’s administration. The letter had been opened, stamped and dispatched to the addressee. The Government stated that the applicant had handed the letter to the detention facility staff unsealed.
According to the applicant, the detention facility’s administration had refused to dispatch many of his letters to the Court, and he had therefore had to send them through informal channels. The Government stated that all his letters had been dispatched.
The applicant complained to various State authorities about the opening of and the failure to dispatch his letters to the Court. In a letter dated 15 May 2006, the prosecutor’s office informed the applicant that there had been no evidence of any failure to dispatch his letters.
On 11 October 2007 the medical correctional facility’s administration received another letter from the Court addressed to the applicant acknowledging receipt of his correspondence. That letter was opened, stamped and then given to the applicant. The employee who had opened the letter was subsequently disciplined.
Article 51 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (as in force at the material time) read, in so far as relevant:
“1. Participation of legal counsel in the criminal proceedings is mandatory if:
...
(5) the suspect or the accused faces serious charges carrying a term of imprisonment exceeding fifteen years, life imprisonment or the death penalty;
(6) the criminal case falls to be examined in a jury trial;
...
In the circumstances provided for by paragraph 1 above, unless counsel is appointed by the suspect or the accused or his lawful representative, or other persons at the request or with the consent of the suspect or the accused, it is incumbent on the investigator, the prosecutor or the court to ensure the participation of legal counsel in the proceedings.”
Article 52 of the Code provides that a suspect or an accused may waive his right to legal representation at any stage of the criminal proceedings. Such waiver may be accepted only if initiated by the suspect or the accused. The waiver must be declared in writing and must be recorded in the official record of the corresponding procedural step. Refusing legal representation does not deprive the suspect or accused of the right to ask to be assisted by counsel at further stages of the criminal proceedings. The appointment of counsel does not mean that any of the procedural steps which have already been taken by that time have to be repeated.
Article 373 of the Code provides for examination of appeals by the appellate court with a view to verifying the lawfulness, validity and fairness of the judgments.
Article 379 reads:
“1.  A judgment may be quashed on appeal on the following grounds:
(1)  a discrepancy between the findings made in the judgment and the factual circumstances of the case established by the first-instance ... court;
(2)  a breach of criminal procedural law;
(3)  incorrect application of the criminal law;
(4)  injustice of the judgment.”
If the judgment has been adopted following a jury trial, it may be quashed on the grounds described in subparagraphs 2 to 4 of the first paragraph of this Article.
Article 376 of the Code provides that the judge is to fix the date, time and place of the hearing after receiving the criminal case file and the statements of appeal. The parties must be given this information no later than fourteen days before the hearing is scheduled to take place. The court determines whether the prisoner should be summoned to attend the hearing. If the prisoner has expressed the wish to be present at his appeal, he has the right to attend in person or to state his case via video link. It is the court which decides how he is to participate in the hearing.
Examining the compatibility of Article 51 of the Code with the Russian Constitution, the Constitutional Court ruled (decision no. 497-O of 18 December 2003):
“Article 51 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which describes the circumstances in which the participation of defence counsel is mandatory, does not contain any indication that its requirements are not applicable in appeal proceedings or that the prisoner’s right to legal assistance in such proceedings may be restricted.”
That position was subsequently confirmed and developed in seven decisions delivered by the Constitutional Court on 8 February 2007. The court found that free legal representation for the purpose of appellate proceedings should be provided on the same basis as representation in the earlier stages of the proceedings, and that it was mandatory in the situations listed in Article 51. It further highlighted the courts’ obligation to ensure the participation of defence counsel in appeal proceedings.
Article 91 § 2 of the Code of Execution of Sentences, as amended on 8 December 2003, provides that detainees’ correspondence may be monitored by the prison authorities. Correspondence with courts, prosecutors, prison officials, the Ombudsman, the public monitoring board and the European Court of Human Rights may not be subjected to monitoring.
Under the 2001 internal prison regulations, as amended in 2004, all detainees’ correspondence was to be processed by the prison authorities. Correspondence was to be either placed in mailboxes or handed to staff unsealed. Monitoring of correspondence with the European Court of Human Rights was prohibited (paragraph 12).
On 3 November 2005 new regulations were adopted. They provide that detainees must put their unsealed letters into mailboxes or give them to prison staff, except for correspondence which is not subject to monitoring (paragraph 50). They also prohibit the monitoring of correspondence with the European Court of Human Rights (paragraph 53).
Article 413 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides for the possibility of reopening criminal proceedings as a result of the finding by the European Court of Human Rights of a violation of the Convention.