The case originated in an application (no. 32598/07) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Konstantin Nikolayevich Sukhanov (“the applicant”), on 25 July 2007.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his trial had not been fair given his and his lawyer’s absence from the appellate and cassation proceedings.
On 21 March 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Kyiv.
At the time of the events he was the director of a private company.
In August 2002 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant on suspicion of tax evasion and forgery in office. Subsequently, the tax-evasion charge was dropped.
On 7 December 2004 the Kyiv Dniprovskyy District Court (“the Dniprovskyy Court”) found the applicant guilty of forgery in office. It held that he had entered knowingly false data in the company’s tax returns. More specifically, instead of applying a straight-line depreciation method in respect of the company’s intangible assets, the applicant calculated their depreciation costs as the difference between the company’s gross revenues and expenses. As a result, the documents showed the absence of any profit or loss in the company’s activity, whereas in the reality it had had losses. The applicant was sentenced to one year’s restriction of liberty (namely detention in a semi-open penal institution by the place of his residence) with a ban on holding administrative posts for one year. The sentence was suspended on probation for one year. The applicant was under an undertaking not to leave the town until the judgment became final.
The applicant appealed. He submitted that the activity of the company had been subject to numerous tax inspections, which had not found any violations of the tax legislation. He therefore contended that he had not done anything criminal and that that fact had not received due attention of the first-instance court. Furthermore, the applicant considered that the expert questioned in the trial did not have adequate qualification. Lastly, he argued that the tax police investigator, who had also been questioned, was not impartial and that his statements should not have been relied on. Accordingly, the applicant requested the appellate court to quash the firstinstance court’s judgment and to pronounce a new one, acquitting him for the lack of the constituent elements of a crime in his actions.
On 10 February 2005 the Dniprovskyy Court sent a letter to the Kyiv City Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) stating as follows:
“The [Dniprovskyy Court] is sending you the criminal case regarding [the applicant] convicted under Article 366 § 1 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine [forgery in office], for the appellate examination at 10.35 a.m. on 17 March 2005.”
In addition to the president of the Court of Appeal, the above letter was also addressed to the prosecutor, the applicant and his lawyer. There is no evidence in the case file as to whether the applicant and/or his lawyer received it. According to the applicant, they were unaware of its existence.
On 17 March 2005, following a hearing held with the prosecutor’s participation, but in the absence of both the applicant and his lawyer, the appellate court rejected the applicant’s appeal. It delivered its ruling “having heard the report of the judge-rapporteur of the appellate court and the explanations of the prosecutor, the latter considering the judgment lawful and [the applicant’s] appeal groundless, having checked the case-file materials and having discussed the arguments advanced in the appeal”. The issue of the applicant’s and his lawyer’s absence from the hearing was not mentioned in the appellate court’s ruling.
The applicant appealed on points of law, challenging, among other things, the examination of his case on appeal in his and his lawyer’s absence as being in breach of his defence rights.
On 23 January 2007 the Supreme Court, in written proceedings, upheld the decisions of the lower courts. Referring to the case-file materials, it noted that the first-instance court had informed the applicant and his lawyer about the scheduled appellate hearing, without further details.
Article 358 lists the issues that the appellate court may examine at its preparatory hearing (that is, a hearing that might be required in order to deal with all the procedural issues prior to the examination of an appeal). Those include the necessity of a judicial investigation (that is, questioning the convicted or the acquitted person, witnesses, victims, and experts, assigning an expert examination, as well as examination and evaluation of documentary and physical evidence) and summoning any persons. As further stipulated in that provision, a convicted or an acquitted person, as well as his/her lawyer, shall be summoned to the appellate court if the appeal implies deterioration of his/her situation or if the court considers it necessary to conduct a judicial investigation.
Pursuant to Articles 254 and 361, a summons to the appellate court shall be served on a convicted person against a signed receipt, no later than three days before the hearing.
Under Article 362, the absence of the parties from the appellate court’s hearing is not an impediment to the examination of the case if not otherwise provided by this Code or the appellate court’s decision.
Article 366 provides that the examination by the appellate court of an appeal against a judgment of the first-instance court results in: (1) delivery of a ruling upholding the first-instance court’s judgment and rejecting the appeal, or quashing the judgment and remitting the case either to the prosecution authorities for additional pre-trial investigation or to the first-instance court for retrial, or quashing the judgment and discontinuation of the proceedings, or making changes to the judgment; or (2) pronouncing by the appellate court of its own judgment, having quashed that of the firstinstance court in full or in part.
The relevant provisions are set out in the Court’s judgment in the case of Zhuk v. Ukraine (no. 45783/05, § 18, 21 October 2010).
The Government submitted to the Court two rulings of the Chernigiv Regional Court of Appeal, of 21 December 2006 and 31 May 2007 respectively, according to which the appellate examination of the criminal cases in question warranted summoning all the parties given that there were appeals implying potential deterioration of the situation for the convicted persons.