The case originated in an application (no. 8252/08) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Georgian nationals, Mrs Elene Dadiani and Mr David Machabeli (“the applicants”), on 4 January 2008.
The applicants were represented by Mr Alexander Baramidze, Mr Irakli Kandashvili and Mr Hans von Sachsen-Altenburg, lawyers practising in . The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Levan Meskhoradze of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants complained under Article 6 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 about the authorities’ failure to enforce a judgment delivered by a domestic court in their favour. They also alleged a violation of Articles 6 and 13 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 on account of the inexplicable delay in the second set of proceedings and a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 on account of the expropriation of the ancestral lands by the Soviet authorities.
On 28 April 2008 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
THE FACTS
The applicants, Mrs Elene Dadiani and Mr David Machabeli, were born in 1923 and 1964 respectively and live in . The second applicant is the first applicant’s nephew. The first applicant’s mother was deprived of her land and other assets by the Soviet authorities in the 1920s.
In 2004 the applicants brought an action against the relevant local authority, seeking restitution of their ancestral lands. In support of their claim, the applicants submitted archives confirming their ancestor’s title to the claimed land and, as a legal basis, referred to general rules on the protection of property and inheritance contained in the Civil Code, the Constitution and the international human-rights treaties ratified by .
In a judgment of 31 January 2005, the Gurjaani District Court established the applicants’ joint ownership of land situated in the . The land was officially identified as “plot no. 604”. The defendant local authorities did not lodge an appeal and the judgment became binding.
On 15 February 2005 the applicants’ lawyer obtained from the Gurjaani District Court the necessary enforcement writ, the relevant part of which read as follows:
“Elene Dadiani and David Machabeli are hereby recognised as ... the co-owners of plot no. 604 in the ” ...
On 26 October 2005 the applicants, acting through their lawyer, submitted a copy of the enforcement writ together with the final judgment of 31 January 2005 to the Gurjaani Public Registry for enforcement. In a letter of 2 November 2005, the registrar replied that it was not possible to register the land in the applicants’ name, as their documentation was incomplete. The lawyer was found to be at fault for the fact that the final judgment neither indicated the size of plot no. 604 nor specified its category: agricultural or non-agricultural. The lawyer was further invited to submit a copy of his identity document, the authority form proving his right to represent the applicants, the original enforcement writ and the cadastral plan of the land in question.
The applicants maintained, relying on the billing information from the lawyers for the relevant period of time, that after receipt of the letter of 2 November 2005 the lawyers, acting on their behalf, had visited the Gurjaani Public Registry on several occasions and voiced their concerns regarding the failure to enforce the judgment. They claimed, inter alia, that they were not in a position to produce an amended final court decision. In reply, the Gurjaani Public Registry refused to register plot no. 604 for various reasons.
The judgment of 31 January 2005 still remains unenforced.
On 25 May 2005 the applicants lodged another action claiming, on the same legal basis, ownership of plot no. 646, adjacent to plot no. 604. The action was registered by the Gurjaani District Court on the same day.
According to the applicants, the examination of their second action has not started yet.
The relevant domestic law and practice as regards the restitution of property has been described in the case of Teimuraz Andronikashvili v. Georgia (no. 9297/08, 22 June 2010) and Klaus and Yuri Kiladze v. Georgia (no. 7975/06, §§ 23 and 25-26, 2 February 2010).
The National Public Registry Agency is a legal entity governed by public law established under the Ministry of Justice. One of its main functions is to register ownership title and other related rights over real property for the purpose of their recognition and verification. The Public Registry Agency is responsible, among other things, for the creation and maintenance of cadastral data on real property.
Under section 5 (b) of the Land Act, the registrar was entitled to request the submission of any document necessary for land registration purposes. The interested party had to comply with the registrar’s request immediately.
Article 1005 § 1 of the Civil Code provides that damage done to an individual by either negligence or deliberate misconduct of a public servant must be compensated by the State.
Under Article 381 of the Criminal Code, the non-execution of a judicial decision constitutes an offence:
“The non-execution of a binding judicial decision, or other judicial decision, or the obstruction of its execution by the State, government or local-government officials, or by the executives of a corporation or other organisations [shall be punished] ...”
Pursuant to Article 3 § 4 (g) of the General Administrative Code of , the Code does not apply to those activities of the executive that are related to the enforcement of final court judgments.
In accordance with Article 177 § 3 of the General Administrative Code, a complaint may be filed against any action of an administrative agency pursuant to the procedure prescribed for filing a complaint in respect of an administrative legal act.