The case originated in an application (no. 71440/01) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Karl-Walter Freitag (“the applicant”), on 5 February 2001.
The applicant was represented by Mr U. Klauke, a lawyer practising in Dortmund in . The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs A. Wittling-Vogel, Ministerialdirigentin, of the German Ministry of Justice.
On 15 November 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Cologne in .
The applicant is the manager of the M GmbH (the “M-Company”). He held registered shares of the V-Holding AG (the “target company”), an insurance company which was seated in .
On 1 and 2 December 1997, respectively, the shareholder's meetings approved the merging of the target company into the
On 25 February 1998 the merger of the two companies was announced pursuant to section 19, subsection 3 of the Law of Reorganisation (Umwandlungsgesetz, see relevant domestic law, below) in the Official Bulletin of the Municipality of Hamburg (Amtlicher Anzeiger der Stadt Hamburg). The applicant maintains that he was unaware of this publication.
Meanwhile, on 28 January 1998 a shareholder of the target company lodged a motion with the  (Landgericht) with the aim of being allocated an additional number of shares. Having been informed that he did not have such a claim under the applicable law, the shareholder withdrew his request on 15 July 1998.
On 5 March 1998 the M-Company, which was represented by counsel, lodged a motion against the acquiring company before the  with the aim of obtaining compensation (bare Zuzahlung) for the alleged loss of value of the shares incurred by the merger pursuant to section 15 of the Law of Reorganisation. The company further requested the  to order the defendant party to submit the date of the most recent announcement of the merger in the public bulletin. Finally, the company requested the  court to transfer the case-file to the competent court in case it should lack jurisdiction.
On 12 March 1998 the  informed both parties that, pursuant to section 306 § 1 of the Law of Reorganisation, the court at the seat of the target company, which was not , appeared to be locally competent. The  invited both parties to submit their comments within four weeks. This letter was served on the
By telefax of 21 March 1998 the plaintiff maintained that the  should be regarded as having jurisdiction. In case the  should not follow this opinion, the plaintiff alternatively requested to transfer the case-file to the .
The applicant's counsel further declared that he lodged all requests in the pending proceedings also on behalf of the applicant, as it was not clear whether the shares were owned by the M-Company or by the applicant personally.
On 9 April 1998 the acquiring company requested an extension of the time-limit until 27 April 1998 with regard to the upcoming Easter holidays.
On 14 April 1998 the , without having heard the applicant, granted the requested extension. The applicant's counsel was informed of this decision by court-letter dated 15 April 1998.
By letter dated 24 April 1998, which reached the  on 27 April 1998, the acquiring company maintained that, according to the relevant provisions, the  as the court at the seat of the target company was locally competent. It further pointed out that the action had been lodged out of the statutory time-limit of two months following the final announcement of the merger in an official bulletin, which had expired on 27 April 1998. As the motion had been lodged with an incompetent court, it had not been properly lodged within that time-limit.
On 5 May 1998 the applicant replied that the acquiring company had been acting in bad faith as it was the only party to the proceedings which knew about the impending expiry of the time-limit and had purposefully delayed the proceedings.
By order of 5 June 1998 the  transferred the case to the , where it arrived on 1 July 1998.
On 2 September 1998 the  declared the actions lodged on behalf of the M-Company and of the applicant inadmissible for having been lodged outside the statutory time limit. That court noted that the registration of the two companies' merger had been announced on behalf of the Berlin Commercial Register on 12 February 1998 by publication in the Federal Bulletin and in a Berlin daily newspaper and on behalf of the Hamburg Commercial Register on 20 February 1998 in the Federal Bulletin and on 25 February 1998 in the Official Bulletin of the Municipality of Hamburg. It followed that the two month time-limit started to run on 25 February 1998. The  noted that the plaintiffs had filed their requests within the statutory time-limit with the . However, as that court had transferred the case to the competent  only after expiry of the time-limit, it had not been lodged in time. According to the , Section 281 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which provided that a law-suit remained pending even if it was transferred from a court which lacked jurisdiction, did not apply to the proceedings aimed at determining a shareholder's compensation (aktienrechtliches Spruchstellenverfahren).
On 10 September 1998 the applicant lodged a complaint with the aim to declare his action admissible. Alternatively, he requested to be granted reinstitution into the proceedings (Wiedereinsetzung in den vorigen Stand) with respect to the time-limit. The applicant pointed out that he had not known at which date the merger had been announced in the official bulletin. Accordingly, he could not have known at which date the time-limit would expire. The  had awaited the defending parties' submissions without referring the case to the , as requested by the applicant. Under these circumstances, the applicant claimed that section 281 of the Code of Civil Procedure should be applicable by analogy to the effect that the lodging with the  had to be regarded as sufficient in order to comply with the statutory time-limit. Alternatively, the applicant claimed that he should be granted a reinstitution into the proceedings with regard to the fact that the delays which had occurred before the  before the case was transferred to the  were not imputable to him. Finally, the applicant maintained that the  had failed to publicly announce the request filed by the other shareholder on 28 January 1998 and to appoint a joint representative in order to safeguard the other external shareholders' rights. He further maintained that his complaint should be declared admissible as a follow-up request to the first request lodged in January 1998.
On 22 November 1999 the Berlin Court of Appeal (Kammergericht) rejected the applicant's complaint. It noted that the merger had been announced on 20 February 1998 in the Federal Bulletin and on
The Court of Appeal expressed its doubts as to whether the rules on reinstitution into the proceedings were applicable to the present proceedings. In any event, the applicant had not been hindered to comply with the statutory time-limit through no fault of his own. Even though section 305 § 1 of the Law of Reorganisation contained a clear and unambiguous provision on jurisdiction, he had insisted that the  had been competent.
On 2 August 2000 the , sitting as a panel of three judges, refused to accept the applicant's constitutional complaint. According to that court, the applicant's complaint did not have fundamental constitutional significance. Neither was the acceptance of the complaint indicated in order to enforce the constitutional rights which the applicant claimed had been violated. While it could not be excluded that the Berlin Court of Appeal, when deciding on the applicant's request for reinstitution into the proceedings, failed in a constitutionally questionable way sufficiently to consider the conduct of the Hamburg Regional Court, the applicant – who had learned in time about the extension of the time-limit granted to the defendant on 14 April 1998 – had failed to apply for a reduction of that extended time-limit, even though the circumstances of the case imposed such an action. The constitutional complaint was thus inadmissible for reasons of subsidiarity. The remainder of the complaint did not have any prospect of success, as the applicant's submissions did not disclose a violation of his rights under the Basic Law. This decision was served on the applicant on 14 August 2000.
The merging of shareholder companies was, at the relevant time, governed by the Law of Reorganisation (Umwandlungsgesetz), which provided as follows:
According to section 15, a shareholder could request compensation (bare Zuzahlung) if the value of the shares he was allocated in the acquiring company did not equal the value of the shares he held in the target company.
Section 19 provided that the merger of two companies had to be registered first in the commercial register at the seat of the target company and, subsequently, in the commercial register at the seat of the acquiring company. Each registration had to be announced by publication in the Federal Bulletin and in one further periodical. The second publication organ was chosen by the commercial court by December for the following year and made public by notifying, inter alia, the chamber of commerce. 
The merger had to be regarded as being publicly announced by the end of the day of the latest publication (see section 19 § 3).
The provisions on procedure read as follows:
Section 305
Time-limit
“A motion for a court decision pursuant to section 15...has to be lodged within two months following the date on which the registration has been publicly announced pursuant to the provisions of this law.”
Section 306
Competent court
“(1) The competent court is the  at the seat of the company whose shareholder is entitled to lodge the motion.”
Section 307
Court proceedings
“(1) The proceedings are governed by the law on matters of non-contentious jurisdiction (freiwillige Gerichtsbarkeit)...
(2) The motion has to be lodged against the acquiring company...
(3) The  has to announce the motion in the Federal Bulletin (Bundesanzeiger) and, if the statutes of the respective company so provide, in other public bulletins. Other shareholders may lodge their own motions within two months following publication. This has to be pointed out in the publication. A request lodged after expiry of this time-limit is inadmissible...”
Section 308
Joint representative
“(1) The Regional Court has to appoint a representative in order to safeguard the rights of those external shareholders who did not lodge an own motion...”
In proceedings governed by the Code of Civil Procedure, an action complies with a time-limit even if it has been lodged with an incompetent court and is only later on transferred to the competent court (section 281 of the Code of Civil Procedure).
In separate proceedings the Federal Court of Justice (Bundesgerichtshof, case no. II ZB 26/04) ruled on 13 March 2006 that section 281 of the Code of Civil Procedure should also apply by analogy to proceedings aimed at determining a shareholder's compensation.