The case originated in an application (no. 73593/10) against the Republic of Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr László Magyar (“the applicant”), on 9 December 2010.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr D. Karsai, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicant complained under Article 3 of the Convention about his life sentence with no parole eligibility and that the conditions of his detention were degrading.
Moreover, relying on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, he complained about the length of his trial and the perceived lack of impartiality of the Regional Court which convicted him.
On 18 October 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 7 February 2012 the President of the Section granted the Hungarian Helsinki Committee leave, under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court, to intervene as a third party in the proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1966. Currently, he is detained at Szeged Prison.
It appears that on an unspecified date in 2002 criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant and his accomplices.
As the investigation against the applicant and nine other defendants proceeded, the applicant was interrogated on numerous occasions as a suspect in connection with various violent crimes committed in many different villages. The investigation resulted in a case file of 25 large boxes. According to the material collected, the applicant and his co-defendants had committed a series of burglaries against lonely elderly people in various parts of the country. They had tied up the victims and beaten them or threatened them until they disclosed where their valuables were hidden and then left them tied up alone in their houses. Some of the victims had died soon after the assaults.
The bill of indictment submitted on 26 June 2003 was 48 pages long, concerned ten defendants, and proposed the hearing of 72 witnesses and two forensic medical experts. The applicant was indicted on 3 counts of homicide, 19 counts of robbery, 19 counts of infringement of personal liberty, 4 counts of assault causing grievous bodily harm, 7 counts of trespass and 3 counts of theft or attempted theft.
After 34 hearings held from 4 February 2004 onwards, on 12 May 2005 the Jász-Nagykun-Szolnok County Regional Court convicted the applicant of murder, robbery and several other offences, in a 135-page-long judgment. The applicant was, as a multiple recidivist, sentenced to life imprisonment without eligibility for parole, that is, whole life sentence (tényleges életfogytiglan).
On appeal, the Debrecen Court of Appeal held a preparatory meeting on 21 November 2005 and a hearing on 21 January 2006. It quashed the first-instance judgment on 25 January 2006 and remitted the case to the Regional Court.
In the resumed proceedings before the Regional Court, an amended bill of indictment was preferred on 31 August 2006 and 27 hearings were held between 25 October 2006 and 19 November 2008. Several forensic medical and graphology experts were appointed in order to verify the defence of a co-defendant to the effect that he could not have taken part in the commission of one of the crimes he was charged with since he had undergone an operation on his knee – under a false name – and was not able to walk. Although this issue was irrelevant for the applicant, it appeared to be crucial for the determination of the charges against his co-defendant.
On 19 November 2008 the Regional Court again convicted the applicant. The applicant submitted that the judge hearing his case this time used to be the trainee of the judge who had tried his case in the first proceedings before the Regional Court.
The Regional Court’s judgment was 161 pages long and covered 33 cases of crimes committed by the ten defendants. The applicant, as well as the above-mentioned co-defendant, was again sentenced to life imprisonment without eligibility for parole.
On appeal, the Debrecen Court of Appeal held hearings on 29 June, 28 September, and 14 and 16 December 2009. In its judgment of 16 December 2009 the Court of Appeal re-characterised the offences of which the applicant had been convicted but upheld his sentence of life imprisonment without eligibility for parole. In order to reflect differences between the attitude of the applicant during the trial and that of the above-mentioned co-defendant (who contributed to the establishment of the facts and expressed remorse) and to make their punishments respectively proportionate, the co-defendant’s sentence was mitigated: he was no longer excluded from eligibility for parole.
On 28 September 2010 the Supreme Court upheld this sentence.
The applicant submitted that his cell at Szeged Prison, the dimensions of which are five by two metres, accommodates another inmate and the toilet is adjacent to his bed and table.
Section 40 (1) of Act no. IV of 1978 on the Criminal Code (as in force at the material time and until 30 June 2013 when it was replaced by Act no. C of 2012 on the Criminal Code) provided as follows:
“Imprisonment shall last for life or a definite time.”
Section 47/A of the Act no. IV of 1978 on the Criminal Code, as in force since 1 March 1999, provided as follows:
“(1) If a life sentence is imposed, the court shall define in the judgment the earliest date of the release on parole or it shall exclude eligibility for parole.
(2) If eligibility for parole is not excluded, its date shall be defined at no earlier than 20 years. If the life sentence is imposed for an offence punishable without any limitation period, the above-mentioned date shall be defined at no earlier than 30 years.”
Article 9 of the Fundamental Law (as in force since 1 January 2012) provides as follows:
“(4) The President of the Republic shall
...
g) exercise the right to grant individual pardon.
...
(5) Any measure and decision of the President of the Republic under paragraph (4) shall be subject to the countersignature of a government member. An Act may provide that a decision within the statutory competence of the President of the Republic shall not be subject to a countersignature.”
Act no. XIX of 1998 on the Code of Criminal Procedure provides as relevant:
“(1) Motions for pardon ... in respect of suppressing or reducing sanctions not yet executed ... shall be submitted – ex officio or on request – to the President of the Republic – by the Minister in charge of justice.
...
(3) [Such a r]equest may be introduced by the defendant, his/her lawyer or ... relative. ...
(4) A [pardon] request ... concerning a sanction not yet executed must be introduced with the first-instance trial court.
(5) In the course of the pardon procedure, the court shall obtain ... such personal particulars of the defendant as necessary for the decision on pardon.”
“(1) The court ... shall forward the case documents and the request to the Minister in charge of justice. ...
(3) The Minister in charge of justice shall forward the request to the President of the Republic even if s/he does not endorse it.”
As regards the practice of the presidential pardon, it is to be noted that, since the introduction, in 1999, of the possibility to exclude eligibility for parole, there has been no decision to grant clemency to any prisoner serving a whole life term.
The relevant texts of the Council of Europe, the European Union and other international legal texts on the imposition and review of sentences of life imprisonment, including the obligations of Council of Europe member States when extraditing individuals to States where they may face such sentences, are set out in Kafkaris v. Cyprus ([GC], no. 21906/04, §§ 68-76, ECHR 2008), and Vinter and Others v. the United Kingdom ([GC], nos. 66069/09, 130/10 and 3896/10, §§ 60-75, 9 July 2013).
The relevant Council of Europe and international instruments on the objectives of a prison sentence, notably as regards the importance to be attached to rehabilitation, are outlined in Dickson v. the United Kingdom ([GC], no. 44362/04, §§ 28-36, ECHR 2007-V) and summarised in Vinter (cited above, §§ 76-81).