The case originated in an application (no. 17604/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Hungarian nationals, Mr György Goldmann and Ms Júlia Szénászky (“the applicants”), on 23 April 2005.
The applicants were represented by Mr J. Lakatos, a lawyer practising in . The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr L. Höltzl, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicants complained, in particular, about the unfairness and the length of the criminal proceedings conducted against them.
On 1 September 2009 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicants were born in 1945 and 1947 respectively and live in Hódmezővásárhely.
On 26 August 1994 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicants, a married couple and both archaeologists. On 5 July 1995 a bill of indictment was preferred and the applicants were charged with several counts of aggravated embezzlement, punishable in the circumstances by up to three years of imprisonment. The alleged offences concerned the alienation of numerous artefacts retrieved by the applicants.
After a remittal, on 21 May 1998 the Békéscsaba District Court found the applicants guilty as charged and sentenced them to one year of imprisonment, suspended for two years. On 7 January 1999 the  upheld this judgment. The review bench of the Supreme Court confirmed the final judgment on 7 March 2000. The courts relied on documentary evidence, the opinion of experts and the testimony of witnesses and the parties and recognised the lapse of time from the commission of the offences as a mitigating factor. After the lapse of the two-year period of suspension on 7 January 2001, the applicants became exempted (mentesülés) from all legal consequences of their conviction.
On 5 September 2001 the applicants nevertheless requested a retrial. On 9 July 2002 the , acting as a second-instance court, ordered the retrial.
In the resumed proceedings, after a remittal, the Gyula District Court held two oral hearings and dismissed the applicants' retrial motion on 15 September 2004. The court relied on documentary evidence, the opinions of several newly appointed experts as well as the testimony of witnesses and the defendants. The main question of taking evidence was whether the items embezzled by the applicants – that is, archaeological findings – had commercial value for the purposes of the offence of embezzlement.
The applicants appealed seeking acquittal. The  upheld the first-instance decision on 26 January 2005, without holding an oral hearing.
The applicants lodged a petition for review. On 1 June 2005 the Supreme Court dismissed the petition as inadmissible, without an examination on the merits, since it was incompatible ratione materiae with the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Section 351
Section 352
“(2) In order to eliminate the ill-foundedness of the first-instance judgment, evidence may be taken if the findings of fact have not been established or are deficient. Evidence shall be taken ... at a hearing.”
“(1) Within 30 days of receiving the file, the president of the panel in charge shall schedule, in order to deal with an appeal, deliberations in camera (tanácsülés), a public session (nyilvános ülés) or a hearing (tárgyalás).”
“(1) The second-instance court shall hold a public session, if – the first-instance judgment being ill-founded – the complete and/or correct findings of fact may be established from the contents of the file or through drawing factual conclusions, or if the defendant must be heard in order to clarify the circumstances relevant for imposing the sentence.
(2) The second-instance court shall summon to the public session those persons whose hearing it deems necessary ...”
“(1) The second-instance court shall notify the public prosecutor and – if they are not summoned – ... the defendant and his lawyer of the public session.”
“(2) In order to take evidence, a hearing ... shall be scheduled.”
Section 370
Section 399
“(1) If [on the examination of the admissibility of retrial motion] the court finds the motion well-founded, it shall order retrial...”
Section 402
“(1) Where – depending on the results of the hearing – the court establishes that the reopening is well-founded it shall set aside the judgment delivered in the original case, or the part challenged by the reopening, and shall deliver a new judgment; whereas if it finds the reopening ill-founded it shall deny retrial.”
Section 416
“(1) Review proceedings may be instituted against a court's final decision on the merits of the case if: ...
g) a human rights organisation set up by an international treaty has established that the conduct of the proceedings or the final decision of the court has violated a provision of an international treaty promulgated by an Act of Parliament, provided that the Republic of Hungary has acknowledged the jurisdiction of the international human rights organisation [in question]...
(3) Under point g) of subsection (1) review proceedings may also be instituted if the human rights organisation set up by an international treaty has established a violation of a provision of the international treaty for a procedural irregularity subject under this Act only to appeal, but not to review. Review proceedings shall not be instituted under point g) of subsection (1) if the international human rights organisation has established a violation of the «trial within a reasonable time» requirement.”