The case concerns the alleged lack of reasoning of the judicial decisions ordering the applicants’ arrest and continued detention, the allegedly unreasonable duration of their detention on remand, the alleged absence of a meaningful review of the lawfulness of their detention, and the allegedly unreasonable duration of the criminal proceedings against them, in breach of Article 5 §§ 3 and 4 and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The applicants’ details are set out in the appended table.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On various dates the applicants were arrested within the context of criminal investigations against them. Shortly afterwards, the courts ordered their detention on remand. The relevant judicial decisions stated, without providing specific details, that the applicants were accused of serious crimes and could otherwise escape and hinder the investigation or continue with their criminal activities.
In addition to the reasons mentioned above, in application no. 43692/15 the domestic court noted, without providing specific details, that the applicant was a serving police officer and argued that he could use his office to interfere with any investigation. In this case the domestic court furthermore noted, again without providing specific details, that the applicant had a previous conviction for a similar crime.
In the course of the proceedings the courts extended the applicants’ detention a number of times, referring to the reasons indicated in the initial decisions on the applicants’ detention. The courts furthermore noted that there were no reasons for the applicants to be released, since no new circumstances warranting release had been identified and the circumstances that had led to the decision to place the applicants in detention pending their trial persisted.
On 10 January 2014 the trial court convicted the first applicant and sentenced him to six years’ imprisonment. In the course of the appeal proceedings, the first applicant was released after he had given personal undertaking not to abscond. On 13 January 2015 the sentence of 10 January 2014 was quashed on appeal and the criminal case against the first applicant was remitted for additional pre-trial investigation. According to the available documents, the pre-trial investigation is still being conducted.
In the course of the proceedings, on 20 August 2013 the second applicant was released on bail. On 29 August 2013 he was rearrested again. On 11 November 2014 the second applicant was released after he had given personal undertaking not to abscond.
In the course of the trial, on 21 December 2015, the third applicant was released on bail.
In the course of the proceedings, on 16 December 2016, the fourth applicant was released on bail.
In the course of the proceedings, on 17 June 2014 the trial court convicted the fifth applicant and sentenced him to ten years’ imprisonment. On 4 July 2016 that sentence was quashed after an appeal on points of law and the case was remitted for retrial. In the course of the retrial, on 9 June 2017 the applicant was placed under all-night house arrest.
In the course of the trial, on 26 June 2017, the sixth applicant was placed under house arrest.
According to the parties’ submissions, as of April 2019 the seventh applicant is still in pre-trial detention pending examination of his criminal case by the trial court.