The case originated in an application (no. 926/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Mikhail Yuryevich Karelin (“the applicant”), on 19 November 2007.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 2 July 2012 the applicant raised a further complaint concerning new unrelated domestic proceedings in 2012 and the absence of a prosecuting party in these proceedings.
On 29 January 2014 the complaint concerning the absence of a prosecuting party in the court proceedings in 2012 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application, including the initial complaints raised in November 2007, was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Naberezhnyye Chelny.
On 4 March 2012 the applicant was arrested by a police officer, Z., and accused of disorderly behaviour in a public place, an offence under Article 20.1 of the Federal Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”), punishable by a fine or up to fifteen days’ detention. It appears that the applicant was then taken to the police station and remained there for some time.
In the police station, Z. compiled an administrative offence record, thereby instituting administrative offence proceedings against the applicant. The record read as follows:
“4 March 2012
I have made the following findings under Article 28.3 of the Code of Administrative Offences:
[The applicant] was drunk and used foul language against passers-by, waving his arms in the air; he was trying to start a fight, and did not rectify his behaviour despite remarks from passers-by. Thus, he gravely offended public order and committed an administrative offence under Article 20.1 of the CAO.
The fact of the offence has been confirmed by: witness K.
[The applicant] has been informed of his rights and obligations under Articles 48 and 51 of the Constitution, and Articles 1.5, 24.2 and 25.1 of the CAO: that the person who is being prosecuted for an administrative offence has the right, inter alia, to have access to all the material in the file, to testify, to adduce evidence, to lodge interlocutory applications and challenges, and to have legal assistance.
...
Decision: to submit to a court
Signature: deputy chief officer, 5 March 2012”
Officer Z. also issued a written report stating that the applicant had used foul language against passers-by.
It appears that one of the passers-by, N., accepted a request to make a written statement attesting to the fact that the applicant had been drunk and had used foul language.
On 5 March 2012 the police officer submitted the record to his superior, who decided that the case should be transferred to a court for examination.
On an unspecified date, the administrative offence file was submitted to a justice of the peace for adjudication. It appears that the file contained the offence record, Z.’s report and N.’s statement. It is unclear whether there was any written statement from K. at that time.
On 29 March 2012 the justice of the peace held a hearing. It is unclear whether it was a public one.
The applicant made a written statement that he had been apprised of his procedural rights.
As can be seen from the judgment in this case (see below), the applicant was accused at the trial of using foul language in the presence of other people, while being drunk, thus breaching public order.
The applicant, who is himself a lawyer, did not appoint a legal representative. He pleaded not guilty and made oral submissions on the charge against him.
After a request, Officer Z. was present at the hearing and made an oral statement. The court also heard N. and K.. It appears that the justice of the peace asked Z. and N. a couple of questions.
By judgment of 29 March 2012 the justice of the peace found the applicant guilty and imposed a fine of 500 Russian roubles (the equivalent of 13 euros at the time) on him. The judgment read as follows:
“The court holds that, while drunk, the defendant used foul language in the presence of other people and thus breached public order ...
The defendant’s guilt is confirmed by Z.’s report and N.’s testimony ... The use of foul language in a public place is unacceptable and discloses a form of disorderly behaviour ... In the court’s view, the use of aberrant language in a public place in the presence of at least one person constitutes an offence under Article 20.1 of the CAO. Moreover, the defendant continued to use foul language during his arrest and while being taken to the police station ...”
The applicant appealed to the Naberezhniye Chelny Town Court. He argued, inter alia, that although the offence record referred to his using foul language “against passers-by”, the justice of the peace had phrased the charge as using foul language “in the presence of other people”; the judge had not retained the phrase from the offence record, which stated that the applicant “[had not rectified] his behaviour despite remarks from passersby”.
On 16 April 2012 the Town Court held a hearing. It is unclear whether it was a public hearing. The appeal court examined the applicant and upheld the judgment of 29 March 2012. On that date, the appeal decision and the trial judgment became final. The appeal court held as follows:
“The justice of the peace convicted [the applicant] of using foul language in the presence of others, thus breaching public order ...
The appeal court dismisses the argument that the mere use of aberrant language in respect of one person does not disclose an offence. The offence of disorderly conduct is constituted by actions breaching public order and peace. Such actions include using foul language in a public place, insulting people, destruction of or damage to others’ property ... Each of these actions may amount to disorderly behaviour if it breaches public order and discloses a manifest disregard to society ...
Certain factual contradictions between the information in the administrative offence record, Z.’s report and N.’s testimony (as regards use of foul language on account of low culture rather than in respect of passers-by) were dispelled during the trial following the interview of the witnesses ...”
The applicant applied to the Deputy President of the Supreme Court of the Tatarstan Republic for judicial review under Article 30.12 of the CAO. Having examined the file, by decision of 15 June 2012 the Deputy President upheld the court decisions of 29 March and 16 April 2012.
The applicant did not seek further review before the Supreme Court of Russia.
Article 28.1 of the CAO provides that administrative offence proceedings are initiated by a competent public official such as a police officer or a prosecutor.
Chapter 25 of the CAO contains provisions regarding “participants in administrative offence proceedings”, namely the defendant, the victim, their representatives and counsel, witnesses, attesting witnesses, specialists and experts, translators and prosecutors. Article 25.11 empowers a public prosecutor to institute administrative offence proceedings; to take part in the examination of the case, adduce evidence, lodge interlocutory applications and issue reports on matters arising during the examination of the case; and to appeal against the decision taken in the case, irrespective of whether he or she participated in the case.
Article 30.1 of the CAO provides that the defendant, the victim, their representatives and counsel have a right to appeal against the decision taken in the administrative offence case. In 2010 the right of appeal was extended to the official who compiled the administrative offence record (and subsequently, more generally, to officials authorised to compile the record).
The official who compiled the administrative offence record and the official/non-judicial authority that issued a decision in the case are not considered as “participants” in terms of Chapter 25 of the CAO or “participants who are empowered to carry out a prosecution” (decisions nos. 1311-O and 1312-O of 24 June 2014 by the Constitutional Court). Such officials deal with the collection of evidence (decision no. 2157-O of 25 September 2014 by the Constitutional Court). They cannot lodge interlocutory applications but can be called to a hearing in order “to provide clarifications” (ruling no. 5 of 25 March 2005 by the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia).
Article 26.2 of the CAO defines “evidence” as any factual data that can be used for establishing the existence or absence of the event giving rise to an administrative offence, the defendant’s guilt and other pertinent circumstances. Such factual data are established (устанавливается) on the basis of the record of an administrative offence, other records prescribed by the CAO, the defendant’s statement, an expert report, or statements given by witnesses or victims. The administrative offence record is a procedural document recording factual data, which is relevant to the correct examination of the case (Constitutional Court, decision no. 89-O-O of 27 January 2011).
Article 1.5 of the CAO provides for the presumption of innocence. The official or the court dealing with the administrative offence case should establish whether the person concerned is guilty or innocent (ruling no. 5 of 24 March 2005 by the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia).
Administrative offence cases should be examined at a public hearing, except in cases relating to State or other protected secrets or where it is necessary to protect the honour or reputation of the people participating in the proceedings (Article 24.3 of the CAO).
Article 25.1 § 4 of the CAO provides that anyone charged under the CAO is entitled to study the case-file materials, make representations, adduce evidence, lodge applications and challenges, and to have legal assistance. The Constitutional Court considered that the above guarantees enabled the person concerned to refute, in the course of court proceedings, information contained in the case file, for instance in the offence record (протокол об административном правонарушении), thereby exercising his or her right to judicial protection based on the principle of adversarial procedure (decision no. 925-O-O of 17 June 2010).
While the administrative offence record must indicate the Article of the CAO corresponding to the charge, the right of final legal classification belongs to a court. If a court considers that the classification given in the administrative offence record was wrong, it may reclassify the relevant actions (or inaction) under another Article of the CAO, concerning the type of offence and provided that the reclassification does not worsen the situation of the defendant (ruling no. 5 of 24 March 2005 by the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia, paragraph 20). If the legal classification of the offence given in the administrative offence record is wrong, a court is empowered to decide the case on the basis of the correct legal classification. In this situation, the factual description of the offence and the adduced evidence should be sufficient for the court to give a different legal classification (ruling no. 10 of 2 June 2004 by the Plenary Supreme Commercial Court of Russia, paragraph 8).
The Constitutional Court stated that Articles 118 § 2 and 123 § 3 of the Russian Constitution provided that equality of arms and adversarial procedure should apply in court proceedings, including under the CAO. While the above constitutional guarantees apply in cases examined (directly) by courts, they do not apply in cases examined by non-judicial authorities or officials (decision no. 630-O of 23 April 2013 by the Constitutional Court). However, the person concerned may seek judicial review of their decisions; such review proceedings should provide for equality of arms and adversarial procedure (ibid.).
The Constitutional Court held, in relation to the Code of Criminal Procedure, that requiring or allowing a court to take over the functions normally attributed to a prosecuting authority contradicted Article 123 of the Constitution and impeded independent and impartial administration of justice (see, among others, ruling no. 16-P of 2 July 2013).
Article 29.4 of the CAO provides that when preparing for the examination of a case, the judge has to decide whether to require the presence of people mentioned in Articles 25.1-25.10 (such as witnesses and experts), to order the production of additional documents or to commission an expert report. The judge also has to decide whether to return the case to the authority that initiated the proceedings where the record or other documents were compiled by non-authorised officials, where the record or documents contain mistakes or lack the requisite information, or where such shortcoming cannot be remedied at the trial.
Pursuant to Article 30.6 of the CAO, the appeal court ascertains the legality and fairness of the trial decision. For this purpose, it examines the available and additional material, questions the defendant and, if necessary, other people, and examines other evidence and carries out other procedural actions. The appeal court is not limited by the arguments raised in the statement of appeal and carries out a full review of the case.
The Constitutional Court stated that in order to comply with the statutory requirement of a “full and objective” examination of the case, a judge has statutory powers to hear participants in the case, to examine evidence, as well as to “carry out other necessary procedural measures aimed at verifying the admissibility and authenticity of evidence, in particular by way of calling proprio motu witnesses, including the official who compiled the administrative offence record or another related record”. This is aimed at further examining the available evidence (the record) rather than at collecting new evidence. The above-mentioned power cannot be considered as incompatible with the judicial function and fully complies with the constitutional principle of adversarial procedure under the CAO (decision no. 1086-O of 6 July 2010; decision no. 884-O of 29 May 2012; decision no. 763-O of 23 April 2015).
For instance, by decision no. 1817-O of 18 September 2014 the Constitutional Court upheld Article 26.9 of the CAO in so far as it was interpreted as allowing a “public official”, also meaning a trial judge, to ask an “official” (also meaning a judge) in another town to interview the public official who had compiled documents relating to the administrative offence case. The requested judge is not prevented from notifying the defendant, who is not precluded from participating in the interview.
Judge Aranovskiy expressed a separate opinion to the above decision in the following terms. Such a request for an interview amounts to collection of evidence, which should be the function of the parties to the case. An exception is allowed before civil and commercial courts in circumstances where a person or a legal entity challenges a legal act or inaction on the part of a public authority. In such cases a certain encroachment upon the principle of adversarial procedure is acceptable since it is related to the protection of one’s rights and freedoms against an action or inaction by a public authority. As a rule, it would be questionable whether a court should be allowed to remedy defects or supplement lacunae in the public authority’s effort to prove the defendant’s guilt. The court’s assistance in adducing proof is only acceptable in a limited number of situations prescribed by law, namely at the request of a party that is deemed to be the weaker one, as in disputes with public authorities. Where evidence is lacking or where it has been obtained in contravention of the applicable rules, the CAO requires the judge to return the case file to the authority or official that initiated the proceedings. “Full and objective examination of the case” does not qualify as a protected constitutional value.
A recent assessment of certain problems arising in the CAO proceedings is available in the 2014 report compiled by the Human Rights Ombudsman of the Russian Federation (as quoted in Mikhaylova v. Russia, no. 46998/08, § 40, 19 November 2015).