The case originated in an application (no. 37259/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Ms Jūratė Švenčionienė (“the applicant”), on 1 October 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. Jurgutis, a lawyer practising in . The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicant alleged a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention as she had had no possibility to attend the appeal hearing in the civil proceedings which she had brought.
On 24 November 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in .
On an unspecified date the applicant brought civil proceedings for divorce and the division of the matrimonial property. On 13 November 2002 she signed a power of attorney authorising her lawyer to represent her during the first-instance proceedings before the Kaunas City District Court.
On 4 December 2003 the Kaunas City District Court granted the divorce and divided the family’s property, awarding the applicant monetary compensation in the amount of 8,547 Lithuanian litai (LTL, approximately 2,442 euros (EUR)), for the property assigned to her former husband. The applicant and her lawyer were present at the hearing.
The applicant’s husband appealed. On 4 February 2004 the  sent a written notice (pranešimas) about the forthcoming court hearing to four recipients – the applicant, her lawyer who had represented her before the court of first instance, the defendant and his lawyer. The notice was sent by the ordinary postal service.
On 18 February 2004 the  heard the appeal in the absence of the applicant and her lawyer. The court noted that no comments on the appeal had been received from the applicant. The other party was present at the hearing. The court decided to reduce the amount of compensation to LTL 3,547 (approximately EUR 1,013).
The applicant lodged a cassation appeal, complaining, inter alia, that she had not been duly summoned to the appellate hearing. In particular, the applicant alleged that the notice sent to her had been dispatched to the wrong address. Moreover, she had authorised her lawyer to represent her only before the Kaunas City District Court. Thus, it had been futile to send notice to that lawyer at the appeal stage.
On 26 April 2004 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s cassation appeal. It noted, inter alia, that, in accordance with standard civil procedure, the parties are to be notified about the first hearing by way of summonses (šaukimais) served upon them by registered post. However, they are to be informed about subsequent hearings by dispatching a notice via the simple postal service. These arrangements are deemed to speed up proceedings and are based on the assumption that the parties have a duty of care to follow the events in the case.
The Supreme Court acknowledged that the notice to the applicant had been dispatched using an incorrect address and noted that the notice had been sent to the applicant’s former representative. However, it observed that, in any event, the applicant had failed to show that – had she been present before the appeal court – she would have adduced any evidence that could have led to a different resolution of the dispute. The applicant had not indicated any such information in her cassation appeal.
Articles 124 and 133 of the Code of Civil Procedure (the Code) provide that the parties to the case shall be informed of the date and place of the court hearing by sending them summonses (šaukimai) or written notices (pranešimai). Once a summons to a forthcoming hearing has been served upon the parties to the case, information about subsequent hearings is rendered by sending written notices. When the summons is sent, a note of its receipt by the recipient must be returned to the court. However, when a notice is sent, no such proof of receipt is required. Under Article 118 of the Code, the service of a hearing notice on a party’s representative constitutes proper service on that party. Under Article 320 § 1 of the Code, the court of appeal decides questions of law and fact.
Pursuant to Article 246, if a party to the case fails to appear and there is no evidence that the party has been duly summoned, the hearing of the first-instance court must be adjourned.
Under Article 310 of the Code, an appeal is to be submitted through the first-instance court which adopted the relevant decision. Under Articles 317 and 318, the judge of this court sends a copy of the appeal to all parties to the dispute, who can comment on it in writing.
Article 319 provides that the parties are notified about the date and place of the appeal hearing. If the court decides to hold a public hearing, the parties are invited to attend, but their absence does not preclude the court from deciding the case.
Article 324 stipulates that, if the appeal court decides the case by the oral procedure, before the hearing the chairman of the chamber has to verify whether the parties are present. The parties have a right to submit their arguments on the grounds of the appeal. If the court finds it necessary, it can also examine the evidence which was submitted to the court of first instance.
According to the practice of the Supreme Court, certain legal norms, which bind the first-instance court when it decides whether a party’s right to participate at the hearing has been violated, also apply to the appeal procedure (the ruling of the Supreme Court of 1 March 2004 in case no. 3K-3-149/2004). Likewise, the Supreme Court has recognised the right of a party to receive a copy of the appeal which the opponent has submitted and to be informed of the date and time of the forthcoming hearing at the appeal court (the ruling of the Supreme Court of 7 April 2004 in case no. 3K-3-262/2004).