The case originated in an application (no. 34779/09) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Dimitar Kirov Mitev (“the applicant”), on 22 April 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Stefanova and Mr M. Ekimdzhiev, lawyers practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Ms M. Dimitrova and Ms B. Simeonova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been convicted of murder on the basis of a confession made by him to the police immediately after his arrest, under duress and in the absence of a lawyer.
On 16 November 2016 the above complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
On 6 February 2017 the President of the Section granted the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee leave to intervene as a third party in the proceedings, in accordance with Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1972 and is currently detained at Varna Prison.
Before the events at issue, he had several previous convictions for theft.
A seventy-five-year-old lady, a neighbour of the applicant’s parents, was murdered in her house in Varna on the morning of 18 June 2006, and a number of her personal possessions were stolen from the house. The applicant was suspected of having committed the offence and a search order was issued in respect of him.
On the morning of 21 June 2006 the applicant was arrested. He had been hiding in an abandoned house in a neighbouring village. The police report on his arrest stated that he had “slightly” resisted the arrest, and that force had been used in order to take him out of his hiding place (under a bed) and handcuff him.
The applicant was taken to the police station in the nearby town of Valchi Dol, where, at 11.30 a.m., an order for his arrest was issued under section 63(1) of the Ministry of the Interior Act 2006 (see paragraph 26 below). The applicant signed a declaration stating that he wanted to be assisted by a lawyer and that he had liver and stomach pains, due to “past ailments”, and wished to be examined by a doctor.
Later in the day, two police officers from Varna, Z.K. and V.V., arrived in Valchi Dol. They had a conversation with the applicant, during which he confessed, according to him under physical duress, to having committed the murder and described his actions in the days preceding his arrest. In addition, he confessed to having stolen a gun and other personal possessions from another house on an earlier occasion. The confession was written down and was signed by the applicant and Officer V.V.
Later on that same day the applicant was transferred to the police station in Varna, where he asked to be examined by a doctor. The examination started at about 8 p.m. The doctor identified bruises and haematomas on the applicant’s right elbow, right flank, buttocks and wrists, which had been caused by hard, blunt objects less than twenty-four hours earlier.
On 22 June 2006 an investigator brought charges against the applicant in relation to another offence, an unrelated theft, and a prosecutor ordered his detention for up to seventy-two hours. On 23 June 2006 the Varna District Court ordered the applicant’s detention on remand in connection with that charge. The criminal proceedings concerning that charge proceeded alongside the proceedings which are the subject of this application, and were completed in March 2007.
The murder investigation, to which the investigation into the alleged theft of a gun and other personal possessions mentioned in the applicant’s confession to Officers Z.K. and V.V. was joined, continued over the months which followed. The police gathered further evidence and witness testimony, some of which was identified on the basis of that confession. They never found the objects stolen from the victim’s house. On 18 December 2006 an investigator brought charges against the applicant in connection with the two offences mentioned above. On that occasion the applicant had a lawyer, retained by him on the same day. The applicant made a brief statement that he was not guilty.
On an unspecified date in 2007 the applicant was indicted and taken to court.
The Varna Regional Court (hereinafter “the Regional Court”), which examined the case at first instance, held its first hearing on 25 June 2007. It heard the doctor who had examined the applicant on the evening of 21 June 2006 (see paragraph 12 above). She stated that she maintained the opinions expressed in her previous report, and the prosecution and the defence posed no further questions. Officers Z.K. and V.V. were examined as witnesses and recounted their conversation with the applicant on 21 June 2006 and the confession he had made to them. They replied to questions posed by the prosecution and the defence. The applicant’s father was examined as well, and he stated that he had visited his son about ten days after his arrest. The applicant had told him that he had been beaten in order to confess, and some traces of this beating had still been visible on him. The Regional Court heard other experts and witnesses.
During the next hearing, held on 3 October 2007, the applicant made a statement on the charges. He said that he had not committed the offences, as at the time of the murder he had been at his grandmother’s house in another village, and that he had confessed to the offences under duress.
On 11 February 2008 the Regional Court examined more witnesses and then the parties made oral submissions. Counsel for the applicant contested the testimony of Z.K. and V.V. in particular, arguing that their examination had been contrary to Article 118 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 31 below). He pointed out moreover that, while the applicant had made a confession to those two officers, he had not repeated that confession when taken before an investigator. At the same time, the confession was one of “the pillars” of the indictment, as there was no other evidence showing the course of the events inside the victim’s house.
In a judgment given on 11 February 2008 the Regional Court convicted the applicant and sentenced him to life imprisonment. On the basis of the evidence collected, it concluded that the applicant had stolen a gun and other personal possessions several days before the murder, and on the day of the murder had entered the victim’s house in order to steal food. When she had surprised him in the house, he had attacked her, hitting her with the gun stolen earlier – in such a way that a part of the gun’s cock had broken off and fallen to the floor – and with an axe which he had found in the house. After the murder the applicant had run away. A stranger had given him a lift to another village, but the applicant had forgotten a bag containing his clothes and the gun in the stranger’s car.
In establishing the facts, the Regional Court relied on the following most important pieces of evidence: a metal fragment which had been found under the victim’s body and which the experts confirmed to be the missing part of the cock of the gun; traces of the victim’s blood found on the handle of the gun found in the applicant’s bag; the testimony of the person who had given the applicant a lift in his car and had found that bag; the fact that that person had also recognised the applicant’s photo when it had been shown to him by the police; and the testimony of Officers Z.K. and V.V., who had recounted what the applicant had confessed to them with regard to the course of the events in the victim’s house. As to the officers’ testimony, the Regional Court pointed out that it considered it credible, since the confession as recounted by them had enabled the police to continue the investigation and identify further evidence.
The applicant lodged an appeal.
In his written and oral submissions to the Varna Court of Appeal (hereinafter “the Court of Appeal”), counsel for the applicant contested once again the testimony given by Z.K. and V.V. He argued that the Regional Court had not commented on the evidence showing that the applicant had been beaten in order to make the confession the officers had recounted, pointed out that the confession had not been repeated once the applicant had been taken before an investigator, and relied again on Article 118 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
In a judgment of 30 May 2008 the Court of Appeal upheld the applicant’s conviction and sentence, finding that his guilt had been proved beyond reasonable doubt. In addition to the evidence described above, it relied on the testimony of a neighbour of the victim, who had seen a person considered to be the applicant on the roof of the victim’s house shortly before the murder. As to Z.K. and V.V., the Court of Appeal pointed out that they had not been investigating bodies within the meaning of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and that their testimony had been assessed in the light of all other evidence. Furthermore, it commented on the exonerating evidence, in particular expert reports finding no fingerprints of the applicant and no traces of his scent in the victim’s house, saying that this was not sufficient to refute the accusations.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law. His counsel contested once again the testimony of Officers Z.K. and V.V., pointing out that the lower courts had not commented on the evidence showing that the applicant had been beaten in order to confess. Moreover, the officers’ testimony had been given in breach of Article 118 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
In a final judgment of 13 November 2008 the Supreme Court of Cassation upheld the Court of Appeal’s judgment. As to the arguments of the defence concerning the testimony of Z.K. and V.V., it observed that the confession as recounted by the officers contained details which could only have been known to the perpetrator of the crimes at issue, and thus could not have been “instigated”. Moreover, allowing Z.K. and V.V. to testify had not been in breach of Article 118 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The Ministry of the Interior Act, in force between 1 May 2006 and 27 June 2014, provided in section 63(1) that the police could detain for up to twenty-four hours a person suspected of having committed a criminal offence. Under section 63(5), any such person had the right to legal assistance from the moment of his or her detention.
Article 15 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in force as of 29 April 2006, lays down the general principle that an accused has the right to defence in criminal proceedings. Article 97 specifies that a person has the right to legal assistance from the moment of his or her detention or the moment when charges are brought against him or her. Article 94 stipulates that the participation of a defence lawyer is mandatory where, inter alia, the case concerns an offence punishable by at least ten years of imprisonment; in such a case, the competent body is required to appoint such a lawyer. Article 55 of the Code, applicable after charges have been brought, lists in detail the rights of the accused, which include the right to legal assistance and to have the defence lawyer present during the implementation of all investigative measures; the right to make statements on the charges (обяснения) or to remain silent; the right to present evidence, to consult the case file and to make objections; the right to participate in the criminal proceedings; and the right to appeal against any decision affecting his rights and interests.
Article 105 § 2 excludes any evidence which has not been collected in accordance with the rules laid down in the Code.
Article 115 of the Code provides that the accused is to give statements on the charges orally and directly before a competent body (a prosecutor, an investigator or a tribunal). Such statements may be given at any moment during criminal proceedings; alternatively, the accused may refuse to give statements.
Article 116 provides that an indictment and a conviction cannot be based solely on a confession by the accused. In addition, a confession does not absolve the competent bodies from their obligation to investigate.
Article 117 of the Code provides that witness testimony can be used to establish any circumstance which a witness has perceived. Article 118, on the other hand, bars certain categories of persons from giving testimony as witnesses. These include persons who have participated in the criminal proceedings in another procedural quality, apart from the co-accused, the victim, the civil claimant or civil defendant and any private prosecuting party, and officers of the Ministry of the Interior who have participated in a search and seizure procedure, a reconstruction of an accident or an identity parade (paragraph 1). In addition, investigating bodies which have carried out an investigative action cannot give witness testimony about that action, even if the record taken of the action does not meet the statutory requirements (paragraph 2). Whether police officers who have questioned a suspect informally may later testify as to the content of the statements made by that suspect is an issue which has been addressed by the Supreme Court of Cassation under Article 118 § 2 or Article 115 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 29 above), and has been given conflicting answers. In some cases the Supreme Court has held that such police officers are not investigating bodies within the meaning of Article 118 § 2, and are thus not prevented from giving testimony in the ensuing criminal proceedings (for example, Решение № 486 от 10.03.2015 г. на ВКС по н.д. № 1406/2014 г., I н. о., also referred to in paragraph 40 below). In other decisions the result was the opposite, with the Supreme Court of Cassation analysing the matter from the point of view of Article 115 and not Article 118 § 2, and holding that such testimony was inadmissible as the rights of the suspect had been violated (for example, Решение № 391 от 25.10.2013 г. на ВКС по н.д. № 1220/2013 г., III н. о., also referred to in paragraph 48 below).
In a report on its visit to Bulgaria in 2006 (CPT/Inf (2008) 11) the CPT stated the following:
“28.  Most detained persons interviewed by the delegation during the 2006 visit indicated that they had been asked to declare in writing whether they wished to benefit from the right to contact a lawyer after they had been brought to a police station. However, it was alleged by some detainees that police officers had suggested that they should decline this right as they ‘did not need a lawyer’ or had told them that they were not entitled to an ex officio lawyer prior to appearing in court. It became clear during the visit that very few persons who had expressed a wish to meet a lawyer – be it private or ex officio – had been given this opportunity while in police custody.
...
The CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities recall to all police officers the legal obligation to grant access to a lawyer from the very outset of a person’s deprivation of liberty.”
Similar findings were made in the CPT reports which followed, namely after its visits to Bulgaria in 2008, 2010 and 2014 (CPT/Inf (2010) 29, CPT/Inf (2012) 9, CPT/Inf (2015) 12).
On 26 March 2015 the CPT issued a public statement on Bulgaria under Article 10 § 2 of the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT/Inf (2015) 17). The statement contained the following paragraphs in particular:
“Police ill-treatment
...
Very little progress, if any, has been made as regards the legal safeguards against police ill-treatment, and the CPT’s key recommendations in this sphere are still to be implemented. In particular, access to a lawyer remained an exception during the initial 24 hours of police custody and the ex officio lawyers did not perform their function as a safeguard against ill-treatment. Further, persons in police custody were still rarely put in a position to notify promptly a person of their choice of their detention, and were not systematically informed of their rights from the outset of their custody.
...
Concluding remarks
...
... As regards the treatment of persons detained by law enforcement agencies, resolute action is required to ensure the practical and meaningful operation of fundamental safeguards against ill-treatment (including the notification of custody, access to a lawyer, access to a doctor, and information on rights).
...”