PROCEDURE
THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE CASE
Article 129
In the administration of justice, judges are independent and subject only to the law
“... The main principles of judicial proceedings are:
1)  legality;
...9)  the mandatory nature of court decisions.”
Chapter 42
Supervisory review of enforceable court decisions, rulings and resolutions 
Article 327
Enforceable decisions, rulings and resolutions which may be reviewed
“Court decisions, rulings and resolutions may be reviewed in supervisory review proceedings following a protest lodged by the officials designated in Article 328 of the Code of Civil Procedure of Ukraine.”
Article 328
Persons who have the right to lodge a protest against an enforceable decision, ruling or resolution of a court 
“The following persons have the right to lodge a protest against an enforceable court judgment, ruling or resolution:
...2)  presidents of the Supreme Court of the Crimea, regional courts, Kyiv and Sevastopol city courts and their deputies - against decisions and rulings of the district (city), inter-district (county) court, and also against the cassation rulings of the civil division of the Supreme Court of the Crimea, regional courts, and the Kyiv and Sevastopol city courts; ...”
Article 329
The courts that may examine protests in supervisory review proceedings
“The following courts hear cases in supervisory review proceedings: ...
The Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Crimea, regional courts, Kyiv and Sevastopol city courts: as regards protests lodged  by the President of the Supreme Court of Ukraine, the General Prosecutor of Ukraine and their deputies, Presidents of the Supreme Court of the Crimea, regional, Kyiv and Sevastopol city courts and their deputies - against the judgments and rulings of the district (city), inter-district (county) courts and against judgments of the district (city) courts, inter-district (county) courts and against the cassation rulings of the Supreme Court of the Crimea, regional courts, Kyiv and Sevastopol city courts; ...”
Article 331
Suspension of execution of judgments, rulings and resolutions that have entered into force
“Officials who have the right to lodge a protest may suspend execution of the relevant judgments, rulings and resolutions until the end of the supervisory review proceedings.
The lodging of a protest against a judgment adopted following a complaint about unlawful actions by an official who interferes with the citizen's lawful rights suspends execution of that decision until the end of the supervisory review proceedings.”
Article 333
The right of persons participating in the case to lodge explanations with regard to the lodged protest and to take part in the consideration of the case
“Parties and other persons participating in the case have the right to lodge written explanations regarding the protest.
Persons informed about the place and time of consideration of the case can at their request participate in the proceedings. Their absence does not influence the consideration of the case.”
Article 337
The powers of the court that considers a case in supervisory review proceedings
“When considering a case in supervisory review proceedings, the court has the right by its ruling or resolution to:
1)  leave a judgment, ruling, resolution without changes, and refuse a protest;
2)  annul a judgment, ruling or resolution in whole or in part and remit the case for re-consideration to the court of first or cassation instance;
3)  annul a judgment, ruling or resolution fully or partially and terminate proceedings in a case or leave it without consideration;
4)  leave one of the previously adopted judgments in the case, or one of the rulings or resolutions without satisfaction;
5)  change a judgment, ruling or resolution or adopt a new decision, without remitting the case for new consideration, if the case does not require the collection or an additional verification of evidence, the circumstances of the case are established by the court of first instance fully and correctly, but the error was made in the application of the norms of substantive law.”
Article 341
Obligatory nature of the directions of the court that considers a case in supervisory review proceedings
“The directions of the court that made the supervisory review are binding on the court which later re-examines the case. These directions are binding within the limits established by Article 319 of this Code.
When considering a case in supervisory review proceedings or annulling the cassation decision, the court has no authority to determine the conclusions that could be made in the course of re-consideration of the case by the cassation court.”
Chapter II 
Transitional provisions
“1.  This Law shall enter into force on 29 June 2001...
Appeals in civil cases lodged before 29 June 2001 shall be considered in accordance with the procedure adopted for the examination of appeals against local court judgments.
Protests against judgments lodged before 29 June 2001 shall be sent to the Supreme Court of Ukraine for consideration in accordance with the cassation procedure.
Judgments that have been delivered and which have become enforceable before 29 June 2001 can be appealed against within three months in accordance with the cassation procedure (to the Supreme Court of ).”
Section 10
Determination of persons belonging to the participants in the relief works at the  nuclear power plant
“Relief workers dealing with the consequences of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant disaster are those citizens who took part directly in any work related to dealing with the disaster itself or its consequences in the alienation zone in 1986-1987 regardless of the number of days worked, and in 1988-1990 – for not less than 30 calendar days, including the evacuation of persons and property from this zone, and those temporarily present there or assigned there from their place of employment within the designated terms for the execution of works in the alienation zone, including military servicemen, civil servants (якщо це державні службовці), the public, enterprises, institutions and organisations regardless of their jurisdiction and those who worked not less than 14 calendar days in 1986 in the acting ambulance stations for the decontamination of the population and the deactivation of the equipment or buildings. The list of these stations is drawn up by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine.”
Section 11
Determination of persons belonging to the category of victims of the  nuclear power plant disaster
“Persons who are considered victims of the  nuclear power plant disaster are the following: ...
5) persons who worked for at least 14 days from the time of the accident until 1 July 1986 or for at least three months during 1986-1987 outside the exclusion zone in particularly harmful working conditions (taking into account radioactivity factors), where this work was related to the elimination of the consequences of the Chernobyl nuclear plant disaster and was carried out on the basis of instructions received from the Government. The types of work and territories to be covered are determined by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine.”
Section 10
Certificates are issued in the following cases:
“... persons assisting in eliminating the consequences of the nuclear power plant disaster shall be issued certificates on the basis of one of the following documents:
a)  a certificate of assignment to the alienation zone;
b)  a military certificate;
c)  a certificate of proof of bonus payments for participation in the relief work;
d)  (excluded on the basis of the Resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine no. 404 of 8.06.1995) a decision of a court establishing direct participation in any work for a certain period related to dealing with the consequences of the nuclear power plant disaster, its consequences in the alienation zone, including the evacuation of persons and property from this zone...
The decision to issue or not to issue the relevant certificate shall be adopted within one month from the date of receipt of the necessary documents by the body issuing such a certificate.”
List of the localities referred to as zones of radioactivity as a result of the  nuclear power plant disaster 
“... Commentary: The town of  to which the applicant was assigned from the place of his employment () is not included in the list of localities...”
Relevant provisions of the Resolution no. 404 of 8 June 1995 read as follows:
On the Introduction of Amendments to paragraph 10 of the Rules for Issue of Certificates to Victims of the  nuclear power plant disaster
“1.  (delete paragraph 10 from the Resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine No. 501 of 25 August 1992).
Commissions on disputed issues regarding the determination of the status of persons who assisted in dealing with the consequences of the nuclear power plant disaster, created at the Ministry of Chernobyl Affairs ... shall verify the issue of certificates to victims of the Chernobyl nuclear plant disaster on the basis of judicial decisions and shall take action where they find a violation of the procedure for establishing such status.”
Relevant provisions of the Resolution of the Plenary Supreme Court of 31 March 1993 read as follows:
“2.  ... – in accordance with the Law of Ukraine on the Status and Social Security of Victims of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant Disaster and the Resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine of 25 August 1992 on the Procedure for the Issue of Certificates to Victims of the Chernobyl Nuclear Plant Disaster, adopted in accordance with the Law, certificates may be issued on the basis of a court judgment establishing the person's specific participation in any kind of work for a certain period of time (determined by the legislation) related to eliminating the consequences of the disaster and its consequences in the alienation zone, including the evacuation of persons and property from such zones, and/or the works in the acting ambulance stations for decontamination of the population and deactivation of equipment. All other issues concerning the status of the victims of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant disaster shall be determined on the basis of the relevant documentation of the commissions of the executive bodies of the Kyiv and Zhytomyr Regional Municipal Councils, and disputes shall be settled by the commissions of the Executive Committees of Kyiv and Zhytomyr and of the Ministry of Chernobyl Affairs.”