The case originated in an application (no. 45084/14) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovak national, Mr Branislav Adamčo (“the applicant”), on 11 June 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Kuzma, a lawyer practising in Košice. The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his murder trial had been unfair within the meaning of Article 6 of the Convention in that observations by the public prosecution service (“the prosecution service”) in reply to his appeal and appeal on points of law had not been transmitted to him, as a result of which he had been deprived of an opportunity to respond in his defence, and in that his conviction had been based on evidence from a witness who had obtained a benefit for testifying against the applicant.
On 12 July 2017 notice of the above complaints as well as of that concerning the composition of the benches in the applicant’s cases was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1978 and is detained in Leopoldov.
In 2001 the applicant was charged and indicted to stand trial on the charge of being a co-perpetrator of a murder (of a certain K.) within the meaning of Articles 9 § 2 and 219 § 1 of the Criminal Code (Law no. 140/1961 Coll., as applicable at that time – “the CC”), on the suspicion that he had driven a hit man to and from the victim of an organised-crime-related contract killing. Throughout the ensuing proceedings he was at all times represented by one or more lawyers.
The indictment was examined in three rounds by the Banská Bystrica Regional Court as the trial court (“the trial court”) and by the Supreme Court as the appellate court (“the appellate court”).
The applicant was initially acquitted on 14 November 2003 and 21 June 2005, but both judgments were quashed – on 14 September 2004 and 11 July 2006 respectively – following appeals by the prosecution service. A witness, M., gave evidence in the course of these proceedings on five occasions, denying having anything to do with the affair and having any knowledge of it (for more about the status of M., see paragraphs 23 et seq. below).
At a fresh hearing before the trial court on 19 March 2007, M. stated that he had been the driver when K. was killed and he identified the applicant as the hitman.
On 20 March 2007, the prosecution service modified the definition of the act for which the applicant stood indicted and reclassified the offence as aggravated murder.
On 28 June 2007 the Regional Court found the applicant guilty of murder under Article 219 § 2 (h) of the Criminal Code (murder of a witness), having accepted that it had been motivated by retaliation for the evidence the victim had given in another organised-crime-related trial. Finding that the statutory conditions for imposing an extraordinary penalty (výnimočný trest) above the ordinary penalty scale had been met, the Regional Court sentenced the applicant to twenty-four years’ imprisonment.
Both the defence and the prosecution service appealed (odvolanie).
In so far as relevant, the defence proclaimed the applicant’s innocence and contested what they considered to be inconsistencies in the evidence given by M. and certain other witnesses. In addition, they challenged the credibility of M. as a witness, arguing that he had incriminated the applicant purely in order to buy impunity from the prosecution service in connection with the charge of the murder of O. that he was facing in a different trial.
In its appeal, the prosecution service argued that it should have been recognised that the applicant had committed the offence of murder on a number of occasions and that the murder in the present case had been committed by an organised group, within the meaning of Article 219 § 2 (c) and (h) of the CC.
On 29 May 2008 the appellate court invited the prosecution service to comment on the applicant’s appeal, which they did in a submission of 15 August 2008, addressing various legal and evidentiary aspects of the case. The observations are signed by a prosecutor, Š., attached to the Office of the Prosecutor General.
On 7 November 2008 the applicant inspected the court file. According to him, the observations by the prosecution service of 15 August 2008 were not a part of the file at that time and, as he would learn later, they and their attachments were stored separately in an irregular manner. In order to substantiate this contention, he submitted a copy of these observations bearing no case-file number, unlike documents that are included in a court case file in a regular fashion.
On 11 November 2008 the appellate court held a public conference (verejné zasadnutie), at which it determined the appeals. The prosecution service was represented by the prosecutor Š.
The appellate court upheld the applicant’s conviction, but reduced his sentence to fifteen years’ imprisonment, observing that the available evidence provided no basis for imposing an extraordinary penalty above the ordinary penalty scale, the fifteen-year prison term being its upper end.
In so far as the applicant had claimed that his conviction had been mainly based on the evidence from M. and that this evidence had been fallacious, the appellate court dismissed the argument as unfounded, observing that by changing his previous position in the present trial M. had merely incriminated himself, in addition to the applicant, but had obtained no advantage. It noted in particular that the prosecution of M. for the murder of K. had only been suspended. Moreover, the evidence from M. had been corroborated by other incriminating evidence.
On 1 February 2010 the applicant appealed on points of law (dovolanie). He raised a number of objections and argued that his appeal was admissible under Article 371 § 1 (b), (c), (e), (g) and (h) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 301/2005 Coll., as amended). These provisions allowed for an appeal on points of law if, respectively, there had been an error in the composition of the tribunal (b), there had been an important infringement of the rights of the defence (c), there had been bias on the part of a judge or a prosecuting authority (e), the decision had been based on unlawfully obtained evidence (g), and a type of penalty had been imposed which had not been envisaged by statute or the penalty had been outside the applicable penalty scale (h).
In so far as relevant, the applicant contended that there had been irregular modifications to the composition of the formations dealing with his case at the trial level at the appellate level.
In addition, the applicant complained that the submissions of the prosecution service of 15 August 2008 in reply to his appeal had not been communicated to him, and that neither they nor the request by the appellate court for those observations had even been included in the case-file, although – without mentioning them – the appellate court had drawn on them in its judgment.
The applicant also contested his conviction on the grounds that to a decisive degree it had been based on unreliable evidence from M.
The appeal on points of law fell to be examined by the Supreme Court sitting as a cassation-instance court (“the cassation court”).
As the applicant would learn later from the cassation court’s decision on his appeal on points of law, on 11 March 2010 the prosecution service filed observations in reply to it. A copy of them was not transmitted to him. In these observations, the prosecution service briefly addressed all of the grounds of the applicant’s appeal. They considered that the gist of the appeal was the applicant’s discontent with the lower courts’ assessment of evidence and findings of fact, but not points of law, an appeal on points of law only being admissible with regard to the latter. In addition, as to the applicant’s own oral submissions and evidence from some of the witnesses, the prosecution service referred to their arguments in their observations of 15 August 2008 on the applicant’s appeal (see paragraph 13 above).
On 6 May 2011 the applicant made a submission to the cassation court in support of his appeal on points of law, stating specifically that, inter alia, if the prosecution service had made any observations in reply to it, he had not received a copy of them.
On 14 June 2011 the cassation court rejected (odmieta) the applicant’s appeal on points of law, having found that while such an appeal had been available, none of the grounds relied on by the applicant had been established. On the grounds last mentioned, the cassation court referred to Article 382 (c) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which provided for rejection of an appeal on points of law “without examination of the matter” if it was apparent that none of the statutorily recognised grounds for appealing on points of law had been established (for more see also paragraph 26 in “Relevant domestic law” below).
In particular, it considered that his objections as to the composition of the formations dealing with his case were inadmissible because the applicant could have but had failed to raise them before the lower instances. Nevertheless, it held that “the chambers dealing with his case at the courts of lower instances [had been] set up in compliance with the applicable work schedules [rozvrh práce] and [had] proceeded in compliance with statutory rules”.
Moreover, the cassation court observed that it had been in accordance with the applicable rules for the prosecution service to be asked for observations in reply to the applicant’s appeal. It dismissed as unfounded his complaint that a copy of those observations had not been served on him, observing that it had been open to him and his lawyers at all times to inspect the case file and thereby to learn of any facts relevant for the examination of his case.
The cassation court gave no specific answer to the applicant’s argument concerning the witness M. However, it found that the lower courts had adequately established and properly assessed all the relevant facts and had sufficiently refuted the applicant’s defence.
On 3 October 2011 the applicant lodged a complaint under Article 127 of the Constitution with the Constitutional Court. Relying on various components of his right to a fair trial under Article 6 of the Convention and their constitutional equivalents, he advanced the same complaints as those mentioned above in relation to his appeal on points of law. In addition, he contended that he had never received a copy of the observations by the prosecution service in reply to his appeal on points of law and had thereby been deprived of a possibility to respond.
On 23 January 2014 the Constitutional Court declared the complaint inadmissible. As to its relevant part, it cited extensively from the contested decisions finding no constitutionally relevant unlawfulness, arbitrariness or irregularity in them.
In particular, it noted that objections in relation to the composition of the formations dealing with the applicant’s case fell as a general rule within the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts. The applicant’s objection before the Constitutional Court mainly concerned the formation that had tried him at the trial-court level. In that connection, the Constitutional Court noted the cassation court’s finding that the applicant had failed to raise that objection before the lower courts, as a result of which the cassation court had had no jurisdiction to entertain it. The Constitutional Court concluded that, accordingly, it was also prevented from dealing with it.
As to the observations of the prosecution service in reply to the applicant’s appeal, the Constitutional Court noted that both the appeal by the applicant and that of the prosecution service had been examined by the appellate court at a public conference in the course of which the applicant and his two lawyers had extensively used the opportunity to submit any arguments and objections they had deemed appropriate.
As regards the observations of the prosecution service in reply to the applicant’s appeal on points of law, the Constitutional Court found that they contained no important elements of fact or law new in relation to those already known to the applicant and the reliance on which by the prosecution service he could have anticipated.
Accordingly, the Constitutional Court concluded that, in terms of substance, the non-service of those observations on the applicant could not have caused any prejudice to his rights.
Like the court of cassation, the Constitutional Court gave no specific answer to the applicant’s argument about the credibility of the evidence from M.
The Constitutional Court’s decision was served on the applicant on 21 March 2014 and it was not amenable to appeal.
Prior to the change of his testimony in the applicant’s trial (see paragraph 9 above), on 27 October 2005 M. was charged with murder in respect of a different victim (a certain O.) and detained pending trial on that charge. On an unspecified later date, the investigation was closed and on 30 March 2006 he was released.
On the basis of a decision of 30 June 2009, M. was also investigated on suspicion of perjury in connection with having submitted conflicting versions of the applicant’s involvement in the murder of K. However, in a decision of 17 September 2009 the prosecutor Š. annulled the decision to open that investigation as he found it unlawful.
On the basis of the statements he had made in the course of the applicant’s trial, M. was suspected of having participated in the murder of K. himself as the applicant’s accomplice. On 15 February 2006 the prosecution service agreed temporarily to suspend the bringing of charges against him. Charges were brought on 16 December 2009 but on 10 May 2010 the prosecution service terminated the proceedings on the grounds that M. had significantly contributed to the detection of a serious crime committed by an organised group and to the prosecution and conviction of its perpetrators and that, as envisaged by Article 215 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the interests of society in detecting that crime prevailed over its interest in prosecuting M.
Article 382 provides for a rejection of an appeal on points of law “without the examination of the matter” if (a) the appeal is belated, (b) the appeal has been brought by a person who is not eligible to appeal, (c) it is apparent that the grounds for appealing in accordance with Article 371 are not established, (d) ordinary remedies have not been exhausted, (e) the appeal does not meet the formal requirements, or (f) the appeal is directed against a decision that is not open to appeal on points of law.
Pursuant to Article 386, if the cassation court finds any grounds of appeal as envisaged in Article 371 established, it quashes the challenged decision, the relevant part of it or, as the case may be, invalidates the underlying proceedings.
According to section 2 of the Act (Law no. 153/2001 Coll., as amended):
“The prosecution service shall be an autonomous, hierarchically structured and integrated system of State organs headed by the Prosecutor General, in which prosecutors operate in a relationship of subordination and superiority.”