The case originated in an application (no. 32993/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Finnish national, Mr Hannu Juhani Lehtinen (“the applicant”), on 4 September 2002. The applicant died on 30 September 2005. However, his widow, Mrs Terhi Johanna Lehtinen, and his children Ms Oona Liisa Kivimäki, Ms Essi Emelia Kivimäki and Ms Iisa Linnea Kivimäki expressed their wish to pursue the application. For practical reasons Mr Hannu Juhani Lehtinen will continue to be called “the applicant” in this judgment.
The applicant was represented by Mr O. Taurén, a lawyer practising in . The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Arto Kosonen of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged a violation of Article 6 § 1 and 6 § 3 (d) of the Convention on account of the lack of an oral hearing and the refusal to hear his evidence and that of three witnesses.
On 21 May 2007 the President of the Fourth Section of the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1959 and was resident in Siltakylä at the time of his death.
At the material time the applicant was the majority owner of a limited liability company providing bakery and café services. The company is not an applicant before the Court.
In 1999 the Uusimaa Tax Office carried out a tax inspection of the company’s books for the years 1996-1998. The tax inspector interviewed the applicant and three persons who were working, or had worked, for the company: Mr T.L., Ms H.T. and Mr R.L. He drew up an inspection report dated 2 September 1999 and two inspection letters dated 6 September 1999. He found that there were deficiencies in the company’s book-keeping and that it had failed to enter as income part of the retail sales during the tax years 1996, 1997 and 1998. Basing himself on the company’s turnover, books and the remaining cash register printouts, he estimated the amounts at 140,000 Finnish marks (FIM), FIM 100,000 and FIM 130,000 respectively. He considered that the missing sales should be treated as disguised payments of dividends for the purposes of assessing the tax liability of both the company and the applicant and therefore the applicant’s estimated income should be increased by the above amounts.
The Tax Office requested the company to submit its observations regarding the alleged errors in its tax returns for the fiscal years 1996-1998. In its observations of 23 August 1999 the company contested the allegation that certain sales had not been entered in the books. On 24 September 1999 the company and the applicant submitted their joint observations maintaining that all sales had been entered in the books and that the applicant had not received any disguised payments of dividends.
The decisions taken in respect of the applicant’s increased tax liability are mentioned below.
On 10 and 22 November 1999 the Tax Office increased the applicant’s estimated income for the above-mentioned years by FIM 129,000, FIM 90,000 and FIM 130,000 respectively. Following a rectification of the applicant’s tax liability, the amount of the disguised payments of dividends was reduced to FIM 121,000 for 1998. Tax surcharges of FIM 5,000 and FIM 3,000 were imposed on the applicant for the years 1996 and 1997.
Following the applicant’s requests, the Tax Rectification Board, on 31 May and 20 July 2000, partly upheld his claims for reductions. It reduced the disguised payments of dividends to FIM 85,000, FIM 60,000 and FIM 85,000 for the tax years 1996 to 1998. It also reduced the amount of tax surcharges for the years 1996 and 1997 to FIM 4,000 and FIM 2,000 respectively.
The applicant appealed to the Administrative Court, requesting an oral hearing of his evidence and that of witnesses Mr T.L., Ms H.T. and Mr R.L. proving that the company had not made any sales that had not been entered as income and that the applicant had not received any benefits which could be considered disguised payments of dividends.
The Tax Office obtained the observations of the Tax Ombudsman, the written statement of the Tax Office and the applicant’s observations in reply.
On 13 June 2001 the  rejected the request for an oral hearing. It reasoned:
“The  considers that an oral hearing is manifestly unnecessary having regard to the evidence submitted to it and the nature of the case. The case can thus be decided without an oral hearing.”
The court also rejected the appeal, giving the following reasons:
“The amounts of money which the applicant is considered to have received by way of disguised payment of dividends
On the basis of the circumstances observed during the tax inspection, not all the company’s sales have been entered in the books. In estimating the amount of the missing sales, the documents in the tax inspection file show that the Tax Office has already taken into consideration the company’s statement of errors entered in the cash register. In its decisions the Rectification Board partly upheld the company’s claims and reduced the estimated amounts of disguised payments of dividends accordingly.
The applicant was the majority owner of [the company] and, up until 2 December 1998, Chairman of its Board. He worked for the company full time. He counted the contents of the cash register daily and was responsible for sending the money to the bank. In addition, he took care of the company’s purchases, payment of salaries and all money transactions. Therefore, and as there is no suggestion to the contrary, the sales which have not been entered in the books can be considered to have been used by the applicant for his own benefit. As the applicant, for reasons referred to in section 57 of the Taxation Procedure Act, has failed to declare part of the income for the tax years 1996 to 1998, which has consequently not been subject to taxation, the payment of the taxes not claimed has had to be ordered in a reassessment procedure. The increase in the applicant’s income by way of disguised payments of dividends to FIM 85,000, FIM 60,000 and FIM 85,000 respectively for the tax years 1996-1998 cannot be considered too high. As the applicant must be considered to have produced, knowingly or through gross negligence, false tax returns concerning the afore-mentioned years, tax surcharges have also had to be imposed. The tax surcharges concerning 1996 and 1997 cannot be considered excessive. There is no reason to alter the Rectification Board’s decision on the basis of the appeal.”
On 9 August 2001 the applicant requested leave to appeal. Should the  not find it possible to alter the decision, he requested that the case be sent back to the  for an oral hearing. On 8 March 2002 the  refused leave to appeal. It reasoned:
“The applicant’s appeal concerns disguised payments of dividends added to his income by way of reassessment. There is no reason to bring the case before the  in the interests of the application of the law in other similar cases or the uniformity of legal practice. Nor has there been any manifest error in the examination of the case. There are likewise no pressing economic reasons to grant leave to appeal. Since none of the grounds for granting leave to appeal laid down by section 70 of the Taxation Procedure Act applies, the Supreme Administrative Court refuses to grant leave to appeal and therefore will not rule on the applicant’s appeal.”
Section 38(1) of the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act (hallintolainkäyttölaki, förvaltningsprocesslagen; as amended by Act no. 433/1999) provides that an oral hearing must be held if requested by a private party. An oral hearing may, however, be dispensed with if a party’s request is ruled inadmissible or immediately dismissed or if an oral hearing is clearly unnecessary due to the nature of the case or other circumstances.
In this regard, the explanatory report of the Government Bill (no. 217/1995) for the enactment of the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act states that an oral hearing contributes to a focused and immediate procedure but since it does not always bring any added value it is important that the flexibility and cost effectiveness of the administrative procedure is not undermined. An oral hearing is to be held when it is necessary for the clarification of the issues and the hearing can be considered beneficial for the case as whole.
During the period from 2000 to 2006 the  did not hold any oral hearings in tax matters. As to the eight administrative courts, appellants requested an oral hearing in a total of 603 cases. The courts held an oral hearing in 129 cases. There is no information about how many of these taxation cases concerned the imposition of a tax surcharge. During the first six months of 2006, the administrative courts held a total of 20 oral hearings in tax matters.
Witnesses who have been called by a party or the administrative authority that made the decision or the hearing of whom the appellate body considers necessary may be heard in the oral hearing. A party may be heard under oath concerning circumstances of special relevance to the resolution of the matter. Chapter 17, sections 18-39, of the Code of Judicial Procedure (oikeudenkäymiskaari, rättegångsbalken) apply to the hearing of witnesses (section 39 of the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act as amended by Act no. 433/99).
Testimony must be oral. A witness must not refer to a written statement. However, the witness may use written notes as a memory aid (Chapter 17, section 32(1)). A statement that a witness has previously given to the court or to the public prosecutor or the police may be read out in connection with the hearing of the witness only if, in his or her testimony, the witness retracts his or her earlier statement, or explains that he or she cannot or will not testify (section 32(2)).
A written statement of a private nature, a pre-trial investigation record or a statement entered or stored in another document must not be admitted as evidence unless otherwise provided in an Act (Chapter 17, section 11(1), of the Code of Judicial Procedure; Act no. 690/1997). Section 11(2-3) lists exceptions to the prohibition on using written preliminary investigation material. For example, if a witness cannot be questioned in the main hearing or outside the main hearing, the court may allow the pre-trial investigation record or another document or statement to be taken into account in a hearing. The Administrative Judicial Procedure Act contains no restriction on the use of pre-trial investigation material in the consideration of a case.
The said Act provides that the statement of reasons must indicate which facts and evidence have affected the decision and on which legal grounds it is based (section 53).
Section 29 of the Taxation Procedure Act (laki verotusmenettelystä, lagen om beskattningsförfarande; Act no. 1558/1995 as in force for the fiscal years 1996-1998) included provisions on the distribution of disguised payments of dividends and provided that if it was evident that a partnership or some other corporation had paid a sum of money to a shareholder, to the spouse, a child, parent or another relative of a shareholder as a salary, gift salary, partial salary, housing benefit, representation or travel expenses, insurance fee, or a comparable credit considered more than reasonable or if the corporation had paid any one of the persons cited a sum of money as a purchase price, rent, interest, provision or some other expense that was essentially higher or had him or her pay less than the norm, a reasonable tax was imposed on the sum. If a partnership, by buying its shares or by decreasing the value of its share capital, had distributed assets to its shareholders and if it was evident that the distribution of the assets had been carried out for the purpose of evading tax on dividends, the assets distributed were to be regarded in this respect as taxable income to the taxpayer.
Section 32(1) (as in force at the relevant time) provided that if there was a minor deficiency or error in the tax return or some other piece of information or document, and the taxpayer failed to comply with a verifiably sent request to correct the error or if the taxpayer submitted the tax return, piece of information or document too late without proper justification, a maximum tax surcharge of EUR 168.19 could be imposed on the taxpayer. Section 32(2) provided that if a taxpayer submitted a tax return or some other piece of information or document with essential deficiencies or errors or did not submit them until he or she had received a verifiably sent request, a maximum tax surcharge of EUR 840.94 could be imposed on the taxpayer. Section 32(3) provided that if a taxpayer knowingly or through gross negligence submitted an essentially erroneous tax return or some other piece of information or document or did not submit a tax return at all, a tax surcharge of 5 to 30 per cent on the added income and 0.5 to 1 per cent of added assets would be imposed, to a maximum of EUR 840.94, unless there were special reasons not to do so. Such a tax surcharge was also imposed when a taxpayer declared income incorrectly, whether knowingly or through gross negligence.