The case originated in an application (no. 6923/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 30 December 2002 by Mrs Galina Melnic.
The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Vitalie Pârlog.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that her right to a fair hearing was breached as a result of the failure of the Court of Appeal to give any reasons for extending the time-limit for lodging an appeal. She also complained about a violation of her rights under the Convention as a result of the quashing of the judgments in her favour following a request for annulment lodged by the Prosecutor General with the Supreme Court of Justice.
On 29 March 2005 the Court communicated the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits and on the claims for just satisfaction under Article 41 of the Convention.
The Government submitted two unilateral declarations and invited the Court to strike out the application, in accordance with Article 37 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Rezina.
The applicant is the widow of the former President of the Rezina District Court. On 7 June 1998, after the death of her husband, the applicant lodged several requests with the Ministry of Finances (“the Ministry”) and Ministry of Justice, seeking the lump sum to which she was entitled in accordance with the “Law on the Status of Judges”. When she was refused on the ground of lack of resources, the applicant brought an action against the Ministry.
On 2 March 1999 the Buiucani District Court awarded the applicant 345,491 Moldovan lei (MDL, the equivalent of 35,987 euros (EUR) at the time), to which it found she was entitled following the death of her husband. The Ministry appealed. By judgments of 11 May 1999 and 17 August 1999 the  and the Court of Appeal, respectively, dismissed the Ministry’s appeals.
The applicant lodged numerous complaints about the failure of the Ministry to comply with the judgment and pay her compensation. On 13 January 2000 the Ministry paid the compensation.
Since the applicant considered that the late enforcement of the judgment had significantly reduced the value of her compensation due to inflation, she requested the Ministry to make good the diminished value. The Ministry refused to comply with the applicant’s request and she brought an action against it, seeking compensation for the late enforcement.
On 14 September 2001 the Buiucani District Court ruled in favour of the applicant and ordered the Ministry to pay her MDL 244,953 (EUR 21,007 at the time) in compensation. The Ministry appealed.
On 5 February 2002 the  dismissed the Ministry’s appeal and upheld the judgment of 14 September 2001. The judgment of the  stated specifically that the Ministry’s representative had been present and had addressed the court. Since the Ministry did not lodge an appeal in cassation within fifteen days, the judgment of 5 February 2002 became final.
On 8 April 2002, 47 days after the expiry of the legal time-limit for lodging the appeal in cassation, the Ministry lodged an appeal in cassation with the Court of Appeal and requested an extension of the legal time-limit for lodging it, without providing any reasons for the failure to observe it.
On 9 July 2002 the Court of Appeal examined the Ministry’s appeal in cassation. The Court of Appeal requested, ex-officio, a report from the Statistics Department on the level of inflation and relied on it in its judgment. The applicant alleged that she had not been given the possibility either to familiarise herself with the document or to challenge it before the court. The applicant also alleged that she had expressly requested the Court of Appeal to dismiss the Ministry’s appeal in cassation since it had been lodged out of time.
By a judgment of 9 July 2002 the Court of Appeal upheld the Ministry’s appeal in cassation, quashed the judgments in favour of the applicant and reduced the amount of compensation for inflation to MDL 118,848 (EUR 8,766 at the time). The Court of Appeal did not give any reason for accepting the appeal in cassation lodged out of time.
On 16 September 2002 the Prosecutor General lodged with the Supreme Court of Justice a request for annulment of the judgments in favour of the applicant and asked for the reduction of the amount of compensation awarded.
On 9 October 2002 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the Prosecutor General’s request for annulment, quashed the judgments in favour of the applicant and dismissed her claims for compensation.
Section 114. Extension of a time-limit
“Where a person has failed to comply with a legal time-limit for reasons considered by a court to be plausible, that time-limit may be extended by the court.
A request for the extension of the time-limit shall be lodged with the court concerned and shall be examined at a court hearing....
A court judgment dismissing a request for extension of a time-limit may be challenged by way of an appeal.”
Section 284. The extension of the time-limit
Section 305. The time-limit for lodging an appeal in cassation
Section 314. The judgment of the cassation instance and the procedural provisions
Section 316. Irrevocable judgments (Hotărârile irevocabile)