.  The case originated in an application (no. 23257/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Dragoş Fălie (“the applicant”), on 25 May 2004.
.  The applicant was represented by Mr P. I. Vlaic, a lawyer practising in . The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Răzvan-Horaţiu Radu.
.  The applicant alleged that the domestic court of last resort had deprived him of his right of access to the courts by dismissing his civil complaint without deciding on its merits.
.  On 31 August 2008 the application was communicated to the Government.
.  The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in .
.  In 1999 he purchased a house and the land on which it was built, located in . The applicant’s parcel of land was adjacent to a parcel of land purchased by two other third parties in 1948.
.  On 13 November 2001 the applicant lodged a civil action against the two third parties, seeking to obtain the demarcation of the adjacent parcels of land and an order requiring the defendants to return to him an 11 sq. m parcel of land which was allegedly being illegally occupied by them.
.  In a judgment of 4 April 2002 the Bucharest District Court held that the defendants had been illegally occupying a parcel of 10.78 sq. m of the applicant’s land since 1965. It established the boundaries of the properties on the basis of a technical report prepared by an expert and ordered the defendants to return the land in question to the applicant.
.  The defendants lodged an appeal with the Bucharest County Court. The court ordered a new expert report. On 22 May 2003 the court dismissed the appeal as ill-founded endorsing the reasoning of the first-instance court.
.  The defendants lodged an appeal on points of law on the ground that the courts had misinterpreted the facts and the applicable legal provisions.
.  In a final decision of 26 November 2003 the Bucharest Court of Appeal allowed the appeal on points of law, quashed the decisions of the first two courts and dismissed the applicant’s action. It held that both the applicant and the defendants had in their possession smaller areas of land than those mentioned in their respective contracts of acquisition, and invited the parties to reach a friendly settlement. It also held that the parties could bring a fresh action only if they could not reach an agreement.
.  The Civil Code in force at the material time did not provide any definition of an action to demarcate land. Civil actions of this kind are a creation of the doctrine and case­law. At the time the applicant lodged his action with the domestic court, the Civil Code contained an Article concerning the right of landowners to seek an order requiring the owners of adjacent plots of land to contribute to the demarcation of their land.
“Any landowner may oblige the owner of an adjacent plot of land to contribute to the demarcation of their land; the related expenses should be shared equally.”
.  The relevant provisions of Law no. 36/1995 read as follows:
“Notarial deeds containing manifest errors or omissions may be corrected or completed by a public notary at the request of the parties or on the notary’s own initiative with the agreement of the parties ...”