The case originated in an application (no. 17868/07) against the Republic of Bulgaria, lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Kostadin Georgiev Mihaylov, a Bulgarian national who was born in 1922 and lives in  (“the applicant”), on 27 March 2007.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Stefanova and Mr M. Ekimdzhiev, lawyers practising in . The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kotseva, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that, by delivering two contradictory rulings on who was the proper defendant to an action which he had filed against the authorities, the courts had prevented him from having the merits of his case adjudicated and had thus barred him from effectively asserting his claim.
On 7 June 2007 the Court decided to give priority to the application under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court and to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
In 2001 the applicant became fully blind in both eyes because of glaucoma.
On 7 January 2002 he asked the Labour-Expert Medical Commission specialising in eye diseases in  (“the LEMC”) to certify him as a disabled person.
In a decision of 5 September 2002 the LEMC found that as a result of his illness the applicant was completely incapable of seeing with either eye and had thus 100% lost his ability to work for the rest of his life. It determined that the start date of the disability was 12 December 2001, the date on which he had first been examined by a medical commission specialising in eye diseases.
On 11 September 2002 the applicant applied to the Regional Department of Social Security in  for a disability pension and an attendance allowance.
In a decision of 1 October 2002 the head of the pensions division of the Regional Department of Social Security in  set the amount of the applicant’s disability pension and his attendance allowance, setting the start date as 11 September 2002, the date of the applicant’s application.
The applicant appealed, arguing that the start date should have been set as 12 December 2001, when his disability had first been conclusively determined. In a decision of 28 January 2003 the director of the Regional Department of Social Security in  dismissed the appeal. He found that the LEMC had determined the start date of the applicant’s disability as 12 December 2001. The applicant had applied for a pension on 11 September 2002, that is, more than six months after the accrual of his right, whereas under Article 94 of the Social Security Code of 1999 (see paragraph 29 below) pensions were granted from the date of accrual of the right to a pension, but only if the person concerned had applied within six months of that date. If this timelimit was missed the pension was granted from the date of application, which in the instant case was 11 September 2002.
The applicant sought judicial review, arguing, inter alia, that the missing of the six-month time-limit had not been his fault, but a result of the slow pace at which the LEMC had processed his case. In a judgment of 22 July 2003 the  quashed the director’s decision, agreeing that the applicant’s failure to comply with the timelimit had not been due to his oversight, but to the fact that he had only obtained the decision of the LEMC after that timelimit had expired.
The Regional Department of Social Security in  appealed on points of law to the . In a final judgment of 9 August 2004 the  upheld the lower court’s judgment, fully agreeing with its reasoning.
On 22 March 2005 the applicant brought an action against the National Social Security Institute. He relied on section 1 of the State Responsibility for Damage Act of 1988 (see paragraph 24 below) and sought 2,000 Bulgarian levs (BGN) in non-pecuniary damages for the frustration he had experienced as a result of the unlawful decisions of the social security authorities.
In a judgment of 1 July 2005 the Plovdiv District Court awarded the applicant BGN 500 in non-pecuniary damages. It held, inter alia, that the action had been properly brought against the National Social Security Institute, which was the authority responsible for social security matters.
Both the applicant and the National Social Security Institute appealed. The National Social Security Institute argued, inter alia, that it was not the proper defendant in the case.
In a final judgment of 28 October 2005 the  quashed the lower court’s judgment and dismissed the action. It noted that, according to the National Social Security Institute’s internal rules, it had territorial subdivisions – the Regional Departments of Social Security, which had their own bank accounts and balance sheets. The unlawful decision from which the applicant’s alleged damage arose had been made by the head of a territorial subdivision of the Institute. Therefore, the proper defendant was not the Institute, but its Regional Department. The court ordered the applicant to pay BGN 80 in court fees.
On 11 October 2006 the applicant brought an identical action, but this time, in line with the ’s holding (see paragraph 16 above), named as a defendant the Regional Department of Social Security in .
In a decision of 24 October 2006 the Plovdiv District Court declared the action inadmissible. It found that the National Social Security Institute was a legal person and that the Regional Department of Social Security in  was only one of its subdivisions. It noted that according to interpretative decision no. 3 of 2004 of the Supreme Court of Cassation (see paragraph 26 below), claims under section 1 of the State Responsibility for Damage Act of 1988 had to be brought against those authorities which had a legal personality, not against their territorial departments or subdivisions having no legal personality. The Regional Department of Social Security in  did not have such a personality. The interpretative decision was binding on all courts, but had apparently been disregarded by the  in the previous proceedings. The court further stated that, despite the evident injustice created by the combination of its ruling and the earlier ruling of the , it could not continue examining an action against an improper defendant and was bound to discontinue the proceedings.
The applicant appealed. He said that the decision had infringed his right of access to a court and explained that he had been forced to bring an action against the Regional Department of Social Security in Plovdiv only because the Plovdiv Regional Court had stated that it, and not the National Social Security Institute, was the proper defendant to actions under section 1 of the State Responsibility for Damage Act of 1988.
In a decision of 27 November 2006 the , sitting in a different formation from the one in the first proceedings, dismissed the appeal. It also held that the proper defendant was the National Social Security Institute, which was a legal person, and not the Regional Department of Social Security in , which was merely one of its territorial subdivisions. The fact that the Regional Department had its own bank account and balance sheet did not alter this conclusion. The court referred to the Supreme Court of Cassation’s interpretative decision no. 3 of 2004 (see paragraph 26 below). It went on to state that the situation was indeed unfair and that the applicant was in an impasse, created, on the one hand, by the fact that the interpretative decision was mandatory and, on the other hand, by the fact that its prior judgment had dismissed the action against the National Social Security Institute. Unfortunately, the court was not in a position to resolve that impasse.
The applicant appealed on points of law to the Supreme Court of Cassation. He reiterated his arguments regarding access to a court.
In a final decision of 10 January 2007 the Supreme Court of Cassation upheld the lower court’s decision with almost identical reasoning.
Article 7 of the Constitution of 1991 provides as follows:
“The State shall be liable for damage caused by the unlawful decisions or actions of its organs and agents.”
Section 1(1) of the State Responsibility for Damage Caused to Citizens Act of 1988 („Закон за отговорността на държавата за вреди, причинени на граждани“ – this was the original title; on 12 July 2006 it was changed to the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act, „Закон за отговорността на държавата и общините за вреди“), as in force at the material time, provided that the State was liable for damage suffered by private persons as a result of unlawful decisions, actions or omissions by civil servants, committed in the course of or in connection with the performance of their duties. Section 1(2), as in force at the material time, provided that compensation for damage arising from unlawful decisions could be claimed after the decisions concerned had been annulled in prior proceedings.
Section 7 of the Act provides that an action for compensation has to be brought against the authorities whose unlawful decisions, actions or omissions have caused the damage.
In that interpretative decision (тълк. реш. № 3 от 22 април 2004 г. на ВКС по тълк.д. № 3/2004 г., ОСГК), made on 22 April 2004 pursuant to the proposal of the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Plenary Meeting of the Civil Chambers of that court resolved a number of contentious issues relating to the construction of various provisions of the State Responsibility for Damage Act of 1988. In particular, it noted that, according to section 7 of the Act, actions for compensation had to be directed against the authorities whose unlawful decisions, actions or omissions had caused the damage (see paragraph 25 above). It held that the proper defendants to these actions were those authorities which had legal personality, not their territorial subdivisions or departments that did not have such a personality.
In accordance with section 86 § 2 of the Judicial Power Act of 1994 („Закон за съдебната власт“), interpretative decisions are binding on the judiciary and the executive branch.
Under Article 33 § 1 of that Code, state social security is managed by the National Social Security Institute. Article 33 § 2 provides that the Institute is a legal person having its seat in  and that it establishes territorial subdivisions.
Article 94 § 1 of that Code provides that pensions are granted from the date when the right to a pension has accrued, provided that the application for a pension has been made not later than six months after the accrual of the right. If the application has been made after the expiry of that timelimit, the pension is granted from the date when the application has been made.
A new paragraph 2 was added to Article 94, with effect from 1 January 2005. It provides that if the persons concerned have made their applications for a disability pension not later than one month after the entry into force of the decision of the LEMC, the pension is granted from the date when they requested the LEMC to certify them as disabled persons.