The case originated in an application (no. 48978/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Rinat Taymurazovich Gobayev (“the applicant”), on 14 July 2011.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 17 December 2015 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Beslan, in the Republic of North Ossetia-Alania.
He provided legal services to the municipal unitary enterprise, MUP Beslanskiye Elektricheskie Seti (Power Supply Networks of Beslan – “the debtor company”) but the company failed to pay for his services.
The debtor company was set up in 2006 in accordance with a decision of the head of the administration of the Pravoberezhnyy District of the Republic of North Ossetia-Alania (“the district administration”). According to section 1.5 of the debtor company’s articles of association, the district administration was the founder of the debtor company and the owner of its assets.
According to section 2 of its articles of association, the debtor company’s main objectives were to provide a secure electricity supply to consumers, to make a profit, and to improve the quality of the services provided to consumers in Beslan. To achieve those objectives, the company was to perform the following activities: (a) securing the electricity supply to the local population; (b) the construction, installation and reconstruction of electrical equipment; (c) the “improvement of financial and economic relations”, including, for instance, concluding and performing electricity supply agreements, undertaking cost-saving efforts and seeking a growth in profit; and (d) other activities not prohibited by law. In order to carry out those activities, the company had “a right of economic control” (право хозяйственного ведения) over assets allocated to it by the district administration (for further details on the right of economic control, see Liseytseva and Maslov v. Russia, nos. 39483/05 and 40527/10, §§ 55-75, 9 October 2014).
On 30 January 2007 the Assembly of Representatives of the Pravoberezhnyy District recommended that the district administration “approve a lease of the assets allocated to the debtor company”. No further details were contained in the copy of the recommendation supplied to the Court.
By Decree no. 64 of 16 February 2007 the district administration (a) approved the conclusion of a lease agreement between the debtor company and a limited liability company, O.-E. (“the OOO”); and (b) ordered the director of the debtor company to lease the assets under the company’s economic control to the OOO, for a period of forty-nine years.
On 1 October 2007 the debtor company and the OOO concluded the lease agreement. The debtor company undertook to transfer its fixed assets to the OOO, with the aim of providing an uninterrupted electricity supply to consumers in Beslan, and ensuring the modernisation and due maintenance of the networks. The OOO undertook to accept the assets, to use them solely in accordance with their designated purpose, to ensure they were maintained and to pay the rent.
Pursuant to a detailed transfer and acceptance instrument of 1 October 2007, compiled “in accordance with the decision of the district administration”, in October 2007 the assets under the debtor company’s economic control – namely vehicles, several electric transformers and dozens of overhead power lines – were transferred to the OOO.
The agreement and the transfer and acceptance instrument were approved by the head of the district administration. The agreement was stated to be subject to State registration (at clause 11.6). According to the applicant, the agreement had never been registered.
It appears that the OOO failed to pay the rent.
On 12 August 2010 the OOO advised the bailiffs sevice, in reply to its request within enforcement proceedings (see below), that the OOO did not consider itself bound by the debt towards the debtor company for the following reason. The founder of the debtor company, the district administration, was also the founder of two other municipal unitary enterprises which had accumulated considerable debts towards the OOO. However, those enterprises had evaded payment, as the founder had liquidated them despite the existing debts to the OOO.
It appears that no insolvency proceedings have been initiated in respect of the debtor company, and that it has continued to operate to date.
On 4 February 2009 the Pravoberezhnyy District Court of the Republic of North Ossetia-Alania (“the district court”) ordered the debtor company to pay the applicant 217,938 Russian roubles (RUB) in respect of unpaid legal fees and interest. The judgment became final on 16 February 2009.
On 17 April 2009 the district court ordered the debtor company to pay the applicant RUB 487,653 in respect of unpaid legal fees, interest and costs. No appeal was lodged against the judgment, which became final ten days later.
Enforcement proceedings were brought in respect of the two judgments on 7 April and 12 May 2009, respectively.
On 24 August 2009 the bailiffs service of the Pravoberezhnyy District informed the applicant that the debtor company had not conducted any economic activity, as the entirety of its assets had been leased to the OOO (see paragraph 9 above).
On 19 May 2010 the district bailiffs service joined all enforcement proceedings against the debtor company, including those arising from the judgments in the applicant’s favour, into a single, joint enforcement procedure. Among the company’s other creditors were pension and tax authorities and a private company.
In September 2010 the joint enforcement proceedings were assigned to the Inter-District Department on Special Enforcement Proceedings of the Bailiffs Service of North Ossetia-Alania.
According to the Government, on 13 May 2013 the district court granted the bailiffs’ request and ordered unspecified means of transportation owned by the district administration to be seized and allocated to the debtor company under the right of economic control.
On 14 March 2014 the bailiff discontinued the enforcement proceedings and returned the writs of execution to the applicant, as it was impossible to execute the awards (section 46(1)(4) of the Enforcement Act). The bailiff established that the debtor did not have any assets upon which execution could be levied, and all possible lawful measures taken by the bailiffs to identify any such assets had produced no results.
According to the Government’s latest submissions of 8 September 2016, on 1 October 2014 the bailiffs service opened a new set of enforcement proceedings in respect of the judgments in the applicant’s favour. The bailiffs could not identify any property or accounts registered to the debtor company. In October 2014 the bailiff issued the debtor company with an attachment order in respect of unspecified property, as well as a warning about criminal liability for the failure to comply with the domestic judgment. According to the Federal Bailiffs Service’s submissions to the Government, on 3 February 2015 a bailiff seized “property of the debtor organisation”, identified in the submissions as the “electricity supply to the refugee settlement of Tsalyk”, with an estimated market value of RUB 1,674,700.
In May 2015 the property in Tsalyk was referred for sale but in June 2015 the State Assets Authority of North Ossetia-Alania returned the accompanying documents “for modification”, as the debtor company’s title to the seized property had not been registered.
At a later stage the district administration informed the bailiffs that the above assets were unregistered. Therefore, on 15 August 2016 the bailiff filed an application for State registration of “a building” in the refugee settlement in Tsalyk.
The parties did not submit any updated information about any progress in the enforcement proceedings. In particular, they did not specify whether the applicant’s claims had been satisfied from any proceeds of the sale of any identified assets.
In his observations and claims for just satisfaction of 10 June 2016, the applicant provided the following information about the developments in his case.
On 21 July 2014 the district court adjusted the award of 4 February 2009 on account of inflation and ordered the debtor company to pay the applicant a further RUB 81,000.50 in addition to the initial unenforced award – that is, a total of RUB 298,938.50.
On 27 April 2016 the district court further index-linked both the initial judgment debt of 4 February 2009 and the further amount awarded on 21 July 2014, accordingly increasing the total amount the debtor company was to pay the applicant to RUB 363,695.
No appeals were lodged against the awards, nor have they been paid.
On 21 July 2014 the district court, by a separate decision, indexlinked the award of 17 April 2009 in line with inflation and ordered the debtor company to pay the applicant RUB 181,243.50 in addition to the initial unenforced award – that is, a total of RUB 668,896.50.
On 27 April 2016 the district court, by a separate decision, further index-linked both the initial judgment debt of 4 February 2009 and the amount awarded on 21 July 2014 in line with inflation and accordingly increased the total amount owed by the debtor company to the applicant to RUB 813,794.
No appeals were lodged against the awards, nor have they been paid.
On 8 December 2014 the district court awarded the applicant RUB 335,229 in default interest in respect of the judgments of 4 February and 17 April 2009 and the two index-linking decisions of 21 July 2014, for the period until 1 November 2014 (see paragraphs 29 and 32 above).
The court observed that a notification of the hearing had been sent to the debtor company’s only address, but the court had received “information that there [was] no such organisation”. However, the court also noted that both the State Register of Legal Entities and a letter of 20 November 2014 from the district administration confirmed that the debtor company’s address was correct and up to date.
On 27 April 2016 the district court index-linked the above award in line with inflation and increased it to RUB 384,396.
On 19 April 2016 the district court awarded the applicant RUB 147,652 in default interest for the period between 1 November 2014 and 1 March 2016 in respect of the judgments of 4 February and 17 April 2009, 8 December 2014 (see paragraph 35 above) and the two index-linking decisions of 21 July 2014 (see paragraphs 29 and 32 above).
No appeals were lodged against any of those awards by the debtor company, nor were the awards honoured.
On 30 January 2004 the Government of North Ossetia transferred the power supply network in Tsalyk to the district administration, in order to provide a power supply to a refugee camp. On 10 November 2005 the district administration accepted the above assets on its balance sheet.
On 9 April 2008 the North Ossetia Department of the Federal Service for Environmental and Technological Oversight (“the Rostekhnadzor”) conducted an inspection of the power network in response to numerous complaints by the inhabitants of the Tsalyk refugee camp about numerous power cuts. The Rostekhnadzor established that the relevant facilities were intended to be transferred from the district administration’s balance sheet to the debtor company’s. However, the transfer had not taken place.
According to a judgment of 18 May 2016 by the Commercial Court of the Republic of North Ossetia-Alaniya (case no. A61-4006/2015) given in unrelated proceedings involving the district administration, the latter was the factual owner of the relevant power supply network, and there was no evidence of any other person’s title to the assets.
The enforcement of court awards and more generally debt claims against insolvent or presumably insolvent debtor legal entities are regulated by the Insolvency Act of 26 October 2002 (Law no. 127-FZ). Section 3 of the Insolvency Act, as in force at the material time, defined the state of bankruptcy of a legal entity as follows:
“A legal entity is regarded as being unable to satisfy the claims of creditors in respect of pecuniary obligations and (or) to fulfil its obligations in respect of mandatory payments if the respective obligations and (or) obligation are not complied with within three months of the date on which compliance should have occurred.”
Insolvency proceedings in respect of a legal entity could only be instituted by a court if the overall amount of debt claims exceeded RUB 100,000 (section 6 of the Insolvency Act). Whilst the executive body of the debtor had the right to file for bankruptcy in circumstances where it was obvious that the debtor would have been unable to fulfil its obligation in due time (section 8 of the Insolvency Act), it had a legal duty to do so if the forced seizure of the debtor’s property in satisfaction of a claim would have made the debtor’s economic activity extremely difficult or impossible (section 9 of the Insolvency Act).
If any indicators of bankruptcy as established by section 3 of the Insolvency Act materialised, the head of the debtor company was required to inform the owner of the unitary enterprise’s assets thereof. The owner of the unitary enterprise’s assets had to take timely measures to prevent the insolvency of the legal entity (section 30 of the Insolvency Act).
The owner of the property under the economic control of a unitary enterprise defines the purpose and aims of the company. The owner oversees the use of the property assigned to the company in conformity with its stipulated purpose and the maintenance of that property (Article 295 of the Civil Code).
The State or municipal unitary enterprise may dispose of assets only in a manner which does not prevent it from carrying out its activities in accordance with its statutory purpose and aims. Transactions made in violation of this requirement must be declared void (section 18(3) of the State Unitary Enterprises Act).
As clarified by paragraph 10 of Ruling no. 10/22 of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia adopted at the Plenary session of 29 April 2010, transactions of the type mentioned above must be declared void irrespective of whether the owner consented to them.
By Ruling no. 6/8 of 1 July 1996 the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia reiterated that the owner’s rights in respect of the assets allocated to a state or municipal unitary company under the right of economic control were listed in Article 295 § 2 of the Civil Code and emphasised that the owner was not entitled to seize, lease or otherwise dispose of such assets. Acts of disposal by the State and local authorities of the assets allocated to the unitary enterprise under its economic control had to be declared invalid pursuant to a claim by the respective enterprise (paragraph 40 of the Ruling). According to Ruling no. 10/22 of 29 April 2010 (cited in paragraph 48 above), the owner cannot dispose of such assets irrespective of the consent of the enterprise (paragraph 5 of the Ruling).
The company’s financial documents are subject to a compulsory annual audit and must be forwarded to the competent State and municipal authorities (section 26 of the Unitary Enterprises Act). The owner sets the company’s economic performance targets and oversees its achievement of those targets (section 20 of the Act).
Other relevant domestic provisions and case-law governing unitary enterprises with the right of economic control are summarised in Liseytseva and Maslov (cited above, §§ 54-127), and Samsonov v. Russia ((dec.), no. 2880/10, 16 September 2014).