The case originated in two applications (nos. 32541/08 and 43441/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Aleksandr Sergeyevich Svinarenko and Mr Valentin Alekseyevich Slyadnev (“the applicants”), on 5 May 2008 and 2 July 2008 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr V.G. Palchinskiy and Mr Ye.F. Plotnikov respectively, lawyers practising in Magadan. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their placement in a metal cage in the courtroom had been contrary to Article 3 of the Convention and that the length of the criminal proceedings against them had been excessive.
On 23 October 2008 the applications were communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicants were born in 1968 and 1970 respectively and live in the settlement of Sinegorye in the Yagodninskiy District of the Magadan Region.
In 2002 the Far Eastern Federal Circuit Investigation Department of the Investigation Committee at the Ministry of the Interior brought a number of sets of criminal proceedings against a Mr Grishin.
On 24 September 2002 the first applicant was questioned as one of the suspects in those proceedings. On 9 October 2002 he was arrested. In a decision of 12 November 2002 ordering his detention on remand, the Magadan Town Court noted that the crimes he was charged with had been committed during a three-year probation period under a judgment of the Magadan Region Yagodninskiy District Court of 13 April 2001 convicting him of theft and imposing on him a conditional sentence of five years’ imprisonment. It also noted that he had negative references from his place of residence and that he had breached his undertaking to appear before the investigating authority. According to the final charges against the first applicant, he was accused of robbery with violence against Mr A.S. and Mrs T.S. in September 2002 as a member of a gang led by Mr Grishin, and of the illegal acquisition, storage, transportation and carrying of ammunition.
On 20 January 2003 the second applicant, who was serving a sentence of imprisonment after his conviction by the Magadan Region Yagodninskiy District Court on 26 July 2002 for negligent infliction of death under Article 109 § 1 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation (“the CC”), was questioned as one of the suspects in the proceedings brought against Mr Grishin. On 22 January 2003 he was charged with the following crimes:
(i)  establishing an armed gang under Mr Grishin’s leadership and participating in the gang’s attacks on citizens from October 2001 to September 2002 – under Article 209 § 1 of the CC;
(ii)  the robbery in October 2001 of Mr V.B., the director of a private goldrefining company, with the use of weapons and violence endangering life and health and a threat to use such violence, by an organised group, with the aim of misappropriating another’s property of substantial value – under Article 162 § 3 of the CC;
(iii)  illegal storage and transportation of precious metals (industrial gold stolen from Mr V.B.) of substantial value by an organised group in October 2001 – under Article 191 § 2 of the CC;
(iv)  extortion (from Mr V.B.) in October 2001 with the aim of obtaining a right to property under the threat of the use of violence, repeatedly, by an organised group – under Article 163 § 3 of the CC;
(v)  the robbery of Mr Ya.B. in October 2001 with the use of weapons and violence endangering life and health and the threat to use such violence, by a group of persons according to a premeditated plan, repeatedly, by means of illegal entry into a dwelling with the aim of misappropriating another’s property of substantial value – under Article 162 § 3 of the CC; and
(vi)  illegal acquisition, storage, transfer, transportation and carrying of firearms, repeatedly, by an organised group in October 2001 – under Article 222 § 3 of the CC.
On 11 April 2003 the Magadan Region Khasynskiy District Court found the second applicant to be eligible, in view of his orderly behaviour and positive references, for early conditional release one year and three months ahead of the term of two years and three months to which he had been sentenced under the Yagodninskiy District Court’s judgment of 26 July 2002.
On 24 April 2003 the  ordered the second applicant’s remand in custody pending the current criminal proceedings against him. It noted, inter alia, that he was accused of grave crimes which had been committed during a three-year probation period under the Yagodninskiy District Court’s judgment of 15 June 2001 convicting him of hooliganism and infliction of bodily harm and sentencing him conditionally to four years’ imprisonment.
On 20 May 2003 the investigation was completed and the defence received access to the case file.
On 13 August 2003 the  found that the second applicant had been deliberately delaying the examination of the case file and set a time-limit for the examination at 5 September 2003.
On 19 September 2003 the case was sent for trial to the Magadan Regional Court, which scheduled for 2 October 2003 and held from 16 October to 26 December 2003 a preliminary hearing to decide on numerous requests by the applicants and their two co-defendants concerning the admissibility of the evidence and other procedural issues, as well as to prepare the jury trial requested by the defendants. During this period the hearing was postponed for about four weeks at the co-defendants’ request.
As a result of the preliminary hearing, on 26 December 2003 the  ordered that the case be examined at an open hearing by a jury on 23 January 2004. On that day fewer than twenty candidate jurors appeared before the court instead of the fifty invited and the court, therefore, ordered that another 100 candidate jurors be summoned.
On 13 February 2004 a jury was formed and the jurors were sworn in.
The  held about thirty court sessions, during which it decided various procedural issues, such as the replacement of some jurors, the exclusion or examination of certain evidence and the ordering of expert opinions. It examined the evidence, including the testimony of the victims, witnesses and experts, and heard the defendants. The hearing was adjourned for two weeks as one of the defence lawyers could not attend.
On 15 June 2004 the prosecution amended one of the robbery charges against the second applicant (concerning Mr Ya.B.) to the milder charge of “arbitrary unlawful acts with the use of violence”, under Article 330 § 2 of the CC.
On 22 June 2004 the jury found the applicants not guilty. They were released in the courtroom. On 29 June 2004 the  delivered a judgment in which they were acquitted and their right to rehabilitation was acknowledged.
The co-defendants and the prosecution appealed against the trial court’s judgment. On 7 December 2004 the Supreme Court examined the case on appeal and quashed the judgment on the grounds, inter alia, that some of the jurors had concealed information about their family members’ criminal records although they had been obliged to disclose such information to the parties and the court at the time of their selection, and that the presiding judge had failed to sum up all the evidence in his directions to the jury, in particular the victims’ and witnesses’ statements. It remitted the case to the  for fresh examination.
On 21 December 2004 the  received the case file. It adjourned its hearing twice, on 31 January and 7 February 2005, as the second applicant’s lawyer had failed to appear.
In a decision of 8 February 2005 the  imposed on the defendants an undertaking not to leave their place of residence without its authorisation, to appear before it when summoned, and not to obstruct the proceedings.
The Regional Court’s decision of the same date to remit the case to the Magadan Regional Prosecutor for the rectification of errors in the indictment was appealed against by the defence and quashed as erroneous by the Supreme Court on 26 April 2005.
The hearing before the  was adjourned on 17 June 2005 as a result of the first applicant’s and a co-defendant’s failure to appear, for unknown reasons. It was adjourned again on 21 June 2005 owing to a co-defendant’s hospitalisation and the impossibility of examining the case in respect of the others in separate proceedings.
The hearing resumed on 22 November 2005. On that day, however, fewer than twenty candidate jurors appeared before the court instead of the thirty invited and the court, therefore, ordered that another 100 candidate jurors be summoned.
On 6 December 2005 the  ordered that the applicants and the other two defendants be detained on remand. It noted the applicants’ previous convictions, the serious charges against them, and the fact that during the preliminary investigation and the current trial some of the witnesses had expressed fears of unlawful behaviour by the defendants. In its decision it did not give any details concerning the fears referred to, or the names of the defendants concerned. The first applicant’s appeal against the detention order, in which he argued, inter alia, that the witnesses’ fears did not relate to him, was dismissed. The applicants’ detention was subsequently extended for similar reasons.
On 9 December 2005 the jury was formed and the court held hearings on 12, 20 and 23 December 2005. On the last-mentioned date one of the co-defendants was granted leave to retain a new lawyer. On 27 December his new lawyer failed to appear and the hearing was adjourned until 10 January 2006, 1-9 January being non-working days. The  continued the examination of the case in January. It ruled on numerous procedural requests by the defence, in particular, challenges to the presiding judge and the prosecutor.
As the witnesses and victims who lived in Sinegorye had failed to appear at the hearings several times, on 17 January the court ordered them to be brought before it by force. The hearing was adjourned on 20 January until 27 January and on 26 February until 10 March 2006 pending the execution of that order.
The examination of the case continued in February, March, April and May 2006. During this time the hearing was adjourned on a number of occasions for about four weeks in total at the request of jurors who could not participate, and for about a week at the request of one of the defence lawyers, who was ill. On 2 June 2006 the presiding judge declared the examination of the evidence closed. In five sessions in June 2006 the  heard the parties’ pleadings. It announced a break from 14 July until 3 October 2006 in view of the fact that several jurors were leaving for summer holidays in central .
The hearing resumed on 3 October 2006. Having consulted the parties, the court decided that they would repeat their pleadings. They did so on 6, 12 and 19 October and 2 November 2006. The preparation of questions to be put to the jury followed. The jury delivered its verdict on 17 November 2006. The first applicant was found not guilty and was released in the courtroom.
On 5 December 2006, after an examination of the legal issues during the sessions held in November and December, the  delivered its judgment. The first applicant was acquitted and his right to rehabilitation was acknowledged. The second applicant was convicted of extortion (from Mr V.B.), and arbitrary unlawful acts with the use of violence (in respect of Mr Ya.B.), and was sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment, which took into account his 2001 conviction, in respect of which the conditional sentence was revoked, and acquitted on the remaining charges. His detention on remand was to continue until the judgment took effect.
On 6 June 2007 the Supreme Court examined the appeals against the judgment lodged by Mr Grishin, one of the victims and the prosecution. It found a violation of the rules pertaining to a criminal trial by the defendants and their lawyers, who had abused their rights and, despite the presiding judge’s warnings, discussed, in the jurors’ presence, issues which fell outside the scope of their competence, such as the alleged falsification of evidence, alleged violations of the law when obtaining evidence, for example, by the torturing one of the defendants, and the allegation that a certain victim had given statements on the investigators’ instructions. They had made remarks which did not concern the issues to be decided by the jury and which had been aimed at discrediting the evidence against them, thus creating a negative impression of the victims and the presiding judge, and a positive one of themselves. This was held to have unlawfully influenced the jury’s verdict. It was also noted that the jury’s verdict had not been entirely clear as some of the answers had been contradictory. The Supreme Court quashed the judgment and remitted the case to the  for fresh examination. It also ordered that the second applicant should remain in custody.
In August 2007 the first applicant was detained on remand in connection with another set of criminal proceedings brought against him on suspicion of extortion allegedly committed in 2002.
On 4 September 2007 the  received the case file and opened the proceedings. On 5 October 2007 fewer than twenty candidate jurors appeared before the  instead of the 100 invited and the court, therefore, ordered that another 150 candidate jurors be summoned.
On 2 November 2007 the selection of the jurors began. However, after a number of candidate jurors refused sit in the case, their number was still insufficient and the court ordered that another 150 candidate jurors be summoned. The same situation occurred on 22 November 2007.
The number of candidate jurors who appeared before the Regional Court was again insufficient on 11 December 2007 and 17 January 2008, which necessitated the summoning of an additional 200 and 250 persons respectively.
The jury was formed on 5 February 2008 and the trial commenced. The court held five or six sessions monthly from February to June 2008, two sessions in July, four in August (after a break for jurors’ holidays from 1 July to 18 August), eleven in September, six in October, ten in November and four in December 2008. Some of the sessions were held without the jury as they concerned various procedural issues, including the admissibility of evidence and requests for the examination of the evidence before the jury. The court examined the vast body of evidence, including the testimony of more than seventy victims and witnesses, and numerous expert reports.
For about a month the trial was delayed because Mr Grishin was ill. Some delay was due to difficulties in ensuring the appearance of a number of the victims and witnesses, who resided in remote settlements in Burkhala and Sinegorye or had moved to the central and other parts of the country.
On 13 February 2009 the  started hearing the parties’ pleadings.
On 7 March 2009 the jury returned a not guilty verdict in respect of the first applicant. It found the second applicant guilty of arbitrary unlawful acts and not guilty of the remaining charges.
On 12 March 2009 the  ordered the second applicant’s release on an undertaking not to leave his place of residence and that he would behave in a law-abiding manner.
On 19 March 2009 it delivered its judgment, acquitting the first applicant and finding as follows in respect of the second applicant:
On 11 October 2001 Grishin, Slyadnev and N.G., against whom the criminal proceedings were terminated owing to his death, had requested Ya.B. to repay a debt in the amount of 100,000 Russian roubles (RUB). Following his refusal, Grishin and N.G. had beaten him up. Slyadnev had beaten up S.K., who had witnessed Ya.B.’s beating. They had then taken Ya.B. to his home and Grishin had taken money from him in the amount of RUB 247,000.
The Regional Court considered that, given the gravity of the acts committed by Mr Grishin and the second applicant, as well as the specific circumstances, which characterised the crimes committed by them as brazen attacks on citizens using violence, threats and weapons, the deprivation of their liberty was the only proper punishment for each of them. The Regional Court convicted the second applicant under Article 330 § 2 of the CC for arbitrary unlawful acts with the use of violence, sentenced him to two years and ten months’ imprisonment, revoked the conditional sentence under his 2001 conviction as the new crime had been committed during the probation period, and, after adding the revoked conditional sentence, sentenced him to a total of four years and five months’ imprisonment, discharged him from serving the sentence in the part relating to the conviction under Article 330 § 2 as criminal liability had become time-barred, and found that he had served his sentence in the remaining part in view of his detention on remand from 24 April 2003 to 22 June 2004 and from 6 December 2005 to 12 March 2009, which amounted to four years, five months and six days in total. It acquitted him of the remaining charges.
On 23 July 2009 the Supreme Court dismissed an appeal by Mr Grishin and the prosecution and upheld the judgment.
During the applicants’ detention on remand they were taken to the  from their detention facility by police guards. During the hearings they sat on a bench enclosed on four sides by a metal railing. The enclosure was 255 centimetres long, 150 centimetres wide and 225 centimetres high, with a doorway. The distance between the railing rods, which were 10 millimetres in diameter, was 19 centimetres.
According to the first applicant’s additional information, armed policemen were on guard near the caged dock. There were always two policemen per each detainee  eight policemen in total during the first two sets of proceedings and six policemen during the third set of trial proceedings.
On 25 August 2009 the first applicant, who had been acquitted of all charges, brought proceedings for compensation in respect of pecuniary and nonpecuniary damage incurred as a result of the criminal proceedings against him, in particular, his detention on remand. On 23 October 2009 the  awarded him RUB 18,569 by way of damages. On 1 March 2010 the  awarded him RUB 50,000 in respect of non-pecuniary damage, to be paid by the Ministry of Finance.
Article 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading treatment of a defendant or other participants in criminal proceedings.
Under the Rules on the Design and Construction of Courthouses, in force since 1 August 2000, courtrooms for the hearing of criminal cases must have a subzone for defendants and guards, which must be enclosed on four sides with a railing made of metal rods 14 millimetres in diameter, 220 centimetres high or extending up to the ceiling, with a doorway and a steelwire ceiling (paragraphs 5.4, 5.9 and 8.3 of the Rules СП 311042000, as approved by the Courts Administration Office at the Russian Federation Supreme Court on 2 December 1999). Access from the defendants’ cells in the courthouse to the courtroom must be through separate corridors and stairs and a separate entry to the courtroom. There must be metal detectors at the public entrance to the courthouse and metal bars on the windows in the courtroom (paragraphs 5.11, 8.1, 8.2 and 5.35 of the Rules).
Under the Directions on the Functioning of Temporary Detention Centres and Police Guard and Convoy units, approved by Order no. 140 of Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation on 7 March 2006 (“Order no. 140”), suspects and accused are taken from their detention facility to the courthouse by police guards and are placed in the courtroom in a dock behind a barrier (“metal railing”). It is prohibited to take them to a courtroom which is not equipped with a barrier (“metal railing”). The same rules were contained in directions approved by Order no. 41 of the Ministry of the Interior of the  on 26 January 1996, which was in force before Order no. 140.
Both Orders were issued for internal use only. Applications challenging their legality on the basis of lack of official publication were dismissed by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, which found that they contained confidential information and had been registered with the Ministry of Justice of Russia (decision of 2 December 2002, as upheld by the appeal section of the Supreme Court on 24 April 2003 in respect of Order no. 41, and decision of 7 December 2011 in respect of Order no. 140).
Order no. 41 was also challenged before the Supreme Court by a Mr Sh. on the ground that its provision on keeping defendants behind a “metal railing” during their trials violated domestic law and the Convention in so far as they prohibited degrading treatment and guaranteed the right to a fair trial. The Supreme Court dismissed that appeal in a decision of 19 October 2004. It noted that the impugned provision concerned persons detained on remand by a court decision in accordance with the requirements of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The police were responsible for guarding and taking them to a courthouse from their detention facilities (Article 10 § 16 of the Law on Militia). The Rules on the Design and Construction of Courthouses provided for the installation of “metal railings” for defendants as one of the security requirements. Detention on remand was to be carried out in accordance with the principles of legality, fairness, the presumption of innocence, equality before the law, humanism, and respect for human dignity, and in accordance with the Constitution, the principles and norms of international law, and the international agreements of the Russian Federation, and must not be accompanied by torture or other acts aimed at the infliction of physical or moral suffering (the Federal Law on the Detention of Suspects and Defendants charged with Criminal Offences).
On 23 December 2004 the decision was upheld on appeal by the appeal section of the Supreme Court, which noted that, in so far as Mr Sh. had argued that he had actually been held in a “metal cage”, the disputed Order had not set out the technical characteristics of the “barrier (metal railing)”.