The case originated in an application (no. 26553/08) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Azerbaijani nationals, Ms Mahira Gandali gizi Gurbanova (Mahirə Qəndalı qızı Qurbanova - “the first applicant”) and Ms Rahila Gandali gizi Pashayeva (Rahilə Qəndalı qızı Paşayeva - “the second applicant”) (together – “the applicants”), on 20 April 2008.
The applicants were self-represented. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicants complained, in particular, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention of the non-enforcement of a final judgment delivered in their favour. Relying mainly on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the first applicant further complained of being denied access to the Supreme Court as a result of not having been granted legal aid for an advocate to lodge a cassation appeal on her behalf in the civil proceedings.
On 8 December 2010 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1946 and 1953 respectively, and both live in Baku.
On 13 June 1990 the first applicant’s husband and the second applicant were allocated plots of land in the Azizbeyov District.
The first applicant’s husband passed away in 1998.
On an unspecified date the applicants requested the State Register of Real Estate, the State Committee of Land and Cartography and the Baku City Executive Authority (“the authorities”) to provide them with certain documents necessary for the registration of their property rights over the plots of land in question.
Upon a refusal by the authorities to provide the applicants with the relevant documents, the applicants lodged a joint action against the abovementioned State authorities.
On 17 October 2007 the Azizbeyov District Court granted the applicants’ claims and ordered the authorities to provide the applicants with the documents concerning their respective plots of land and to register the applicants’ property rights over the plots of land.
No appeal was lodged against the Azizbeyov District Court’s judgment of 17 October 2007 and it became final and enforceable within a month of its delivery.
On an unspecified date in 2008 the applicants brought a civil action, claiming, inter alia, compensation for the non-enforcement of the Azizbeyov District Court’s judgment of 17 October 2007. By a judgment of 4 April 2008, the Narimanov District Court dismissed the applicants’ compensation claim. On 11 September 2008 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal lodged by the applicants against the Narimanov District Court’s judgment of 4 April 2008.
On an unspecified date in 2008 the first applicant lodged a cassation appeal against the Baku Court of Appeal’s judgment of 11 September 2008. On 28 November 2008 the Baku Court of Appeal returned the applicant’s cassation appeal on the grounds that it had not been lodged by an advocate. It relied on Article 67 of the Code of Civil Procedure (“the CCP”).
On an unspecified date the first applicant requested the Baku Court of Appeal to provide her with legal aid, claiming that she did not have sufficient financial means to pay for the legal services of an advocate in order to lodge a cassation appeal. On 27 January 2009 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the first applicant’s request on the following grounds:
“The Court notes that the applicant’s request for free legal aid from a Stateappointed lawyer must be dismissed on the grounds that the civil procedure legislation in force does not provide for an appeal court to appoint a State-funded lawyer so that he or she can prepare a cassation appeal and participate in cassation proceedings, or to examine the financial situation of the applicant, who has submitted a request for free legal assistance ...
... This decision is amenable to a cassation appeal ... within 10 (ten) days of its delivery ...”
The first applicant did not lodge a cassation appeal against the Baku Court of Appeal’s decision of 27 January 2009.
At the time of the latest correspondence with the applicants, the Azizbeyov District Court’s judgment of 17 October 2007 remained unenforced.
Article 67 (compulsory presence of an advocate in proceedings) of the CCP, in force at the material time, read, as far as relevant, as follows:
“Cassation appeals ... shall be admitted [for examination on their merits] only if they were prepared by an advocate and shall only be examined on their merits in the presence of an advocate.”
In accordance with Article 408.1.3 (return of a cassation appeal) of the CCP, a cassation appeal that has not been lodged by an advocate has to be returned to the appellant.
Law no. 819-IIIQD of 26 May 2009, which entered into force on 24 June 2009, introduced a new paragraph to Article 14 (principles governing court proceedings) of the CCP, which reads, as far as relevant, as follows:
“14.5. In instances where this Code requires compulsory representation by an advocate, parties to the case who do not have sufficient financial means to pay for the services of an advocate, have the right to free (State-appointed) professional legal assistance for the representation of their interests and for the exercise of their procedural rights.”
Law no. 819-IIIQD also amended Article 67 of the CCP, as far as relevant, as follows:
“67.1.  Cassation appeals ... shall be admitted [for examination on their merits] only if they are prepared by an advocate. Persons involved in a case shall participate in cassation ... court hearings only when represented by an advocate.
2.  In the instances where this Code requires the compulsory presence of an advocate in court proceedings [and] the persons involved in a case do not have sufficient financial means to pay for the services of an advocate, the court which has delivered the decision [against which a cassation appeal was lodged] shall ensure, on the basis of a written request by [those] persons, the participation of an advocate in the proceedings.”
Article 20 (free legal assistance by a State-appointed lawyer) of the Law, as in force at the material time, reads, as far as relevant, as follows:
“... Persons lacking financial means who are in need of free legal assistance in court proceedings shall be granted free (State-appointed) legal assistance without any restriction. The amount to be granted as free legal aid and the method of payment shall be regulated by the relevant executive authority.”
By a decision of 11 June 2002, the Constitutional Court found that Article 67 of the CCP was compatible with the Constitution. It further held, as far as relevant, as follows:
“... Upon the request of a party to the case, the domestic court examining the case shall determine the issue of providing the person who seeks the assistance of a lawyer, but does not have the financial means for this purpose, with a State-appointed lawyer ...
The Cabinet of Ministers is recommended to adopt the rules on free legal assistance in civil cases ...”