The case originated in an application (no. 45611/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Zdravko Gregurić (“the applicant”), on 4 July 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr B. Posavčić, a lawyer practising in Kutina. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
On 18 March 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant lives in Kutina.
From 1 January 2001 the applicant concluded several consecutive fixed-duration contracts of employment with the company C.N.S. Ltd. concerning the same post. The contracts were for a continuous period which in total amounted to over seven years and seven months.
On 5 June 2009 the applicant’s employer returned the applicant’s employment registration book to him, without any written or oral notification, showing that his employment had been terminated.
On 20 July 2009 the applicant brought a civil action before the Ivanić Grad Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Ivanić Gradu). He asked it to recognise that he had concluded an open-ended contract of employment, given that he had been in continuous employment with his employer for over three years, which was the time-limit for fixed-term employment contracts under the Labour Act. He also asked the Municipal Court to establish that his employment had not been terminated and to order his reinstatement.
On 22 January 2010 the Ivanić Grad Municipal Court dismissed the applicant’s claim as time-barred.
Upon an appeal by the applicant, on 16 February 2011 the Velika Gorica County Court (Županijski sud u Velikoj Gorici) quashed the firstinstance decision and remitted the case for fresh consideration. It held that the first-instance court should have declared the applicant’s claims inadmissible as time-barred, without examining it on the merits.
In the fresh proceedings, the Ivanić Grad Municipal Court on 6 May 2011 declared the applicant’s action inadmissible as having been lodged outside the prescribed time-limit. The first-instance court, relying on section 133 of the Labour Act, held that the applicant and his employer had concluded a fixed-term contract lasting until 31 May 2009 and that the applicant must have known that his contract would end on that day. He had not concluded a new contract of employment with his employer and he had therefore been obliged to lodge an application for the protection of his rights with his employer within the fifteen-day time-limit, starting from 1 June 2009. However, he had failed to do so and consequently his claim had been lodged out of time. Rejecting the applicant’s argument, the firstinstance court also held that the defendant company had not been obliged to adopt a formal decision on terminating his employment or to send him any other kind of notification, given that he must have known that his contract would come to an end on 31 May 2009.
On 12 May 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Velika Gorica County Court.
On 26 July 2011 the Velika Gorica County Court upheld the firstinstance decision.
On 14 November 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law (revizija) with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske), which was dismissed as ill-founded on 25 September 2012. The Supreme Court also held that the applicant had failed to seek the protection of his rights in respect of his employer within the deadlines prescribed by section 133 of the Labour Act. Accordingly, his claim had been lodged out of time.
On 14 March 2013 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske). He complained that the courts had wrongly declared his claim inadmissible because it had been of a declaratory nature and as such had not been subject to deadlines. He relied on a decision by the Velika Gorica County Court of 16 January 2013 in the case of a colleague of his, who for the same reasons as the applicant had also sought to have the court recognise that he had concluded an open-ended contract of employment. In that decision the Velika Gorica County Court, in accordance with instructions given in the Supreme Court’s decision no. Revr-1697/11 of 6 June 2012, had dismissed the defendant’s (the employer’s) objection that the claim was time-barred. Namely, the Supreme Court had held that the claim had been of a declaratory nature and as such was not subject to deadlines.
On 6 May 2013 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint as manifestly ill-founded.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991, 91/1992, 112/1999, 81/2001, 117/2003, 88/2005, 84/2008, 96/2008, 123/2008 and 57/2011), as in force at the material time, provided:
“(1)  A claimant may ask the court to recognise the existence or absence of a right or legal relations or the authenticity ... of a document.
“(1)  When the European Court of Human Rights has found a violation of a human right or fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms or the additional Protocols thereto ratified by the Republic of Croatia, a party may, within thirty days of the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights becoming final, lodge an application with the court in the Republic of Croatia which adjudicated in the first instance in the proceedings in which the decision violating the human right or fundamental freedom was rendered, to set aside the decision by which the human right or fundamental freedom was violated.
(2)  The proceedings referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be conducted by applying, mutatis mutandis, the provisions on the reopening of proceedings.
(3)  In the reopened proceedings the courts are required to respect the legal opinions expressed in the final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights finding a violation of a fundamental human right or freedom.”
The relevant provisions of the consolidated text of the Labour Act - (Zakon o radu – pročišćeni tekst, Official Gazette no. 137/2004), as in force at the material time, provided:
“(1)  As an exception, a contract of employment may be concluded for a definite period (‘a fixed-term contract’) in cases of employment where termination has been previously determined by objective factors, i.e. by a specific time-limit, the performance of a specific task or the occurrence of a specific event.
(2)  An employer must not conclude one or more consecutive fixed-term contracts of employment under which employment commences with respect to the same work for a continuous period exceeding three years, except in order to substitute a temporarily absent employee or if permitted by law or a collective agreement.
...
(5)  If a fixed-term contract of employment has been concluded contrary to the provisions of this Act or if the employee continued working for the employer after the expiration of the period for which the contract was originally made, the employee shall be considered to have concluded an open-ended contract of employment.
(6)  The employer shall inform employees working for him or her under fixed-term contracts about the available jobs in respect of which those workers might conclude open-ended contracts of employment, and provide them with further training and education under the same conditions as those provided to employees working under fixed-term contracts.”
“(1)  A contract of employment shall be concluded in writing.
(2)  A failure on the part of the parties to the contract to conclude a contract of employment in writing shall not affect the existence and validity of that contract.
(3)  If a contract of employment was not concluded in writing, the employer shall give a written certificate to the employee on the conclusion of the contract before the work commences.
(4)  If the employer fails to conclude a contract of employment in writing with the employee within the time-limit referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, or fails to give him or her a written certificate on the conclusion of the contract, it shall be deemed that the employer has concluded an open-ended labour contract with the worker.
...”
“(1)  An employee who considers that his or her employer has violated any of his or her rights arising from employment may, within fifteen days following the receipt of a decision violating that right, or the day after he or she became aware of such a violation, seek permission from the employer to exercise that right.
(2)  If the employer does not accede to the worker’s request referred to in paragraph 1 of this section within fifteen days, the employee may within another fifteen days seek judicial protection from the court having jurisdiction in respect of the right that has been violated.
(3)  ...
(4)  An employee who has failed to submit a request of the kind referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, may not seek judicial protection from the court having jurisdiction in respect of the right that has been violated.
... “
Section 133 of the consolidated text of the Labour Act - (Zakon o radu – pročišćeni tekst, Official Gazette no. 137/2004) corresponds to section 126 of the Labour Act (Zakon o radu, Official Gazette nos. 38/1995 with its subsequent amendments).
The Government relied on Constitutional Court decisions nos. UIII3893/2007 of 11 March 2010, U-III-374/2008 of 27 October 2010, U-III-3256/2011 of 1 December 2014 and U-III-736/2005 of 8 July 2013. In those decisions the Constitutional Court held that inconsistency in a court’s case-law breached the principle of legal certainty and thus violated the constitutional right to a fair hearing. In all those cases the applicants clearly stated that the courts had departed from their previous case-law, thus violating their right to a fair hearing.
The applicant relied on the Supreme Court’s decision in case no. Revr-1697/11 of 6 June 2012, which was delivered in a case brought by his colleague and which was identical to his. The Supreme Court quashed a decision by the Velika Gorica County Court of 7 September 2011 and remitted the case for fresh consideration. The relevant part of the decision reads as follows:
“The first-instance court established that the claimant had concluded an open-ended contract with the defendant ... , that the claimant’s employment had not been terminated on 31 March 2009 and that the defendant was obliged to reinstate the claimant ...
The second-instance court rendered a judgment which allowed the defendant’s appeal, quashed the first-instance judgment and declared the claim inadmissible.
...
The second-instance court ... held that the claimant was not entitled to seek judicial protection of his rights ... given that he had failed to lodge an application for the protection of his rights with the employer, as envisaged by section 133(4) of the Labour Act ...
In the instant case the claimant brought a claim, asking the court to recognise that he had concluded an open-ended contract, that his employment had not been terminated on 31 March 2009, and to order the defendant to reinstate the claimant ... It follows that the claim [in the present case] is a declaratory claim and that the right to lodge such a claim should be assessed in accordance with section 187(1)(2) of the CPA [the Civil Procedure Act], which provides that a claimant may ask [the court] to establish the existence or absence of a right or legal relations or the authenticity or otherwise of a document before the expiry of the claim for performance based on that relationship, or when the plaintiff has some other legal interest for lodging that form of claim.
...
A declaratory claim is neither subject to a deadline, nor dependent on whether has a claimant lodged an application for the protection of his rights with his employer. The requirement for lodging such a claim is, inter alia, the existence of a legal interest. Such a claim could only have been declared inadmissible if such a legal interest had not existed.
... ”
“The claim that was declared inadmissible ... reads as follows:
‘The claimant ... shall be recognised as a Croatian language teacher employed ... on the basis of an open-ended contract, which fact the defendant shall recognise and then reinstate the claimant ... ‘
...
... the [claimant] claims that a declaratory claim in a labour dispute is not subject to deadlines and that the courts, by examining whether [her] claim was lodged in a timely manner, ... applied the law incorrectly...
[The claimant] considers that she has a legal interest in lodging a declaratory claim ...
It is clear from the content of the claim that it is a declaratory claim brought on the basis of section 187(1) of the CPA [the Civil Procedure Act]...
... the claimant was not obliged to lodge a declaratory claim within [prescribed] deadlines ... thus, the courts wrongly declared [her] claim inadmissible as time-barred ...
In the fresh proceedings the [first-instance] court shall ... establish whether the [procedural] requirements for bringing a declaratory claim [before the court] exist, namely, whether ... the legal interest exists, and after that it shall examine the claim on the merits.
... ”
“The subject matter of the dispute is a claim for establishing that the parties [to the proceedings] concluded an open-ended contract ... from 1 June 2009 (namely, the existence of working ... status) and a condemnatory claim for reinstatement.
...
... in the instant case the claimant did not seek to protect his employment rights with a claim of the type provided for by section 126 of the Labour Act but with a claim to recognise that he had concluded an open-ended contract, within the meaning of section 187(1) of the CPA [the Civil Procedure Act]...
The declaratory claim provided for by section 187(1)(2) of the CPA [the Civil Procedure Act] is not subject to any deadlines, but to ... [the existence of] a legal interest to seek such a determination, which is a procedural requirement for the admissibility of a declaratory claim.
...
By wrongly applying section 126(1)(2) of the LA [the Labour Act], instead of section 187(1)(2) of the CPA [the Civil Procedure Act], the courts wrongly declared the declaratory claim inadmissible.
In that connection, they also wrongly dismissed the condemnatory claim (reinstatement) given that the merits of that claim were examined on the background of [the lower courts’] misunderstanding about the admissibility of the declaratory claim.
Therefore, the case is to be remitted for fresh consideration and in the new proceedings the first-instance court shall establish the existence of a legal interest by the claimant to lodge a declaratory claim.
If [the first-instance court] establishes [that the claimant has a legal interest], upon which the admissibility of the claim depends, it shall decide on the merits of that claim.”