The case originated in an application (no. 66742/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by thirty-nine Greek nationals (“the applicants”), whose names appear in the list annexed hereto, on 6 December 2000.
The applicants were represented by Mr P. Yatagantzidis and Mrs E. Metaxaki, both lawyers practising in . The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by the delegates of their Agent, Mr M. Apessos, Senior Adviser at the State Legal Council and Mr K. Georgiadis, Legal Assistant at the State Legal Council.
The applicants alleged that their property rights as guaranteed by Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 had been violated. They also complained under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention about the length of the proceedings that they had instituted before the .
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 6 May 2003, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicants, but not the Government, filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicants are involved in a long-standing dispute with the State concerning the ownership of a plot of land known as “Omorphokklisia” in Galatsi, a suburb of . This land is included in a wider area called the “Veïkou Estate”. The applicants have so far obtained a number of rulings in their favour from the civil courts and the public prosecutors of the  first instance and appeal courts. On several occasions, the State authorities have either claimed that the land in question was a forest or that it was not.
In 1934 the Ministry of Agriculture took a reforestation decision (no. 108424/1934) concerning a wider region in Attica, which included ,  and the suburbs. According to that decision, the area “consisted, before the destruction and downgrading of the forest vegetation ..., of pine-tree forest which was progressively downgraded and tended to disappear ...”
In a document of the Forest Inspection of Athens of 14 November 1968, it was stated that half of the area which included the applicants’ land was agricultural and half covered by bush and five pine-trees. The Forest Inspection expressed the opinion that, considering the morphology of the area, it has never been a forest and could not be reforested, since the decision of the Ministry of Agriculture of 1934 excluded from the scope of the reforestation barren lands or plots owned by individuals. The Forest Inspection concluded that the city plan could be extended to the impugned area.
On 6 September 1994 the prefect of  declared an area within the Veïkou Estate, including the applicants’ land, “reafforestable” (it should be turned back into a forest). As it was expressly stated in the prefect’s decision, the aim was “... to recreate the forest greenery destroyed or downgraded by illegal quarry activities and other illegal actions such as land clearing, constructions etc. in an area of 284 000 square meters” (decision no. 3015/1994). On 10 October 1994 the prefect took a similar decision for another area of the Veïkou Estate.
On 10 November 1994 the applicants challenged decision no. 3015/1994 before the . They claimed that they were owners of properties that originated from the parcelling of a broader area included in the major area known as “Veïkou Estate” and which were located inside the reafforestable area. In particular, in their appeal, they contended that the prefect’s decision lacked reasons and aimed at depriving them of any property or possession rights on the contested plot. In their additional observations of 3 March 1999 they claimed that the prefect’s decision was an operative act, in particular because it was issued after a new assessment of the factual situation (pages 55-59 of the applicants’ memorial). They further contended that the cause of the adoption of that decision was the attempt of the State to create a dispute over their property or possession rights, although the legal conditions for the issuance of such a decision were not met since the area never constituted a forest in the past.
On 14 December 1994 the applicants invited the State to purchase the plot in question from them according to the procedure prescribed by Law no. 998/1979. The authorities did not reply.
On 22 October 1999 the Forest Inspection of Athens qualified as “reafforestable” according to the procedure prescribed by Law no. 998/1979 an area of approximately 189 sq. m. located within the area concerned by the prefect’s decision of 10 October 1994 (see paragraph 10 above). The Forest Inspection concluded that only 20 sq. m. of that surface was forest and should be reforested. The Committee for the Settlement of Forest Disputes confirmed that decision and an appeal is now pending before the Appeal Committee.
On 5 June 2000 the  accepted that the applicants, who “were considered owners”, had locus standi. It declared their appeal inadmissible on the ground that the prefect’s decision was not an operative act since it simply confirmed the decision issued by the Minister of Agriculture in 1934. In particular, the court held that the decision of 1934 remained in force because no other act, of an equivalent force, had reversed it. The subsequent acts of the Administration, such as the interpretation of some aerial photos, could not be considered as a new assessment of the situation which could give to the decision of the prefect an operative character (judgment no. 1968/2000).
In various judgments delivered during the past years the Greek courts have had the occasion to decide the property status of part of the Veïkou Estate (judgments nos. 8864/1995 of the Athens First Instance Court, 8314/1996, 9632/2000 of the Athens Court of Appeal and 1359/2002 of the Court of Cassation). The courts have recognised that a number of plots which were situated in the greater area of the Veïkou Estate did not constitute a forest but were private properties which were included in the development plan of the city. Some other judicial decisions (judgments nos. 13789/1977, 1865/1992 and 1783/1997 of the Athens First Instance Court, 7350/1978 of the Athens Court of Appeal and 696/1980 of the Court of Cassation), concluded that the greater area, which comprised the properties claimed by the applicants, had never been a forest in the past.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
Article 24 § 1
“The protection of the natural and cultural environment constitutes a duty of the State. The State is bound to adopt special preventive or repressive measures for the preservation of the environment. Matters pertaining to the protection of forests and forest areas in general shall be regulated by law. Alteration of the use of State forests and State forest areas is prohibited, except where agricultural development or other uses imposed for the public interest prevail for the national economy.”
Article 117 § 3
“Public or private forests or forest areas which have been destroyed or are being destroyed by fire or have otherwise been deforested or are being deforested, shall not thereby relinquish their previous designation and shall compulsorily be proclaimed reafforestable, the possibility of their disposal for other uses being excluded.”
The Government submit that, in the sense of Article 117 § 3 (which, in accordance with the established case-law of the Supreme Administrative Court, is directly applicable), the protection of forests is enacted without any time-limit and is not obstructed by any illegal destruction or deforestation. Moreover, the declaration of an area as reafforestable and the prohibition of any use that would obstruct reforestation are not left to the discretion of the Administration but are mandatory.
The relevant sections of Law no. 998/1979 read as follows:
Section 10 § 3
“A Committee for the Settlement of Forest Disputes is established at the seat of each prefecture, which is competent to settle disputes concerning the character of an area or part of the surface as forest area or the limits of it.”
Section 14
“1. If no forest registry has been drawn up, the characterisation of an area or part of the surface as forest area and the determination of the limits thereof ... is made at the request of any person having a lawful interest or ex officio, by act of the competent forest inspector.
...The act is notified to the person, legal entity or public service which has submitted the request....
Section 38 § 1
“Forests and forest areas which are destroyed or deforested by fire or illegal logging are declared reafforestable, regardless of their special category or their location ...”
Section 41
“1. The decision declaring an area as reafforestable is taken by the competent prefect. It clearly indicates the limits of the area and is accompanied by a plan ...
... the decision of the prefect mentioned in paragraph 1 is taken following the recommendation of the competent forest inspection.”
According to Section 43 of that Law the State can buy the properties included in a reforestation scheme.
The Government stress that the above-mentioned sections establish a special judicial procedure for the characterisation of an area as forest area and aim at settling disputes in a binding way for both the Administration and the individuals.