The case originated in an application (no. 14816/08) against the Republic of Albania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Albanian national, Arben Topi (“the applicant”), on 14 February 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Kasapi, a lawyer practising in Tirana. The Albanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their then Agent, Ms L. Mandia of the State Advocate’s office.
The applicant alleged that he had been denied access to the Constitutional Court and that his trial in absentia had breached Article 6 of the Convention.
On 26 June 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The Government implicitly objected to the examination of the case by a Committee (Article 28 § 1 (b)), arguing that it included issues that were not the subject of the Court’s well-established case-law. The Court accepts that objection.
The applicant was born in Peqin in 1977. He is currently serving a prison sentence.
In 1998 the applicant was implicated in the commission of the criminal offence of setting up and being a member of an armed gang and of other criminal offences.
On 4 February 1999 the prosecutor charged him with the offences of membership of an armed gang, attempted intentional murder and other crimes. The notification of the prosecutor’s charges was acknowledged by the applicant’s officially appointed lawyer.
It appears that throughout the investigation proceedings the applicant was represented by an officially appointed lawyer.
On 12 February 1999 the Elbasan District Court ordered the applicant’s arrest. However, the order could not be enforced as the applicant could not be traced.
On 19 February 1999 the Elbasan District Court declared the applicant a fugitive from justice after unsuccessful attempts to locate him. The decision stated that it was impossible to find him as it appeared that he had escaped to an unknown destination (këto kërkime nuk kanë bërë të mundur kapjen e të pandehurit pasi ai rezulton të ketë ikur në drejtim të paditur).
On an unspecified date the prosecutor decided to commit the applicant for trial.
On 28 May 1999 the Supreme Court transferred the case for examination to the Durrës District Court.
On 2 June 1999 the applicant’s father appointed a lawyer to represent the applicant before the domestic courts.
The trial proceedings against the applicant were conducted in absentia and he was represented by a lawyer appointed by his family in accordance with Article 48 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“CCP”).
On 15 February 2000 the Durrës District Court convicted the applicant in absentia of establishing and participating in an armed gang and attempted intentional murder. He was sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment. The decision was based on evidence from documents and witness testimony.
The applicant’s family-appointed lawyer and the other co-accused appealed against the conviction to the Durrës Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”). On 19 April 2000 the Court of Appeal declined to examine the applicant’s appeal on the grounds that the applicant’s family had not given any express authority to the lawyer for such a procedure. However, the Court of Appeal examined the applicant’s case as part of its overall examination, having regard to the appeals of the other defendants. It convicted the applicant of the same offences as before and sentenced him to thirteen years’ imprisonment.
On 7 December 2000 the Supreme Court dismissed appeals by the applicant and other co-accused against the Court of Appeal’s decision of 19 April 2000.
On 16 September 2005 the applicant was arrested by the Czech authorities on the basis of an arrest warrant issued by Albania.
On 25 January 2006 the applicant was extradited to Albania.
On 1 March 2006 the applicant was officially informed of his conviction in absentia.
On 13 September 2007 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal against the conviction in absentia.
On 24 October 2007 the Constitutional Court, sitting in camera, declared the appeal time-barred as the two-year time-limit had started to run on 7 December 2000. The Constitutional Court’s reasoning stated that throughout the proceedings the applicant had been represented by a courtappointed lawyer or a family-appointed lawyer and that accordingly he had had the opportunity to become acquainted with the proceedings brought against him.
The relevant domestic law and practice at the material time have been described in detail in the judgments of Shkalla v. Albania (no. 26866/05, §§ 28-35, 10 May 2011), and Izet Haxhia v. Albania, (no. 34783/06, §§ 19-42, 5 November 2013).
On 30 March 2017 the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) was amended by Law no. 35/2017 and the new provisions entered into force on 1 August 2017. The relevant new provisions applicable to the present case read as follows:
“1. The prosecutor, the defendant, the victim or accusing victim, and the private parties are allowed to have the time-limit reset if they establish that they were unable to comply with the time-limit owing to unforeseen events or force majeure.
Leave to appeal out of time cannot be granted more than once in respect of each party and of each stage of the proceedings.
An application for the resetting of the time-limit for appeal must be lodged within ten days of the date of the cessation of unforeseen events or force majeure. The application shall be examined by the authority seized at the time of its introduction (për kërkesën vendos organi që procedon në kohën e paraqitjes së saj).
An appeal against a refusal to grant leave to appeal out of time may be lodged with the court within five days ...”.
“2. Defence counsel may lodge an appeal against a conviction in absentia in so far as he has been specifically authorised by the defendant, by means of a power of attorney issued in accordance with the law, or a statement made at the hearing”.
“1. The parties are allowed to have the time-limit reset if they establish that they were unable to comply with the time-limit owing to unforeseen events or force majeure ...
In the event of trial in absentia [as a result of the defendant’s withdrawal from attending the proceedings], the defendant may request the resetting of the time-limit for appealing against the decision if he can establish that he has not been notified of the decision.
An application for the resetting of the time-limit for appeal must be lodged within ten days of the date of the cessation of unforeseen events or force majeure. For the case provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article, an application must be lodged within ten days of the date on which the defendant effectively acquires knowledge of the decision. Leave to appeal out of time cannot be granted more than once in respect of each party and of each stage of the proceedings.
...
An appeal against a refusal to grant leave to appeal out of time may be lodged with the court of appeal within five days ...”.
“An application for review [of a final decision] may be lodged:
a)  if the facts on which the decision was based do not comply with those of another final decision;
(b)  if the [court rendering the] decision has relied on a civil or administrative court decision which has subsequently been quashed;
(c)  if, subsequent to the decision, new evidence has emerged or has been found which, independently or together with previous evidence, proves that the decision is wrong;
(d)  if it is proved that the decision was given as a result of the falsification of judicial acts or another fact that constitutes a criminal offence.
(e)  if the European Court of Human Rights has adopted a judgment which makes a review of the case necessary ...
(f)  if the extradition of a person convicted in absentia is granted on the explicit assurance that the case will be reviewed. The application for review shall be lodged within thirty days of the date on which the person is extradited...
(g)  if the person is tried in absentia ... and is asking that the case be reviewed. The application for review should be lodged within thirty days of the date on which the defendant acquired knowledge [of the trial in absentia] ...”.
On 21 September 2017 the Committee of Ministers gave a decision on the execution of the judgment in the case of Shkalla (cited above) concerning, among other matters, the Albanian authorities’ failure to reopen proceedings in absentia. This decision, which was adopted at its 1265th meeting, stated, in so far as relevant:
“The Deputies
noted with satisfaction the individual measures taken in these cases, in particular that all the applicants have had an effective possibility to obtain reopening of the impugned proceedings and that, for those applicants who requested it, guarantees were given that the new proceedings either had been or would be conducted in accordance with the requirements of Article 6 of the Convention and that, pending these proceedings, the applicants could request release; considered accordingly that no further individual measures are required in this group of cases;
...
encouraged the authorities rapidly to finalise the ongoing reform of the judicial system to prevent further violations concerning the lack of guarantees surrounding criminal proceedings in absentia, the right to defend oneself in court and the appearance of witnesses; decided to continue their supervision of these measures in the cases of Caka, Cani and Izet Haxhia, and to close the similar cases Berhani and Shkalla”.
On 7 December 2017 the Committee of Ministers gave a decision on the execution of the judgment in the case of Izet Haxhia (cited above) concerning, among other matters, the Albanian authorities’ failure to reopen proceedings in absentia. This decision, which was adopted at its 1302nd meeting, stated, in so far as relevant:
“The Deputies
...
welcomed the general measures taken, in particular the legislative amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure adopted on 30 March 2017 concerning the guarantees surrounding criminal proceedings in absentia, the right to defend oneself in court and the appearance of witnesses; considered that the adopted general measures are sufficient to prevent similar violations and that these cases can be thus closed”.
In the resolution of the same day, the Committee of Ministers stated, in so far as relevant:
“The Deputies
...
Recalling the respondent State’s obligation, under Article 46, paragraph 1, of the Convention, to abide by all final judgments in cases to which it has been a party and that this obligation entails, over and above the payment of any sums awarded by the Court, the adoption by the authorities of the respondent State, where required:
-  of individual measures to put an end to violations established and erase their consequences so as to achieve as far as possible restitutio in integrum;”
By this resolution, the Committee of Ministers closed the examination of the Izet Haxhia judgment.