The case originated in an application (no. 30460/13) against the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a British national, Mr A.T. (“the applicant”), on 20 April 2013. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Schons and Mr B. Entringer, lawyers practising in Luxembourg. The Luxembourg Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs A. Kayser, of the Permanent Representation of Luxembourg with the Council of Europe.
The applicant contested the fairness of the criminal proceedings, complaining, in particular, that he had not benefited from the assistance of a lawyer during his questioning by the police or from effective assistance during his interrogation by the investigating judge.
On 4 November 2013 the complaint concerning the lack of effective assistance before the police and the investigating judge (Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
Given that the applicant was a British national, the British Government were invited to submit written observations (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court), but on 12 November 2013 they informed the Court that they did not intend to exercise their right of intervention.
On 1 December 2014 the Section President decided, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court, to invite the parties to submit additional written observations on the admissibility and the merits of the application.
Both the applicant and the Government submitted observations on the admissibility and the merits of the case.
The non-governmental organisation Fair Trials International was granted leave to intervene in the written proceedings (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1973 and was detained in London at the time he lodged his application.
On 9 October 2009 the Public Prosecutor ordered an investigation against the applicant on charges of rape and indecent assault on a girl under the age of sixteen, with the aggravating circumstance that the perpetrator held a position of authority over her.
On 4 December 2009 the applicant was arrested in the United Kingdom under a European Arrest Warrant. The Government indicated that the applicant was presented with the European arrest warrant, which contained a statement in English of the facts and of the nature of the offences with which he was charged. The applicant submitted that he had been placed in “detention pending extradition” in a British prison, and that it did not transpire from the criminal file that the European arrest warrant had been served on him at that precise time.
On 17 December 2009 the applicant was surrendered to the Luxembourg authorities. At 2.45 p.m. he was officially served with the European arrest warrant on his arrival at Luxembourg airport, and at 3.20 p.m. he was questioned at the police station in the presence of an interpreter. It transpires from the police report of 17 December 2009 that “[the applicant] initially refused to make any statement. With repeated reference to British legislation, he claimed his right to legal assistance. After having received the requisite explanations regarding the procedure to be followed in cases such as his, he agreed to take part in the questioning”. The applicant was informed of the victim’s statements and the suspicions against him, and was questioned on the facts. He stated his version of events and contested all the charges against him, denying any guilt. At the end of the interrogation he requested legal assistance for the following day’s interrogation before the investigating judge. At 7.15 p.m. he was transferred to Luxembourg Prison.
On the morning of 18 December 2009 he was questioned by the investigating judge in the presence of an interpreter. In that connection, the minutes of the interrogation read as follows: at 9.02 a.m. the investigating judge checked the identity of the applicant – who now held accused (Beschuldigter) status – and informed him that a criminal investigation (Untersuchungsverfahren) had been initiated against him concerning the offences with which he had been charged. The applicant was then informed of his right to choose a defence lawyer from among the members of the Bar Association or to obtain the assistance of an officially appointed lawyer. The applicant availed himself of that right, and was assigned Mr W. as his officially appointed lawyer. The applicant was questioned in the presence of his lawyer and an interpreter; he made statements on the facts and confirmed his statements to the police. The interrogation ended at 10.53 a.m.
It transpires from the case file that the applicant, who had been remanded in custody, was released on 10 March 2010 by the Luxembourg District Court subject to his remaining in Luxembourg, reporting regularly to the police and refraining from contacting his victim.
By a judgment of 31 March 2011 the criminal division of the District Court sentenced the applicant to a seven-year prison term accompanied by a three-year partial probation period. The judges reiterated the statements from the victim, the witnesses and the applicant during the judicial and police investigations and during the court hearing. They mentioned the fact that the applicant had constantly changed his “version of events”, and pointed out that according to a credibility analysis none of the evidence gathered had cast any legitimate doubts on the truthfulness of the victim’s statements.
On 7 February 2012 the criminal division of the Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance judgment.
The judges observed that the applicant had contested the charges against him throughout the proceedings and that he was maintaining his objections before the Court of Appeal. They held that the district court had provided a detailed and exhaustive list of the statements by the victim, the applicant and the various witnesses and experts questioned.
They pointed out that the applicant’s lawyer had complained about the fact that after the applicant’s extradition from the United Kingdom had had been heard by the police on his arrival in Luxembourg without the benefit of legal assistance, which he had requested but been denied; the judges therefore concluded as follows:
“As regards the failure to provide for the assistance of a lawyer during the question by police, it transpires from police report SPJ/JEUN/2009/6926-5/COES of 17 December 2009 that the accused had initially requested the assistance of a lawyer during the questioning which was to take place in the police station, but that after the applicable procedure had been explained to him he had agreed to give statements without the assistance of counsel.”
In their analysis of the charges against the applicant, the judges noted, among other things, that the latter had not always been consistent in his statements. With particular regard to one of the episodes in issue, they referred to the difference between the statements which he had made during the police questioning and his depositions during the first-instance and appeal hearings.
On 22 November 2012 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law. In particular, it declared ill-founded a submission under Article 6 § 3 of the Convention, on the following grounds:
“Whereas it transpires from the discussion of the submission that the [applicant] complains that the Court of Appeal merely found a violation of the rights of the defence without drawing the requisite conclusions from that finding;
Whereas, however, the Court of Appeal held that ... [see quotation in paragraph 18];
That, in reaching such a decision the Appeal did not find a violation of the rights of the defence as alleged by the appellant but, on the contrary, concluded that there had been no violation of the rights of the defence inasmuch as the accused had recorded his agreement to making statements in the absence of counsel;
It follows that the impugned judgment did not violate Article 6 § 3 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, as alleged by the applicant; ...”
The applicant left Luxembourg for the United Kingdom (at an unspecified date), and on 20 December 2012 the prosecution issued a European arrest warrant for the purposes of executing the 7 February 2012 judgment.
On 12 June 2013, in response to a request from the British authorities (the Extradition Unit of the Crown Prosecution Service) dated 29 May 2013, a representative of the Principal State Prosecutor provided those authorities with information on judicial procedures in Luxembourg. As regards the hearing of 17 December 2009, the representative stated in particular that it had transpired from the police report that the applicant, whose statements had been translated by the interpreter, had neither been assisted by a lawyer or been offered legal assistance. As regards the interrogation of 18 December 2009, the representative explained that a lawyer officially appointed by the investigating judge had assisted the applicant during the interrogation and for the duration of the ensuing domestic proceedings. She added that anyone asking to consult his or her officially appointed or freely chosen lawyer, before an interrogation, was allowed to do so; contrary to his assertions, the applicant’s access to his lawyer before the interrogation of 18 December 2009 had not been restricted.
On 19 August 2013 the British court authorised the applicant’s surrender to the Luxembourg authorities in order to serve his sentence in Luxembourg; the applicant’s appeal against that decision was dismissed on 20 December 2013. According to the case file, the applicant is currently incarcerated in Luxembourg Prison.
...
The relevant legislative provisions have been complemented by internal circulars.
In particular, the “Luxembourg Police Memorandum No. 49/2011” of 20 June 2011 – which also applies to customs officers interrogating a person deprived of his liberty – provides that officers must comply with the Court’s case-law (see Salduz v. Turkey [GC], no. 36391/02, ECHR 2008, and Dayanan v. Turkey, no. 7377/03, 13 October 2009), on pain of cancellation of any procedures initiated, and specifies that the relevant chapters of the police regulations have been amended accordingly.
Prior to this memorandum, an exchange of correspondence took place between the public prosecutor’s office and the police department.
In a circular sent out on 13 May 2011 the Principal State Prosecutor asked the Director General of Police to instruct all police officers to ensure that any accused person deprived of his liberty had access to the effective assistance of a lawyer during the interrogations which he underwent during his detention.
On 15 June 2011, at the request of the Director General of Police, the State Prosecutor provided the following information:
“... The right of legal assistance - applicable procedures
Under our current domestic law, the right to the assistance of a lawyer is applicable to specific types of police interrogations of persons deprived of their liberty, that is to say:
- police interrogations of individuals detained in in flagrante proceedings (Article 39(7) of the Code of Criminal Procedure) and
- police interrogations of individuals remanded in custody concerning acts other than those with which they have been charged (Article 52(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
Inasmuch as recent case-law of the European Court of Human Rights has particularly emphasised the need for such assistance in respect, in principle, of any police questioning of an ‘accused’ deprived of his liberty, the benefit of that right should be extended to:
- police interrogations in the framework of a preparatory investigation, by way of letters rogatory from the investigating judge, of the individual deprived of his liberty pursuant to a warrant to appear or a domestic or European arrest warrant.
...
The scope of the right to the assistance of a lawyer
In my letter of 13 May 2011 I pointed out that the right to the assistance of a lawyer during an interrogation was not confined to the lawyer’s physical presence; it should also enable the person under interrogation to receive help and protection from the lawyer and allow the lawyer to assist the person effectively.
This should be taken to mean:
 ... arrangements should be made to enable the detainee to talk to his lawyer before the interrogation and, in particular, after receiving a summary of the facts relevant to the interrogation ... That conversation should take place under such conditions as to guarantee its confidentiality. There may be compelling reasons for not allowing such an interview, though only in exceptional cases and subject to the authorisation of the judge or prosecutor in charge, who must be contacted on the matter...”
...
The relevant passages of Directive 2012/13/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 on the right to information in criminal proceedings provide:
Where a person is arrested and detained at any stage of the criminal proceedings, Member States shall ensure that documents related to the specific case in the possession of the competent authorities which are essential to challenging effectively, in accordance with national law, the lawfulness of the arrest or detention, are made available to arrested persons or to their lawyers.
Member States shall ensure that access is granted at least to all material evidence in the possession of the competent authorities, whether for or against suspects or accused persons, to those persons or their lawyers in order to safeguard the fairness of the proceedings and to prepare the defence.
Without prejudice to paragraph 1, access to the materials referred to in paragraph 2 shall be granted in due time to allow the effective exercise of the rights of the defence and at the latest upon submission of the merits of the accusation to the judgment of a court. Where further material evidence comes into the possession of the competent authorities, access shall be granted to it in due time to allow for it to be considered.
...”
...