.  The case originated in an application (no. 7984/06) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Ms Anahit Saghatelyan (“the applicant”), on 8 February 2006.
.  The applicant was represented by Mr A. Ghazaryan, a non-practising lawyer, and Mr M. Danielyan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia at the European Court of Human Rights.
.  The applicant, a former judge, alleged in particular that she was deprived of access to court to challenge her dismissal from the judiciary.
.  On 16 June 2009 the application was communicated to the Government.
.  The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Vardenis. She worked as a judge at Gegharkunik Regional Court.
.  On 17 February 2004 the Minister of Justice filed a motion with the Council of Justice seeking to have the applicant dismissed from her post under Section 30 (8) of the Law on the Status of a Judge. The motion stated that the applicant had been severely reprimanded on three occasions, namely in 1997, 2000 and 2001, for various gross violations of the rules of criminal procedure and another set of disciplinary proceedings had been instituted against her on the same grounds in December 2003.
.  On 2 March 2004 the Council of Justice examined the motion and decided to form a three-member commission to examine the factual basis of the motion and to report back to the Council.
.  On 27 April 2004 the Council of Justice adopted a conclusion recommending to the President of Armenia that the applicant be dismissed.
.  On 30 April 2004 the President of Armenia issued a decree dismissing the applicant from her post.
.  On 15 March 2005 the applicant lodged a claim with the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan, seeking to annul the President’s Decree of 30 April 2004 as unlawful. She argued that her dismissal from work had been in violation of a number of provisions of domestic law and various European instruments relating to the status of a judge. In particular, the motion for dismissal filed by the Minister of Justice on 17 February 2004 had been based upon matters which had been the subject of earlier disciplinary proceedings and in respect of which penalties had already been imposed. The motion did not contain any reasoning and was not accompanied by any supporting documentation and was, therefore, unsubstantiated. She further argued that judicial decisions were not supposed to be subject to a review other than by way of an appeal procedure prescribed by law. Thus, the commission of gross violations of the law (the alleged grounds for her dismissal) could only have been found by a higher court (which had not happened in her case) and not by non-judicial bodies and officials, such as the Council of Justice or the Minister of Justice. Finally, she claimed that the question of her dismissal had been examined by the Council of Justice in her absence, in violation of the relevant rules.
.  On 26 May 2005 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan decided under Article 109 of the Code of Civil Procedure to terminate the proceedings on the ground that the applicant’s claim was not subject to examination by the courts of general jurisdiction. In doing so, the District Court referred, inter alia, to Article 100 (1) of the Constitution, Article 15 § 2 of the Civil Code and Article 160 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure (the CCP).
.  On 7 June 2005 the applicant lodged an appeal.
.  On 13 July 2005 the Civil Court of Appeal examined and dismissed the applicant’s claim as unsubstantiated.
.  On 5 August 2005 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law.
.  On 23 September 2005 the Court of Cassation quashed the judgment of the Court of Appeal and decided to terminate the proceedings on the same grounds as the District Court.
.  On 16 November 2006, in proceedings unrelated to this case, the Constitutional Court found the second paragraph of Article 160 § 1 of the CCP to be unconstitutional.
.  The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
“Everyone has the right to defend his rights and freedoms by any means not prohibited by law.
Everyone has the right to judicial protection of his rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution and laws.”
“Everyone has the right to a public hearing of his case by an independent and impartial court within a reasonable time in conditions of equality and with respect for all fair trial requirements in order to have his violated rights restored, as well as the validity of the charge against him determined.”
“The guarantor of independence of the judicial authorities is the President of [Armenia]. He shall preside over the Council of Justice.
The Minister of Justice and the General Prosecutor shall be the vice-presidents of the Council.
The Council shall be also composed of fourteen members appointed by the President of [Armenia] for a period of five years, including two legal scholars, nine judges and three prosecutors. ...”
“The Council of Justice shall: ... (6) submit a proposal approving the termination of the term of office of a judge...”
“The Constitutional Court, in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law, shall: (1) decide on the conformity of laws, the resolutions of the National Assembly, the decrees and directives of the President of [Armenia] and the decrees of the Government with the Constitution; ...”
“Applications to the Constitutional Court can be submitted by: (1) the President of [Armenia]; (2) at least one third of the deputies of the National Assembly; (3) candidates for the office of the President of [Armenia] and for the National Assembly in connection with disputes related to election results; [and] (4) the Government...”
.  The former Articles 38 and 39 of the Constitution were transformed into Articles 18 and 19 and read as follows:
“Everyone has the right to an effective remedy to have his rights and freedoms protected by the judicial and other public authorities.
Everyone has the right to defend his rights and freedoms by any means not prohibited by law. ...”
“Everyone has the right to a public hearing of his case by an independent and impartial court within a reasonable time in conditions of equality and with respect for all fair trial requirements in order to have his violated rights restored, as well as the validity of the charge against him determined. ...”
As a result of the amendments, Article 101 reads as follows:
“In conformity with the procedure set forth in the Constitution and the law on the Constitutional Court, an application to the Constitutional Court may be filed by: ... (6) every person in a specific case when the final judicial act has been adopted, when the possibilities of judicial protection have been exhausted and when the constitutionality of a law provision applied by the act in question is being challenged...”
.  The relevant provisions of the Civil Code read as follows:
“1. The civil legislation is based, inter alia, on the principle of freedom of contract.
Citizens and legal entities acquire and enforce civil rights of their own will and in their interests. They are free to determine their rights and obligations on the basis of a contract and stipulate any provision in a contract which is not incompatible with the law...”
“1.  The acts of public authorities or local self-government bodies which are incompatible with laws or other legal acts and which violate the civil rights and lawful interests of a citizen or a legal person may be annulled by a court...
The Constitutional Court of Armenia shall, under Article 100 of the Constitution of Armenia, decide on the compatibility of laws, the resolutions of the National Assembly of Armenia, the decrees and directives of the President of Armenia, and the decrees of the Government of Armenia with the Constitution.”
.  The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“The court shall terminate the proceedings, if ... [inter alia] the dispute is not subject to be examined by the courts...”
“Unlawful acts of public authorities, local self-government bodies and their officials can be annulled or their actions (inaction) can be contested (hereafter, annulling the unlawful act) if the act in question contradicts the law and if there is evidence that the applicant’s rights and (or) freedoms guaranteed by the Armenian Constitution and laws have been violated. ...”
“1.  An application seeking to annul unlawful acts of public authorities, local selfgovernment bodies and their officials shall be submitted to a court dealing with civil cases or the Commercial Court depending on their jurisdiction over cases.
The court cannot examine applications seeking to annul those acts, the determination of whose conformity with the Constitution of Armenia falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court.
The application may concern the unlawful act itself or any part of it. ...”
.  The relevant provisions of the Law, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“The question of premature termination of the term of office of a judge shall be raised before the Council by the Minister of Justice...
The following may serve as grounds for premature termination of the term of office of a judge upon the Council’s conclusion: (1) a gross violation of lawfulness; and (2) commission of an act incompatible with a judge’s title.
The Minister of Justice ..., in cases envisaged by the first paragraph of this Section, shall submit to the Council the materials on which the proposal to terminate prematurely the term of office of a judge ... is based.
...
The Council, when examining the question of premature termination of the term of office of a judge, shall summon and hear the judge. ...”
“The President of the Council shall summon the Council’s hearings.
The Council’s hearings shall be conducted by the President of the Council or, upon his instruction, the Minister of Justice or the General Prosecutor.
If the President of the Council is not present at the Council’s hearing, then the hearings, in which questions related to judges are examined, shall be conducted by the Minister of Justice, while [the hearings], in which questions related to prosecutors are examined, shall be conducted by the General Prosecutor.”
“The Council, when performing its functions envisaged by ... [, inter alia, Article 19] of this Law, [shall adopt] conclusions.”
“The Council’s ... conclusions are adopted by the majority of votes of those present at the hearing. ...
The Council’s conclusions are of a recommendatory nature. ...”
.  The relevant provisions of the Law, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“The term of office of a judge shall be terminated upon the proposal of the Council of Justice by the President of [Armenia] if: ... (8) [he or she] has committed a gross violation of the law when administering justice; ...”
.  On the basis of applications lodged by individuals, not judges, following the Constitutional amendments of 2005 the Constitutional Court found the second paragraph of Article 160 § 1 of the CCP incompatible with Articles 18 and 19 of the Constitution, as amended on 27 November 2005, because it failed to guarantee a balance of power, created a serious gap in terms of judicial control of legal acts and endangered the implementation of an individual’s right to judicial protection of his rights and freedoms as guaranteed by paragraph 1 of Article 18 of the Constitution.
.  According to Article 6, an advocate is entitled to receive remuneration for his services. The amount and mode of payment for legal services are decided by a written contract concluded between the advocate and the client in accordance with the Civil Code.