The case originated in an application (no. 11301/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by thirty-three Slovak nationals, whose particulars appear in the appendix (“the applicants”), on 24 March 2003.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Buzinger, a lawyer practising in . The Government of the  (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms A. Poláčková, who was subsequently succeeded in that function by Ms M. Pirošíková.
On 13 April 2006 the President of the Fourth Section of the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Applying former Article 29 § 3 (currently Article 29 § 1) of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicants were clients of a private non-banking investment company, Sun a.s. (“the company”), which was open for investment by the public.
Under various types of private-law contracts, the applicants and more than seven hundred other individuals made financial investments in the company, which failed to meet its contractual obligations.
In December 1999 and subsequently, several individuals lodged criminal complaints against the management of the company about defaults on payments. In a report of 2 June 2000 the police observed, inter alia, that the company's customers were scattered all over the country, and that a relatively high number of criminal complaints could be expected in the matter.
On 27 April 2000 a criminal investigation was opened against Š., the owner and chief executive officer of the company. However, on 18 May 2000 the decision was quashed on appeal due to formal shortcomings and lack of evidence.
Numerous other criminal complaints in the matter were lodged, inter alia, by the applicants and the Supervisory Board and the Board of Directors of the company. They finally resulted in criminal proceedings being taken against Š. (see below).
On 25 April 2002 the  dismissed a petition for an insolvency order against the company, on the ground that the value of its estate was not sufficient to cover the costs of the proceedings.
The company was consequently wound up and on 14 February 2005 erased from the Register of Companies, whereby it ceased legally to exist.
In the period between 10 April 2000 and 17 June 2002 four applicants lodged criminal complaints accusing the management of the company of fraud and embezzlement.
On 16 August 2000 the Bratislava V District Office of Investigation took a formal decision under Article 160 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to open criminal proceedings against one or more unknown persons, on suspicion that they had committed the offence of embezzlement within the meaning of Article 248 §§ 1 and 5 of the Criminal Code in connection with the management of the company.
Later in 2000 the investigators obtained information from the Police Criminal Forensics Institute, the Police Financial Intelligence Unit, the tax authorities, the National Property Fund, the Bratislava Stock Exchange, the National Employment Authority, the Financial Market Authority and the Slovak Securities Centre.
In the course of the proceedings the applicants were interviewed by investigators. They lodged specific quantified claims under Article 43 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for damages in the period between 9 March 2001 and 24 June 2003 (see the appendix).
The applicants appointed representatives from among themselves to act on their behalf. In the subsequent period, through their representatives, they complained on numerous occasions to various governmental institutions and the media about the course of the investigation and especially about undue delays.
From August 2001 to March 2002 the investigators interviewed several aggrieved parties and witnesses and obtained further information concerning the company, from a sworn expert, the Police Financial Intelligence Unit, the tax authorities and the Securities Centre.
On 21 March 2002 the Minister of the Interior ordered the matter to be investigated by a special team. The team was set up and took up the investigation on 1 April 2002.
On 2 May 2002 the Bratislava Regional Office of Investigation ruled that, in view of its scale and importance, that office would be responsible for the conduct of the investigation.
In a letter of 9 May 2002 the Bratislava V District Office of Public Prosecution acknowledged that in the period prior to March 2002 there had been delays in the investigation.
Between April and December 2002 the investigators questioned 373 aggrieved persons, seventeen witnesses, numerous other persons and a sworn expert, obtained information from private companies, the land registry authorities, the tax authorities, the Social Security Administration and the Securities Centre, searched a flat and non-residential premises and took various steps, including involving Interpol, with the aim of establishing the whereabouts of Š., who was suspected of having gone abroad.
On 27 August 2002 the investigators accused Š. of embezzlement and other economic offences in connection with the insolvency of the company.
In October 2002 the investigator applied for a warrant for the arrest of the accused and ordered expert evidence to be taken. An expert report was submitted in January 2003.
On 30 October 2002 the Bratislava V District Court issued an arrest warrant.
In November 2002 the investigator ordered further expert evidence to be taken and obtained information from various sources.
On 5 and 6 February 2003 respectively Š. was arrested and remanded in custody. On 27 February 2003 the Bratislava V District Prosecutor dismissed as unfounded his appeal against the accusations.
Later in 2003 the investigators interrogated Š. 9 times, heard 278 aggrieved parties and thirty-nine witnesses, obtained information from several commercial banks, an airline company, the Securities Centre, the Ministry of Economy and the Financial Police, cross-examined the accused and a witness and ordered further expert evidence to be taken. The police carried out a search of a house and non-residential premises.
On 12 January 2004 the investigation was transferred to the Organised Crime Unit of the Police Corps.
Later in 2004 the investigators cross-examined several witnesses and Š., ordered an examination by a mental health specialist and interviewed eighteen aggrieved persons and three witnesses. In 2005 the investigator interviewed Š., two witnesses and an expert witness and cross-examined Š. and a witness.
On 19 July 2006 the Supreme Court ruled, on application by the Prosecutor General, under Article 47 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, that participation of aggrieved parties in the criminal proceedings was not admissible. Although this decision had no impact on the applicants' standing as aggrieved parties in criminal proceedings within the meaning of Article 46 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the applicants as a result could no longer exercise their rights as aggrieved parties as stipulated in Article 46 §§ 1 and 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Supreme Court noted that there were as many as 707 aggrieved parties, that they had not appointed a common representative, that their claims and demands differed in many aspects and that the assertion of such claims and demands individually in the criminal proceedings would endanger the main purpose and speedy course of the proceedings. The Supreme Court observed that, as its ruling had an impact on the running of the statute of limitations in respect of civil-law claims for damages, the Prosecutor General was to make it public by appropriate means. The Supreme Court's ruling was announced by the Public Prosecution Service on their official web page on 11 August 2006.
According to the information available, the criminal proceedings are still pending.
On 26 June 2002 the applicants lodged a complaint under Article 127 of the Constitution with the . They complained that the District Office of Investigation and the District Office of Prosecution had violated their right to a hearing “without unjustified delay” (Article 48 § 2 of the Constitution) and “within a reasonable time” (Article 6 § 1 of the Convention).
On 23 August 2002 the  declared the complaint inadmissible. It observed that the primary aim of criminal proceedings was to detect criminal offences and to punish perpetrators and not to determine aggrieved parties' claims for damages. Aggrieved parties' claims for damages were of a private-law nature and were predominantly to be asserted before the civil courts. The possibility of claiming damages in criminal proceedings was a privilege which did not make the determination of such claims the central issue of the proceedings and was limited by the above main aim of the proceedings. The  concluded that the applicants, being aggrieved parties in the criminal proceedings, did not enjoy the right to have their claims for damages determined “without unjustified delay” and “within a reasonable time”.
Article 43 §§ 1 and 2 provides, inter alia, that a person who has suffered pecuniary or non-pecuniary damage as a result of a criminal offence may claim compensation from the accused and request the court, when convicting the person charged with a criminal offence, to order the latter to pay compensation for the damage. The aggrieved party further has the right to adduce evidence and to comment on it, to inspect the court file, to take part in the hearing and to make submissions.
If there is a large number of aggrieved parties, usually more than one hundred, and if the exercise by each individual of his rights would endanger the purpose and speedy course of the proceedings, the participation of the aggrieved parties in the proceedings shall be decided upon by a court pursuant to Article 44 §§ 3 and 5.
Articles 47 et seq. provide the opportunity to secure the claim of an aggrieved party for damages by impounding the accused person's property in situations when there is a well-founded suspicion that the payment of the claim would be hindered or frustrated.
Persons who have suffered damage to their health or property, have suffered psychological or other damage, or whose legally protected rights or freedoms have been violated or jeopardised as a result of a criminal offence, are considered aggrieved parties. They have, inter alia, the right to claim compensation for the damage they have suffered, to adduce evidence and to comment on it, to inspect the court file, to take part in the hearing, to make submissions, and so on. (Article 46 § 1).
An aggrieved party who has a lawful claim against an accused person for compensation in respect of damage resulting from a criminal offence, has the right to propose that a conviction should include an order for compensation. The proposal must be made at the latest at the closure of the investigation and must indicate the ground and scope of the claim (Article 46 § 3) and can only be made if the claim has not already been decided upon in civil or other proceedings (Article 46 § 4).
If there is a large number of aggrieved parties, usually meaning more than one hundred, and if the exercise by each individual of his or her rights would endanger the purpose and speedy course of the proceedings, the participation of the aggrieved parties in the proceedings shall be decided upon by a court, following an application by the Prosecutor General, pursuant to Article 47 §§ 3 and 4.
Articles 50 et seq. provide for the possibility of securing the claim of an aggrieved party for damages in situations when there is a well-founded suspicion that the payment of the claim would be hindered or frustrated.
Pursuant to Article 287 § 1, where a court convicts a person charged with an offence which has caused damage to third persons under Article 46 § 1, it shall, as a rule, order him or her to compensate such damage, provided that the claim has been filed correctly and in due time.
Under Article 288 § 1, a court shall refer a person claiming damages to a civil court (or to another authority) when the evidence available is not sufficient to determine that claim or where the taking of further evidence exceeding the scope of the criminal case is required and the criminal proceedings would thereby be unduly prolonged.
Under Article 83, where proceedings have commenced in a specific matter, the matter cannot be made the subject of other judicial proceedings.
If a claim for damages is duly lodged in criminal proceedings, it is considered a litis pendens from the point of view of Article 83 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Collection of Judicial Decisions and Standpoints of the Supreme Court, No. 22/1979).
Under Article 112, if creditors make and duly pursue a claim in respect of their rights before a court or another authority, the statute of limitations is stayed from the day the claim is made.
This includes the submission of a civil-party claim for damages in criminal proceedings (see, for example, Collection of Judicial Decisions and Standpoints nos. 131/1974 and 29/1985) from the moment when a criminal complaint is lodged (no. III/1967 in Collection of Judicial Decisions and Standpoints).
The  held in its findings (see for example I. ÚS 157/02; III. ÚS 183/05; I. ÚS 18/06 and I. ÚS 67/2010) that an aggrieved party who joined criminal proceedings with a claim for damages has a right to a hearing “without unjustified delay” (Article 48 § 2 of the Constitution) as such a duly lodged claim excludes the possibility of having it decided upon in civil proceedings (Article 83 of the Code of Civil Procedure).