The case originated in an application (no. 45264/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Albanian national, Ms Aferdita Hamzaraj (“the applicant”), on 27 November 2004.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr S. Puto, a lawyer practising in Tirana. The Albanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs S. Meneri.
The applicant alleged under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention a violation of her property rights in view of the authorities’ prolonged failure to enforce an administrative decision ordering compensation in kind or State bonds. She also complained about the length of the proceedings under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 25 June 2006 the President of the Fourth Section of the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1926 and lives in .
On 30 January 1995 the Lushnjë District Court recognised the existence of the applicant’s father’s property rights over a plot of land measuring 576 sq. m. situated in the city of  (vendim për vërtetim fakti). The decision became binding and final on 13 February 1995.
The applicant, pursuant to the Property Restitution and Compensation Act (hereinafter “the Property Act”), lodged a request with the Lushnjë Commission on Property Restitution and Compensation (hereinafter “the Commission”) seeking restitution of the original property.
By a decision of 21 March 1996 the Commission upheld the property rights of the applicant and the other five heirs of her father over the plot of land measuring 576 sq. m situated in the city of . On the basis of the documents in its possession the Commission held that restitution of the original property was impossible since it was occupied. Accordingly, the Commission decided that the applicant was to be compensated in kind or in the form of State bonds pursuant to section 16 of the Property Act. The Commission ordered the district authorities to take the necessary measures in order to enforce its decision.
In 2004, following the failure of the authorities to enforce the Commission decision, the applicant requested the district authorities to decide on the amount of compensation to be awarded to her in respect of her property.
The authorities have still not complied with their obligation.
The relevant domestic law has been described in detail in