The case concerns the lack of a public hearing owing to the classification of some of the documentary evidence as “secret”.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Barnaul. The applicant was represented by Mr Davydov, a lawyer practising in Barnaul.
The Government were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant held the post of head of the Barnaul Internal Affairs Department (“the Department”).
On 10 November 2009 the head of the Main Internal Affairs Department for the Altay Region ordered an inspection of the Department’s accounting documents, in particular, the documents containing information on the Department’s expenses for police activities and investigations, contracts and other documents in line with the Ministry of Internal Affairs’ decrees. It was established that the applicant had authorised contracts with and subsequently payments to some police informers, in breach of the law.
On 5 August 2010 the applicant was dismissed from his post for repeated disciplinary violations. He challenged the decision before a court.
On 24 August 2010 a judge of the Altay Regional Court held that the applicant’s dismissal related to investigating activities and that, in accordance with the Code of Civil Procedure, a preliminary hearing should be held.
On 12 November 2010 the Altay Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s claim in camera.
On 4 February 2011 the Supreme Court of Russia held a hearing in camera in the applicant’s and the opposite party’s presence and upheld the decision of 12 November 2010 on appeal.
On 27 July 2011 a judge of the Supreme Court of Russia refused to refer the applicant’s request for supervisory review to the Presidium of the Supreme Court.
Article 123 of the Russian Constitution provides that court hearings should be held in public, except in cases established by federal law.
Article 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that court hearings can be held in camera in cases concerning State secrets or secrecy of adoption, and in other cases established by federal law. Private hearings are also allowed upon the request of a party to the proceedings who pleads for the confidentiality of commercial and other data protected by law, privacy and other circumstances, the public discussion of which is capable of impeding the proper administration of justice or entailing a breach of secrecy or a breach of the legitimate interests and rights of individuals. A decision to hold hearings entirely or partly in camera must be reasoned.
Section 5 of the State Secrets Act (Law no. 5485-1 of 21 July 1993) provides as follows:
“The following information may be classified as a State secret:
information in the military field ...
information in the field of the economy, science and engineering ...
information in the field of foreign policy and trade ...
information in the field of intelligence and counter-intelligence and investigation of crimes and anti-terrorist activities:
on means, sources, methods, plans and results of the intelligence, counterintelligence, investigating and anti-terrorist activities and data on financing of the above-mentioned activities if such data disclose information relating to them;
...
on persons collaborating on a confidential basis with intelligence, counterintelligence and investigating authorities ...”