The case originated in an application (no. 11236/09) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Aytunç Altay (“the applicant”), on 17 February 2006.
The applicant was represented by Ms G. Tuncer, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the restriction of the privacy of his consultations with his lawyer was incompatible with his rights under Article 8 of the Convention and that the domestic proceedings with respect to this measure had not complied with the requirements of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 17 October 2017 notice of the above complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1956 and was convicted of attempting to undermine the constitutional order and sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. At the time of the events relating to the application, he was serving his sentence in the Edirne F-type prison.
Since his imprisonment the applicant has been represented by his lawyer in respect of several applications, including the present application, before the Court.
On an unspecified date, the applicant’s lawyer sent a package by post to the applicant. The prison administration believed the contents of the package to be suspect and therefore made a request to the public prosecutor on 12 August 2005 to apply to an enforcement court for a decision as to whether the items sent to the applicant concerned documents relating to his defence or whether they concerned any objectionable content such as to prevent them from being handed over to the applicant.
On 25 August 2005 the Edirne Enforcement Court allowed an application by the prosecutor and examined the contents of the package, which contained a book entitled Globalisation and Imperialism (Küreselleşme ve Emperyalizm), a magazine with the title Rootless Anational Publication (Köxüz Anasyonal Neşriyat), and a newspaper with the title Express International Sha la la (Express Enternasyonal Şalala). The court held that the items in question did not relate to the rights of the defence and that therefore they should not be handed over to the applicant pursuant to section 5 of Law no. 5351.
On 16 September 2005 the applicant lodged an objection with the Edirne Assize Court against the decision of the Edirne Enforcement Court. He submitted that he had asked his lawyer to bring the books and magazines in question simply because he had wanted to read them. He submitted that it had been the prison administration which had told his lawyer that they could not be brought to him in person and therefore had to be sent by post. He further argued that while it was correct that the publications did not relate to his defence rights, they were not illegal and there had been no basis for the prison administration to withhold them from him simply because they had been sent by post by his lawyer.
On 30 September 2005 the Edirne Assize Court dismissed the applicant’s objections on the basis of the case file, holding that the decision of the Edirne Enforcement Court had been in accordance with the law and procedure.
In the meantime, that is to say on 16 September 2005, the prison administration lodged another request with the public prosecutor in relation to the package sent by the applicant’s lawyer. In that request, it submitted that the applicant’s lawyer’s conduct had been incompatible with her duties as a lawyer and requested that section 5 of Law no. 5351, which provides for an official to be present during consultations between a prisoner and his or her lawyer, be applied to the applicant.
On 23 September 2005, referring to its earlier decision of 25 August 2005, the Edirne Enforcement Court, in an examination carried out on the basis of the case file, without holding a hearing and without seeking submissions from the applicant or his lawyer, granted an application on the part of the prison administration and therefore held that an official was to be present during the applicant’s consultations with his lawyer. The decision did not specify how long the restriction was to remain in force. The Edirne Enforcement Court further held that, if requested, a separate decision would be taken as to whether the exchange of documents between the applicant and his lawyer would also be subject to a restriction.
On 24 October 2005 the applicant lodged an objection with the Edirne Assize Court against the decision of 23 September 2005. He submitted that the impugned decision did not explain why it was necessary to restrict the privacy of his consultations with his lawyer. He argued in that connection that a provision which provided for such a restriction could only be applied if it had emerged from documents and other evidence that visits by lawyers to a person convicted of organised crime had been serving as a means of communication within the criminal organisation in question. He argued that no such element had been present in his situation and the court had not conducted any examination in that connection. Lastly, he maintained that there were no legal provisions prohibiting the exchange of books and magazines that were not illegal between a prisoner and his lawyer. The applicant did not request that the examination of his case be carried out by holding a hearing.
On 27 October 2005 the Edirne Assize Court dismissed the case on the basis of the case file and without holding a hearing. Without responding to the applicant’s arguments, it held that the Edirne Enforcement Court’s decision of 23 September 2005 had been in accordance with the law and procedure.
On 29 May 2008 the applicant lodged an application with the Edirne Enforcement Court for the restriction on the conversations between him and his lawyer to be lifted.
On 4 June 2008 the applicant’s application was dismissed on the basis of the case file. The court held that the decision of 23 September 2005 had become final and that there was no need for a further examination.
The applicant lodged another application on 2 November 2010 and applied for a hearing in accordance with the new amendments to the procedure before the enforcement courts (see paragraph 27 below). On 6 December 2010 the Edirne Enforcement Court dismissed the applicant’s application for a hearing, holding that the new amendments to the procedure concerned only the examination of objections against disciplinary sanctions, so that in so far as the restriction of 23 September 2005 had not been a disciplinary sanction, no hearing could be held in respect of that complaint. It further dismissed the applicant’s application for the restriction to be lifted, holding that the decision of 23 September 2005 had been final. An appeal by the applicant against that decision was dismissed on 24 August 2011.
On 21 February 2013 the applicant lodged another application with the Edirne Enforcement Court and repeated his request for the restriction to be lifted. The court dismissed that application on 11 April 2013, holding that there had not been any change in the applicant’s circumstances and that the decision relating to the restriction on consultations with his lawyer remained valid. In that connection, the court held that there was still a risk in view of the previous decisions taken in respect of the applicant by the enforcement courts, and also in view of his lawyer’s conduct. An appeal by the applicant against that decision was dismissed on 10 June 2013.
At time of the adoption of this judgment, the restriction on the applicant’s right to confıdential communications with his lawyer remains in place.
On 17 February 2006 the applicant lodged an application with the Court, complaining about the Edirne Enforcement Court’s decision of 25 August 2005.
On 8 December 2015 the Court declared the application inadmissible on account of non-exhaustion of domestic remedies and held that the applicant had to make use of the new domestic remedy established by Law no. 6384 (see Altay and Others v. Turkey (dec.), no. 9100/06 and 155 others).
On 1 November 2016 the Compensation Commission held that the Edirne Enforcement Court’s decision not to hand over the book and the periodicals sent to the applicant by his lawyer had infringed the applicant’s right to receive information within the meaning of Article 10 of the Convention. It held in that connection that the impugned decision had constituted an interference which had not been based on relevant and sufficient reasons, notably because the domestic court had not explained in its decision in what respect the books and magazines in question had jeopardised the security of the institution.
The relevant provisions of Law no. 5275 on the enforcement of sentences and preventive measures, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“...
(2)  Consultation with a lawyer or a notary may be carried out during working hours except for weekends and public holidays, in a place reserved for that purpose within the sight but not the hearing of officials.
...
(4)  [as amended by section 5 of Law no. 5351] A lawyer’s documents and files relating to the defence and his or her records of meetings with his or her client shall not be subject to examination. However, if it emerges from documents or other evidence that visits by lawyers to a person convicted of the offences set out in Article 220 of the Criminal Code or sub-chapters 4 and 5 of Chapter 2 of the Criminal Code are serving as a means of communication with a terrorist organisation or of committing a crime or otherwise jeopardising the security of the prison, the enforcement court may, on an application by the prosecution, impose [the following measures]: presence of an official during the lawyer’s visits; verification of documents exchanged between the prisoner and his or her lawyers during such visits; and/or confiscation of all or some of these documents by the judge.
...”
“(1)  A convicted prisoner may purchase periodical or non-periodical publications at his or her own expense provided that they are not banned by a court order.
...
(3)  No publication shall be handed over to a convicted prisoner which contains news, photographs or editorials that jeopardise the security of the prison or are obscene.”
“1.  With the exception of the restrictions set forth in this section, convicted prisoners shall have the right, at their own expense, to send and receive letters, faxes and telegrams.
The letters, faxes and telegrams sent or received by prisoners shall be monitored by the reading committee in those prisons that have such a body, or, in those which do not, by the highest authority in the prison.
If letters, faxes and telegrams to prisoners are a threat to order and security in the prison, single out serving officials as targets, permit communication between terrorist or criminal organisations, contain false or misleading information likely to cause panic in individuals or institutions, or contain threats or insults, they shall not be forwarded to the addressee.
...”
Section 59(4) of Law no. 5275 was repealed on 1 February 2018 and replaced at the same time by new provisions concerning the restriction of the privacy of communication of prisoners and their lawyers.
Section 4 of Law no. 4675 on enforcement judges lays downs the powers of enforcement courts in ruling on objections concerning, inter alia, prison authorities’ decisions or actions concerning the execution of sentences, communication of detainees and prisoners with the outside world and the imposition of disciplinary sanctions. Furthermore, section 6 stipulates that an enforcement court must decide on the basis of the case file, after obtaining the written opinion of the relevant public prosecutor and without holding a hearing. The enforcement court may conduct an examination ex proprio motu or request further information from the parties if the interests of justice so require.
An objection against the decisions of enforcement courts lies to the nearest assize court. The assize courts examine objections on points of fact and law without holding a hearing. The relevant Articles of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271) in that connection provides as follows:
“The authority examining the objection may communicate it to the public prosecutor and the other party in order to obtain their written observations. The authority may conduct further investigations into the matter ...”
“1.  Save for the circumstances described by law, the courts shall give decisions on objections without holding a hearing. The public prosecutor, as well as the defendant or his or her legal representative, may be heard if necessary.
Where the objection is allowed, the court examining [the objection] shall render a decision on the subject matter of the objection.
...
The decision delivered in respect of the objection shall be final ...”
On 22 July 2010 Law no. 6008 amended section 6 of Law no. 4675. It was published in the Official Gazette on 25 July 2010. These amendments set out a new procedure in respect of disciplinary sanctions only. Accordingly, the enforcement court delivers a decision after hearing the defence submissions of the prisoner concerned and collecting all the evidence. The prisoner can present his or her defence submissions in person and/or in the presence of his or her lawyer, or through a lawyer only. The Law further provides a remedy for all those prisoners who had previously lodged objections with the enforcement judges concerning disciplinary sanctions imposed on them before the enactment of this Law (provisional section 1). Accordingly, those who had previously lodged objections with enforcement judges against a prison disciplinary sanction have the possibility of lodging a fresh objection with the enforcement judge within six months of the enactment of this Law, and their cases will be dealt with in accordance with the new procedures.
The object of Law no. 6384 was to provide for the settlement, by means of compensation, of applications lodged with the Court concerning the length of judicial proceedings and the non-enforcement or delayed enforcement of judicial decisions. A full description of the relevant domestic law may be found in Turgut and Others v. Turkey ((dec.), no. 4860/09, §§ 19-26, 26 March 2013).
The competence ratione materiae of the Compensation Commission was subsequently extended by a decree which came into force on 16 March 2014. The decree extended the competence of the Compensation Commission to the examination of other complaints such as alleged restrictions of the right of detainees to correspondence in a language other than Turkish and the refusal of the prison authorities, on various grounds, to hand over periodicals. A full description of the relevant domestic law may be found in Yıldız and Yanak v. Turkey ((dec.), no. 44013/07, §§ 9-17, 27 May 2014).
Furthermore, under section 5(2) of Law no. 6384, an applicant may apply to the Compensation Commission within one month of the official notification of the Court’s inadmissibility decision by the Government.
The Turkish Council of Ministers issued a decree which came into force on 9 March 2016. The decree extended anew the competence ratione materiae of the Compensation Commission. The Compensation Commission is now entitled to examine the following subjects under Article 4 of the decree, which reads as follows:
“...
(d)  Applications concerning an alleged breach of an applicant’s right to private and family life on account of the respective disciplinary sanctions imposed on detainees and convicted persons by the prison authorities;
...”
The recommendation of the Committee of Ministers to Member States of the Council of Europe on the European Prison Rules (Rec (2006)2, adopted on 11 January 2006 at the 952nd meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies), in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“Legal advice
1  All prisoners are entitled to legal advice, and the prison authorities shall provide them with reasonable facilities for gaining access to such advice.
2  Prisoners may consult any legal matter with a legal adviser of their own choice and at their own expense.
3  Where there is a recognised scheme of free legal aid the authorities shall bring it to the attention of prisoners.
4  Consultations and other communications including correspondence about legal matters between prisoners and their legal advisers shall be confidential.
5  A judicial authority may in exceptional circumstances authorise restrictions on such confidentiality to prevent serious crime or major breaches of prison safety and security.
6  Prisoners shall have access to, or be allowed to keep in their possession, documents relating to their legal proceedings.”
The relevant part of the Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, approved by the United Nations General Assembly on 9 December 1988 (A/RES/43/173), reads as follows:
“1.  A detained or imprisoned person shall be entitled to communicate and consult with his legal counsel.
A detained or imprisoned person shall be allowed adequate time and facilities for consultation with his legal counsel.
The right of a detained or imprisoned person to be visited by and to consult and communicate, without delay or censorship and in full confidentiality, with his legal counsel may not be suspended or restricted save in exceptional circumstances, to be specified by law or lawful regulations, when it is considered indispensable by a judicial or other authority in order to maintain security and good order.
Interviews between a detained or imprisoned person and his legal counsel may be within sight, but not within the hearing, of a law enforcement official.
Communications between a detained or imprisoned person and his legal counsel mentioned in the present principle shall be inadmissible as evidence against the detained or imprisoned person unless they are connected with a continuing or contemplated crime.”
The Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers (adopted by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held in Havana, Cuba, from 27 August to 7 September 1990) state, in particular:
“8.  All arrested, detained or imprisoned persons shall be provided with adequate opportunities, time and facilities to be visited by and to communicate and consult with a lawyer, without delay, interception or censorship and in full confidentiality. Such consultations may be within sight, but not within the hearing, of law enforcement officials.
...
Governments shall ensure that lawyers (a) are able to perform all of their professional functions without intimidation, hindrance, harassment or improper interference; (b) are able to travel and to consult with their clients freely both within their own country and abroad; and (c) shall not suffer, or be threatened with, prosecution or administrative, economic or other sanctions for any action taken in accordance with recognized professional duties, standards and ethics.
...
Governments shall recognize and respect that all communications and consultations between lawyers and their clients within their professional relationship are confidential.”