The case originated in an application (no. 32984/96) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by sixteen Turkish nationals, Mr Ali Alfatlı, Mr Haşim Aydıncak, Mr Nusrat Safa Akyürek, Mr Ahmet Asena, Mr Mahmut Memduh Uyan, Mr İbrahim Levent Saçılanateş, Mr Mehmet Kaplandur, Mr Nevzat Cömert, Mr Özgür Şahin, Mr Bülent Forta, Mr Hüseyin Cihan, Mr Hasan Yorulmaz, Mr Ahmet Kirami Kılınç, Mr Mehmet Engin Höke, Mr Mustafa Aslan and Mr Sedat Göçmen (“the applicants”), on 7, 8, 12, 18, 24 and 25 June 1996.
The applicants all complained that the criminal proceedings brought against them were not determined within a reasonable time as required by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The applicants Haşim Aydıncak, Nusrat Safa Akyürek, Ahmet Asena, Mahmut Memduh Uyan, İbrahim Levent Saçılanateş, Hüseyin Cihan, Hasan Yorulmaz, Ahmet Kirami Kılınç, Mehmet Engin Höke, Mustafa Aslan and Sedat Göçmen submitted under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that their right to a fair hearing was breached as they were tried by the Martial Law Court which lacked independence and impartiality.
The applicants all alleged under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that their right to a fair hearing was breached since the courts convicted them on the basis of the statements they had made to the police under duress.
The applicant Sedat Göçmen further alleged under Article 6 § 3 (b) of the Convention that he was deprived of his right to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence.
The applicants Haşim Aydıncak, Nusrat Safa Akyürek, Ahmet Asena, Mahmut Memduh Uyan, İbrahim Levent Saçılanateş, Bülent Forta, Hüseyin Cihan, Hasan Yorulmaz, Ahmet Kirami Kılınç, Mehmet Engin Höke, Mustafa Aslan and Sedat Göçmen complained that they had been subjected to various forms of ill-treatment during their pre-trial detention. They did not invoke any Articles of the Convention and did not specify the treatment they had allegedly suffered during their pre-trial detention.
The case was transferred to the Court on 1 November 1998 by virtue of Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11 to the Convention.
On 23 November 1999 the Court communicated to the Government the applicants' complaint under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention concerning the length of the criminal proceedings and the complaint under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention introduced by Haşim Aydıncak, Nusrat Safa Akyürek, Ahmet Asena, Mahmut Memduh Uyan, İbrahim Levent Saçılanateş, Hüseyin Cihan, Hasan Yorulmaz, Ahmet Kirami Kılınç, Mehmet Engin Höke, Mustafa Aslan and Sedat Göçmen concerning their right to a fair hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal. The Court also communicated to the Government Sedat Göçmen's complaint concerning the lack of time and facilities for the preparation of his defence. The Court rejected the remainder of the complaints.
On 1 November 2001 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Third Section (Rule 52 § 1).
By a decision of 27 June 2002 the Court declared the application partly admissible, retaining the applicants' complaint concerning the alleged breach of their right to a hearing within a reasonable time and the complaint introduced by Mahmut Memduh Uyan, İbrahim Levent Saçılanateş, Hüseyin Cihan, Hasan Yorulmaz, Ahmet Kirami Kılınç, Mehmet Engin Höke and Mustafa Aslan concerning their right to a fair hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal.
On 25 September 2002, after an exchange of correspondence, the Registrar suggested to the parties that they should attempt to reach a friendly settlement within the meaning of Article 38 § 1 (b) of the Convention. On 23 and 24 October 2002, 5 November 2002, 4 December 2002; and on 17 December 2002, 7 and 23 January 2003 the applicants and the Government respectively submitted formal declarations accepting a friendly settlement of the case.
On 25 October 2002 Mr Mehdi Bektaş, the representative of the applicant Mahmut Memduh Uyan, informed the Court that his client did not wish to reach a friendly settlement in his case.
On 11 September 2003 the Court unanimously decided to strike the case out of the list following the friendly settlement agreement reached between the parties in so far as it concerned the applicants Mr Ali Alfatlı, Mr Haşim Aydıncak, Mr Nusrat Safa Akyürek, Mr Ahmet Asena, Mr İbrahim Levent Saçılanateş, Mr Mehmet Kaplandur, Mr Nevzat Cömert, Mr Özgür Şahin, Mr Bülent Forta, Mr Hüseyin Cihan, Mr Hasan Yorulmaz, Mr Ahmet Kirami Kılınç, Mr Mehmet Engin Höke, Mr Mustafa Aslan and Mr Sedat Göçmen. It decided to sever the application, in so far as it concerned the applicant Mr Mahmut Memduh Uyan, and adjourned the examination of the complaints introduced by him.
The present judgment examines the merits of the complaints introduced by Mr Mahmut Memduh Uyan on 7 June 1996. Mr Uyan will be referred to as “the applicant”.
On 2 February 1985 the applicant was arrested and placed in police custody. He was accused of membership of an illegal organisation, the Dev-Yol (Revolutionary Way). On 18 March 1985 the Ankara Martial Law Court (Sıkıyönetim Mahkemesi) ordered the applicant's detention on remand.
On 26 February 1982 the Military Public Prosecutor filed a bill of indictment with the Ankara Martial Law Court setting out charges against seven hundred and twenty-three defendants, including the applicant. The military prosecutor accused the applicant of membership of an organisation whose aim was to undermine the constitutional order and replace it with a Marxist-Leninist regime, contrary to Articles 146 § 1 and 168 § 2 of the Criminal Code.
After martial law was lifted, the Ankara Martial Law Court took the name of the Martial Law Court attached to the 4th Army Corps.
On 19 July 1989 the Martial Law Court convicted the applicant and sentenced him to death penalty. The applicant appealed against the conviction and the case was referred to the Military Court of Cassation (Askeri Yargıtay).
Following promulgation of the Law of 26 December 1994, which abolished the jurisdiction of the martial law courts, the Court of Cassation (Yargıtay) acquired jurisdiction over the cases and the files were sent to it.
On 6 February 1995 the applicant was released pending trial.
On 27 December 1995 the Court of Cassation upheld the applicant's conviction.
A description of the relevant domestic law and practice can be found in Şahiner v. Turkey, judgment of 4 September 2001, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 2000-IX.
Article 327 of the Code of Criminal Procedure lists the circumstances in which “a person convicted in a judgment that has become final may be granted a retrial”.
It was amended by section 3 of Law no. 4793, which added a sixth set of circumstances in which the proceedings could be reopened:
“where it has been held in a final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights that a decision in criminal proceedings was given in breach of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms or its Protocols. In such cases, an application to reopen the proceedings may be lodged within one year of the date on which the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights became final.” 
Law no. 4793 came into force on 3 February 2003. By provisional section 1 of the Law, section 3 is applicable in only two sets of circumstances: where the Court has delivered a judgment that became final before the Law came into force, and where the Court delivers a final judgment on an application lodged after the Law came into force.