The case originated in an application (no. 36607/06) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Abdullah Yılmaz (“the applicant”), on 3 August 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Ata, a lawyer practising in Eskişehir. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) was represented by its agent.
On 19 January 2010 the complaints concerning Article 6 § 1 (length of proceedings, alleged unfairness of the proceedings in breach of the principles of equality of arms and adversarial proceedings, and conflicting court decisions) and Article 8 of the Convention (right to respect for private life) were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
Neither the applicant nor the Government submitted observations on the merits.
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in Eskisehir.
At the material time he was a religious culture teacher and had passed a competitive examination organised by the Ministry of Education (“the Ministry”) giving access to teaching posts abroad.
On completion of the competitive examination, a document dated 4 August 2000 marked “secret” was drawn up. The document contained the following passages:
“Abdullah Yılmaz
...
– was taken into police custody on 19.06.1987 for damaging a bust of Atatürk in Kayseri [and was] then released on 22.06.1987 by the trial court;
– practices separation [between men and women] (‘haremlik-selamlik’) in his household;
– [his] wife, A.Y., conforms to the Islamic dress code in everyday life, but wears a wig in the school in which she works...”
The document also states the following:
“This document is intended for information only and cannot be used in evidence in court. [If the said information] is to be used ... the facts mentioned ... must be documented by the bodies and institutions in question, and the origin [of the information] must not be disclosed.”
On 21 August 2000 a Ministry assessment board drew up a list of fourteen teachers who had passed the competitive examination for access to posts abroad but who, consequently upon assessment of their situation pursuant to Article 15 of the Security and Archives Directive (“the Directive”), were refused access to such posts. The applicant’s name appeared on that list.
On 1 November 2000 the applicant sent the competent administrative authorities a request for information inviting them to explain why, given that he had come second in the competitive examination, he had not yet been given a post abroad. He pointed out that the person who had come third in the examination had already been appointed to such a post.
On 17 November 2000 the Ministry wrote to the provincial education authorities to inform them that the assessment of the applicant’s situation in the light of the criteria to be met by candidates in the competitive competition for an appointment abroad, as laid down in Article 5 of Section A of Circular 938 (2000/11) of 4 February 2000 (“the Circular”) had precluded the applicant’s appointment.
That information was transmitted to the applicant.
On 5 January 2001 the applicant lodged with the Eskişehir Administrative Court an application to stay the execution of and set aside the decision to refuse the appointment (“the impugned decision”) as groundless. He also claimed damages in respect of the non-pecuniary damage which he had suffered. In support of his appeal he argued, in particular, that the assessment board had given a decision which had relied on no practical grounds, and that therefore it had used its powers under Article 5 of Section A of the Circular in an arbitrary manner.
On 9 February 2001 the Ministry submitted pleadings in reply based on the criteria set out in Article 5 of Section A of the Circular, including “absence of impediment to discharge of functions (to be determined by the Ministry assessment board in the light of the findings of the staff security inquiry and archive search)”, as well as Articles 8, 12 and 15 of the Directive. It asked that the information concerning the applicant had been assessed by a board composed in conformity with Article 15 of the Directive and, in order to justify the impugned decision, referred to the public-interest principle and the needs and specific features of the educational and teaching services.
On 27 February 2001 the administrative court dismissed the application for a stay of execution lodged by the applicant.
On 13 April 2001 the applicant filed a memorial on the merits arguing that Article 8 of the Directive restricted the obligation to carry out a security inquiry to persons finally appointed to a post abroad, and that he therefore should not have been subjected to such an inquiry. He also pointed out that he had been working as a teacher for many years without the least problem, that he had come second in the competitive examination and that he had never engaged in blameworthy conduct – as witness his lack of a police record. He explained that his arrest in 1987, when he had been a student, had been the result of a misunderstanding and that the case had been dropped at the time. In that regard, he submitted that any security enquiry reaching a negative finding solely on that account would have been unlawful. He added that his conduct of his private life had no effect on the efficiency of his work. Furthermore, the authorities in question should have supported its allegations with proper evidence and explained how they considered that his private life constituted an obstacle to his professional duties. He considered that that was not the case.
On 13 September 2001 the administrative court dismissed the applicant’s action to set aside the impugned decision. In so doing it had regard to the provisions of Article 5 of Section A of the Circular and Articles 2 and 15 of the Directive, ruling as follows:
“...
Under the terms of Article 5 of Section A of the 04.02.2000 Circular ... ‘the absence of an impediment to discharging duties abroad (according to the findings of the staff security enquiry and archive search) must be established by the Ministry’s assessment board’;
Article 2 of the Directive ... provides: ‘The present Directive ... sets out the principles and procedures relating to the security enquiries and archive searches to which all staff [wishing] to be permanently appointed abroad are subject ...’
Article 15 headed ‘assessment’ provides as follows: ‘... an assessment board shall be set up... if the information obtained as a result of the security enquiry and archive search is unfavourable ....’
....”
The court also noted that the applicant had passed the impugned competitive examination and had attended a retraining seminar organised in that context, but that the assessment board which had been set up following the security enquiry and archive search had decided that he could not be appointed to a post abroad. In the light of those circumstances, the evidence on file, the importance and the specific requirements of the posts abroad, the administrative court found that the impugned decision fell within the discretionary powers of the authority in question.
On 2 October 2001 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Council of State.
On 23 January 2002 the Council of State dismissed the application for a stay of execution of the administrative court’s decision.
On 13 May 2005 the Council of State dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law on the grounds that the decision at first instance had been given in accordance with the relevant legal and procedural rules. That judgment indicated that the reporting judge had issued an opinion in favour of confirming the first-instance decision. The Attorney General, for his part, held that the impugned refusal to make an appointment had been based solely on the findings of the security enquiry conducted by the intelligence services, which could not, by their very nature, be used in evidence. He added that “... the allegations had been the subject of a discontinuance decision given in 1987”. Moreover, no pleas had been advanced capable of justifying the impugned refusal to make an appointment, apart from information stemming from an intelligence-gathering exercise. He considered that the decision had been unlawful, that it should be set aside and that the applicant’s appeal should be allowed.
On 5 July 2005 the applicant lodged an application for rectification of that judgment. In his pleadings, he submitted, in particular, that the impugned administrative decision had not been based on objective criteria and was arbitrary. He added that the Attorney General had noted those facts in his opinion.
By judgment of 19 December 2005, notified on 7 February 2006, the Council of State dismissed the applicant’s appeal. That judgment stated that the reporting judge had issued an opinion in favour of dismissing the appeal. The Attorney General, on the other hand, held that the fact of using information stemming from intelligence-gathering was contrary to the rule-of-law principle, inasmuch as it had been obtained by an unidentified institution and, moreover, had not been confirmed by any other legally valid information or document. He therefore sought the annulment of the first-instance decision, on the further grounds that in the light of the relevant case-law that decision had been contrary to the equality principle.