The case originated in three applications (nos. 45197/13, 53000/13 and 73404/13) against Montenegro lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Montenegrin nationals, Ms Irena Radunović (“the first applicant”), Mr Veselin Nenezić (“the second applicant”) and Mr Ivan Gajević (“the third applicant”), on 25 April 2013, 19 July 2013 and 6 November 2013 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr D. Marković, a lawyer practising in Podgorica. The Montenegrin Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs V. Pavličić.
The applicants alleged that they had been deprived of their right of access to a court as the domestic courts refused to examine the merits of their civil claims against the USA Embassy in Montenegro relying on the respondent party’s immunity.
On 22 January 2015 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1982, 1967 and 1978 respectively and live in Podgorica.
The applicants were employees of the USA Embassy (“the Embassy”) in Montenegro. The first applicant worked as a protocol specialist/translator, and the second and third applicants as security guards. All the applicants were local staff.
The employment contract between the locally employed staff and the Embassy provided, inter alia, as follows:
The first applicant’s main duties and responsibilities were related to assisting in organising official receptions, lunches and dinners; questions relevant to protocol and local practices and customs; maintaining a contact database; drafting correspondence in English and Montenegrin; interpreting and translating documents, articles and incoming correspondence; arranging official calls; ensuring press coverage of ceremonial events; organising official visits and serving as a contact person between the front desk and the host country officials.
The second and third applicants’ main duties and responsibilities were continuous surveillance of an area around their fixed posts for security hazards; checking ID cards, screening visitors and vehicles, and controlling parking; recognising emergencies and unusual incidents, and acting accordingly. They could occasionally be required to work at other locations and for special functions such as VIP visits, receptions and dinners at the Principal Officer’s Residence.
Between 14 February 2009 and 28 June 2012 the applicants were informed by the Embassy that they were dismissed.
On 26 July 2010 the Court of First Instance (Osnovni sud) in Podgorica, apparently upon the third applicant’s claim to that effect, quashed the decision on his dismissal and ordered his reinstatement. It would appear that on an unspecified date thereafter this decision became final.
Between 22 November 2010 and 26 July 2012 the applicants instituted separate civil proceedings against the Embassy. All the applicants claimed compensation: the first applicant sought compensation for non-pecuniary damage caused by the wrongful dismissal, and the second and third applicants claimed compensation for loss of earnings. The first and second applicants, in addition, sought reinstatement.
On 26 May 2011 the Court of First Instance in Podgorica declared that it lacked competence to deal with the first applicant’s claim and rejected it (tužba [se] odbacuje), which decision was upheld by the High Court on 21 June 2011. On 4 October 2011 the Supreme Court quashed these decisions. Relying on section 29 of the Civil Procedure Act, section 2 (1) of the Labour Act and section 46 of the Resolution of Conflict of Laws and Regulations of other States Act (see paragraphs 30, 33 and 35 below), the Supreme Court considered that the Montenegrin courts had jurisdiction to examine the merits of the first applicant’s claim.
Between 8 September 2011 and 24 September 2012 the Court of First Instance in Podgorica declared that it lacked competence to deal with the applicants’ claims (in a re-trial in respect of the first applicant) and rejected them. In substance, the court considered that the respondent State had immunity provided for by international law, and therefore could not be subjected to the jurisdiction of another State’s court. In rejecting the first applicant’s claim the court further held that granting immunity to the respondent State could not be considered a restriction on access to court, as provided in Article 6 of the Convention. While the court acknowledged that in international and comparative law there were restrictions on State immunity in respect of employment-related disputes, it also held that recruitment (pitanja u vezi sa zapošljavanjem) in a foreign diplomatic mission or an embassy was an issue which could be “very sensitive or of a confidential nature” and might relate to the diplomatic and organisational policy of a foreign State. In ruling upon the second and third applicants’ claims, the Court of First Instance relied also on the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which provided that the function of Embassies was to represent foreign States, and held that therefore the jurisdiction of the domestic courts was excluded. The court also relied on Article 22 of the Vienna Convention, which provided for the inviolability of the premises of Embassies.
On various dates thereafter the applicants appealed. The first applicant submitted, inter alia, that by examining the merits of her claim the courts would not interfere with the other party’s sovereignty. She also submitted that the Court of First Instance had to examine the claim on the merits pursuant to the decision of the Supreme Court of 4 October 2011 and relied on section 415 of the Civil Procedure Act (see paragraph 32 below).
Between 20 November 2011 and 6 December 2012 the High Court upheld the first-instance decisions, in substance endorsing their reasoning. The High Court further held, upon the first applicant’s appeal, that a violation of sections 367 (1) and 415 of the Civil Procedure Code (see paragraphs 31 and 32 below) by the first-instance court did not render the first-instance decision unlawful, in particular as it was undisputed that the respondent party had its seat in another State and only a diplomatic representation in Montenegro. In ruling upon the second applicant’s claim it held that the jurisdiction of the domestic courts was not explicitly provided for either by the law or an international agreement.
Between 1 November 2012 and 10 May 2013, ruling upon the applicants’ appeals on points of law, the Supreme Court upheld the previous decisions on the grounds that the respondent party was a foreign State with its own legal personality and the domestic courts had no competence to rule upon the applicants’ claims. The court relied on section 29 of the Civil Procedure Act, section 46 of the Resolution of Conflict of Laws and Regulations of other States Act, and Article 3 of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. In ruling upon the third applicant’s appeal on points of law the Supreme Court also held, inter alia, that granting immunity to a foreign State in civil proceedings pursued a legitimate aim of complying with international law and encouraging good diplomatic relations between States, and that it could not be considered as a restriction on access to court in violation of Article 6 of the Convention.
Between 10 January 2013 and 12 July 2013 the applicants lodged separate constitutional appeals. On 18 November 2015 the Constitutional Court dismissed the first and third applicants’ constitutional appeals, while the second applicant’s constitutional appeal would appear to be still pending. The Constitutional Court held that there had been no violation of Article 6 of the Convention as the decisions had been issued by tribunals established by law, which had acted within their competence, and which had given clear reasons for their decisions. There was therefore no arbitrariness in the courts’ rulings. In ruling upon the third applicant’s constitutional appeal the Constitutional Court in addition held that pursuant to the case-law of the Court and the Constitutional Court “it [was] not the task of these courts to examine the conclusions of the regular courts in respect of the substantive law application, except in cases where [...] procedural rights were violated ([such as ...], the right of access to court) [...]”. However, it did not go into any analysis about the third applicant’s right of access to court.
Article 32 provides for the right to a fair trial.
Article 149 provides that the Constitutional Court shall rule on a constitutional appeal lodged in respect of an alleged violation of a human right or freedom guaranteed by the Constitution, after all other effective legal remedies have been exhausted.
The Constitution entered into force on 22 October 2007.
Section 48 provided that a constitutional appeal might be lodged against an individual decision of a State body, an administrative body, a local self-government body or a legal person exercising public authority, for violations of human rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, after all other effective legal remedies had been exhausted.
Sections 49-59 provided additional details as regards the processing of constitutional appeals. In particular, section 56 provided that when the Constitutional Court found a violation of a human right or freedom, it would quash the impugned decision, entirely or partially, and order that the case be re-examined by the same body which had rendered the quashed decision.
This Act entered into force in November 2008.
Section 68 provides that a constitutional appeal can be lodged by a physical person or legal entity, organisation, a community (naselje), a group of persons and other forms of organisation, which do not have a status of legal entity, if they consider that their human right or freedom guaranteed by the Constitution was violated by an individual decision, action or omission of a State body, an administrative body, a local self-government body or a legal person exercising public authority, after all other effective legal remedies have been exhausted.
Sections 69-78 provide further details as regards the processing of constitutional appeals. In particular, section 69 provides, inter alia, that a constitutional appeal can be lodged within 60 days as of the day when an impugned action violating a human right or freedom ceased. Section 76 provides that if in the course of proceedings before the Constitutional Court an impugned decision ceased to be in force, and the Constitutional Court finds a violation of a human right or freedom, it will accept a constitutional appeal and award the appellant just satisfaction.
Section 38 provides that the Constitutional Court must decide within 18 months as of the day when the proceedings before that court were initiated.
This Act entered into force on 20 March 2015 thereby repealing the Constitutional Court Act 2008.
Section 28 provides that the international law rules apply with regard to the competence of the Montenegrin courts to rule in disputes involving foreign citizens enjoying immunity, foreign States and international organisations.
Section 29 further provides that a Montenegrin court shall be competent to rule in a dispute with an international element when its competence in such a case is explicitly provided for by a piece of legislation or an international treaty or, in the absence of such a provision, by the provisions on territorial competence of the domestic court.
Section 367 sets out details as to what constitutes a relevant breach of civil procedure (bitna povreda odredaba parničnog postupka).
Section 415 provides that the court to which the case has been remitted is bound by a legal opinion of the Supreme Court contained in its decision issued upon an appeal on points of law by which the lower court’s judgment was quashed.
Section 2 (1) provides, inter alia, that the Labour Act is applicable to employees working for employers operating in the territory of Montenegro, unless otherwise stipulated by the law (ako zakonom nije drukčije određeno).
Section 20 (19) provides that if the relevant law was not selected and if the circumstances of the case do not imply otherwise, the relevant law for pecuniary claims arising from employment contracts shall be the law of the State in which the work is or was performed.
Section 46 provides, inter alia, that the domestic court is competent to rule only if the respondent party has residence, that is its seat, in Montenegro.
Section 47 provides that the competence of domestic courts exists when it is explicitly provided so by this or another domestic piece of legislation.
Section 55 provides that the domestic court shall be competent in disputes against, inter alia, legal entities which have their seat abroad, in respect of obligations which arose or are to be honoured in the domestic territory if that legal entity has its representation (predstavništvo ili zastupništvo) in that territory.
Section 16 (1) (3) provides that the Court of First Instance is competent to rule in employment-related disputes in the first instance.
Sections 192-199, 205, and 206-212, inter alia, set out details as regards compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage.
On 17 January 2012 the Court of First Instance in Podgorica declared it lacked competence to rule upon a civil claim of X against the Embassy of Poland, by which X had sought that a decision on his dismissal be revoked. On 20 November 2012 the decision of the first-instance court was upheld by the High Court. The courts relied on section 46 of the Resolution of Conflict of Laws and Regulations of other States Act and section 29 of the Civil Procedure Act.
State immunity from jurisdiction is governed by customary international law, the codification of which is enshrined in the United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and their Property of 2 December 2004 (“the 2004 Convention”). The principle is based on the distinction between acts of sovereignty or authority (acta jure imperii) and acts of commerce or administration (acta jure gestionis).
Article 11 (Contracts of employment) of the convention reads as follows:
Neither Montenegro nor the USA has ratified the United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and their Property of 2 December 2004. Neither the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, at the time, nor the USA, opposed it.
The Draft Articles on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and their Property, that were used as the basis for the text adopted in 2004, were adopted by the International Law Commission at its forty-third session in 1991, and submitted to the General Assembly at that session. Article 11 thereof read as follows:
In the commentary on that Article the Commission indicated as follows:
For a more comprehensive overview see Cudak v. Lithuania ([GC], no. 15869/02, §§ 25-33, ECHR 2010).
Article 8 of the International Labour Organisation Convention on Termination of Employment (No. 158) provides, inter alia, that a worker who considers that his employment has been unjustifiably terminated shall be entitled to appeal against that termination to an impartial body, such as a court, labour tribunal, arbitration committee or arbitrator.
Article 3 of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations sets out details as regards the functions of diplomatic missions.