The case originated in an application (no. 1848/16) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Ms Olena Volodymyrivna Gorbatyuk (“the applicant”), on 18 December 2015.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr M. Tarakhkalo, Ms O. Protsenko, Ms V. Lebid, Ms N. Volkova, and Ms A. Martynovska, lawyers practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
On 20 September 2016 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Khmelnytskyy.
In her childhood the applicant was diagnosed with infantile cerebral palsy. Subsequently she underwent inpatient psychiatric treatment.
The applicant has two daughters who were born in 1996 and 2004. The fathers of both daughters were deprived of their parental rights.
In September 2008 the applicant’s parents applied to the guardianship office of Kotovsk Town Council seeking a declaration that the applicant lacked legal capacity (дієздатність). The guardianship office instituted court proceedings to have the applicant deprived of her legal capacity and to determine who should have guardianship of her daughters.
On 30 April 2009 a forensic psychiatric expert found that the applicant was suffering from a chronic mental disorder caused by a brain impairment. The expert concluded that the applicant could not understand or control her actions.
On 15 May 2009 the Kotovsk Town Court deprived the applicant of her legal capacity. It also found that the applicant’s daughters had not been receiving any parental care as a result of the applicant’s mental disorder and the fact that the fathers of both daughters had been deprived of their parental rights. The court appointed the applicant’s father as the guardian of her daughters.
On 25 May 2015 the applicant underwent another forensic psychiatric examination. According to the ensuing report, she was suffering from a mental disorder but was capable of understanding and controlling her actions.
The applicant works as a cleaner and lives independently.
Relevant domestic law, applicable at the relevant time, can be found in Nataliya Mikhaylenko v. Ukraine (no. 49069/11, §§ 16-19, 30 May 2013). Notably, under the 2004 Code of Civil Procedure, as worded at the relevant time, a court decision declaring a physical person entirely incapable could be quashed, and the legal capacity of that person restored, by another court decision, provided that the person in question had either been cured or his or her mental state had significantly improved. Such a decision could be taken upon an application being submitted by the guardian or the guardianship authority (орган опіки та піклування), but not by the person who had been declared incapable, and had to be supported by relevant conclusions drawn by a forensic psychiatric expert (Article 241 § 4). Following amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, which came into effect on 15 December 2017, Article 300 now provides, inter alia, that a court decision declaring a physical person incapable may be quashed upon an application submitted by, among others, the person who was declared incapable.