The case concerns a complaint that the criminal proceedings against the applicant for robbery were unfair because the domestic courts convicted him on the basis of evidence extracted under duress.
The applicant was born in 1985 and is currently serving an imprisonment sentence in Stara Zagora Prison. He was represented before the Court by Ms P. Stoilova, a lawyer practising in Kazanlak.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
An armed robbery was committed on 7 February 2009 in the city of Stara Zagora and a large sum of money was stolen from the premises of a company. The ensuing investigation led the police to the applicant and two other men.
In the morning of 26 February 2009 police officers forcibly entered the applicant’s flat and took him away. During the next hours he was severely ill-treated. The treatment inflicted on him has been described in the Court’s judgment given in an earlier case brought by the applicant (see Stoykov v. Bulgaria, no. 38152/11, 6 October 2015).
Later on the same day the applicant was charged with aggravated robbery. After that he was taken before a judge, where he gave testimony, in the presence of a lawyer, confessing to having committed the offence at issue together with two accomplices. He described in detail the preparation they had undertaken and their respective actions on the night of the robbery.
The ensuing criminal proceedings have been described in detail in the Court’s judgment in a case brought by one of the applicant’s co-accused (see Kormev v. Bulgaria, no. 39014/12, §§ 11-22, 5 October 2017).
In particular, during the trial the applicant withdrew his confession, saying that he had been forced by the police into making it. The defence’s position after that was that he was not guilty.
In a judgment of 15 May 2010 the Stara Zagora Regional Court convicted the applicant of aggravated robbery and unlawful possession of firearms and sentenced him to sixteen and a half years’ imprisonment.
The Stara Zagora Regional Court relied on numerous pieces of evidence, including the applicant’s confession made on 26 February 2009. It held in that regard that it had not been established beyond doubt that the applicant had been ill-treated at the time of his arrest and before making the confession, and that in any event this did not entail the untruthfulness of his statements or their inadmissibility as evidence. The facts exposed by him were corroborated by the remaining evidence and he had spoken of circumstances which he could not have been aware of had he not been involved in the robbery. His confession before a judge had been made “voluntarily, without any physical or psychological violence whatsoever”.
The applicant’s conviction and sentence were upheld on 21 April 2011 by the Plovdiv Court of Appeal. It held that the Stara Zagora Regional Court had correctly assessed the evidence and that the rights of the defence had been respected. As to the applicant’s confession, it pointed out that it had been made before a judge, with all procedural guarantees. It considered that, once the applicant had “decided to confess his guilt” in the beginning of the criminal proceedings, the mere fact that he had retracted that confession later on did not have to be interpreted “to the detriment of the accusation”.
In a final judgment of 17 November 2011 the Supreme Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law. It found that the lower courts had adequately responded to the argument that the applicant’s confession of 26 February 2009 had been made under duress.
Under Article 422 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, criminal proceedings are reopened when a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights establishes a violation of the Convention which is of particular importance for the case. Reopening is to be ordered by the Supreme Court of Cassation, upon a request by the convicted person (Article 420 § 2).