The case originated in an application (no. 30112/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Oleg Olegovich Petrenko (“the applicant”), on 15 March 2004.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms O.V. Preobrazhenskaya, a lawyer practising in Strasbourg and . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk and subsequently by Mr G. Matyushkin, the former and current Representatives of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been detained in inhuman and degrading conditions and that the length of the criminal proceedings against him had been excessive.
On 28 February 2008 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in Sosnovyy Bor in the Leningrad Region.
On 20 May 2001 the applicant was arrested. On 23 May 2001 he was placed in detention.
By judgment of 6 September 2001 the Sosnovyy Bor Town Court of the Leningrad Region convicted him of robbery and sentenced him to five years and three months' imprisonment. On 27 March 2002 the  quashed the judgment on appeal and ordered that the case be remitted for an additional investigation.
On 8 August 2002 the  again convicted the applicant of robbery. It sentenced him to four years and eight months' imprisonment. The applicant brought an appeal.
On 11 February 2004 the  held an appeal hearing. By a decision of the same date, it changed the crime's qualification and upheld the rest of the trial court's judgment.
In the period from 30 May 2001 to 2 March 2004 the applicant was detained in remand prison IZ-47/1 of .
The applicant submitted that he had been detained in overcrowded cells and that the prisoners had had to take turns to sleep. Besides, his cells had been dirty and had lacked ventilation. He also submitted that the food had been of poor quality.
According to the Government's submissions, the applicant was held in following cells:
(a)  cell no. 840 that measured 7,568 square metres and accommodated seven detainees;
(b)  cell no. 844 that measured 7,568 square metres and accommodated seven detainees;
(c)  cell no. 941 that measured 21,367 square metres and accommodated thirteen detainees;
(d)  cell no. 859 that measured 7,568 square metres and accommodated seven detainees.
The Government conceded that the cells had been “overcrowded”. They pointed out, however, that the applicant at all times had been provided with an individual sleeping place and bed linen and that there had been enough space to move around and to do exercises in the cells.
They further submitted that the cells had been naturally and artificially ventilated and lit. The average air temperature in winter had been +18ºC and in summer +22ºC. The cells had been equipped with heating devices and a dining table. Toilet facilities had been separated from the cells' living area by a partition of 1.5 m in height. The applicant had never complained to the authorities of any insects or rodents.
The food had been of a proper quality. The applicant had never been limited in fresh water. He had had a possibility of taking a daily one-hour walk. As to the medical assistance, he had undergone various medical examinations and had been treated against tuberculosis. The appropriate treatment had resulted in the favourable dynamics of his disease.
Article 151. Compensation for non-pecuniary damage
“If a person has sustained non-pecuniary damage (physical or mental suffering) as a result of actions violating his personal non-pecuniary rights or other non-material benefits enjoyed by citizens, and also in other instances provided for by law, the court may require the perpetrator to afford monetary compensation for the said damage.”
Article 1064. General grounds for liability for causing loss or harm
“1.  Loss or harm caused to a person or to a company shall be compensated in full by the wrongdoer.
The law may impose responsibility to compensate for loss or harm on a person other than the wrongdoer”
Article 1069. Liability for damage caused by State authorities,
local authorities and their officials
“Damage caused to an individual or a legal entity by the unlawful actions (inactions) of State, municipal bodies or their officials ... must be compensated. The compensation shall be paid out of the funds of the Treasury of the Russian Federation, the treasury of the constituent element of the  or the treasury of the municipal entity respectively”.
Article 1071. Agencies and persons acting on behalf of the treasury
in awarding compensation for damage at its expense
“In instances where, in accordance with the present Code or other laws, the damage caused is subject to compensation at the expense of the treasury of the Russian Federation, the treasury of the subject of the  or the treasury of the municipal authority, the respective financial agencies shall act on behalf of the treasury ...”
Article 1099. General provisions
“1.  The grounds and amount of compensation payable to an individual for non-pecuniary damage shall be determined by the rules laid down in the present Chapter and in Article 151 of the present Code.
...
Compensation for non-pecuniary damage shall be awarded irrespective of any award for pecuniary damage.”
Article 1100. Grounds for compensation for non-pecuniary damage
“Compensation for non-pecuniary damage shall be awarded irrespective of the fault of the perpetrator, when:
... the damage is caused to a person as a result of his or her unlawful conviction, unlawful criminal prosecution, unlawful application, as a measure of restraint, of remand in custody or of a written undertaking not to leave a specified place, or unlawful imposition of an administrative penalty in the form of arrest or corrective labour.”