The case originated in an application (no. 60708/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Russian nationals (“the applicants”), on 15 July 2013.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
In the wake of the pilot judgment in the case of Gerasimov and Others v. Russia, on 24 November 2014 the application was communicated to the Government for settlement or resolution (see Gerasimov and Others v. Russia, nos. 29920/05 and 10 others, §§ 230-31 and point 13 of the operative part, 1 July 2014). The Court adjourned for two years, that is until 1 October 2016, the proceedings in all cases concerning non-enforcement or delayed enforcement of domestic judgments imposing obligations in kind on the State authorities (ibid., § 232 and point 14 of the operative part).
On 29 September 2016 the Government advised the Court that they were unable to settle the application within the above time-limit, as the domestic judgments in the applicants’ favour had remained unenforced.
Having regard to the expiry of the above-mentioned adjournment period, the Court has decided to resume the examination of the application. The Court informed the parties at the communication stage that the case, subject to settled case-law, would be allocated to the Committee.
The applicants are five Russian nationals. Their personal details are set out in the Appendix. They are members of one family.
Since 1981 the applicants have lived in a flat in an apartment block provided to them under a social tenancy agreement by the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation. The landlord was under obligation to perform a major overhaul of the apartment block, and the applicants had to make regular payments for the major overhaul. They paid the amounts due. The overhaul had never been performed, allegedly since 1935.
On the dates listed in the Appendix the Orenburgskiy District Court of the Orenburg Region granted their claims, having noted from expert reports that the apartment block was “64%‒dilapidated” and its state was “unsatisfactory”, and that the flat was 64%‒dilapidated. The court found that the applicants’ living premises, as well as the common property of the apartment block required a major overhaul. The court ordered the Federal State Institution of the Privolzhsko-Uralskiy Military Circuit to perform the major overhaul of the applicants’ flat, as well as of the common property of the apartment block and of the “devices situated in the living premises and serving for provision of communal services” in the apartment block, and to pay each applicant 3,000 Russian roubles (RUB) in respect of nonpecuniary damage.
According to the applicants’ observations, on 9 November 2011 the Orenburgskiy District Court awarded the claimants RUB 490,155.43 (approximately 11.681 euros) of compensation of losses. They did not enclose a copy of the judgment or further details as to either the defendant, or the exact list of claimants, the scope of the judgment or its subsequent challenge on appeal by any of the parties.
In 2012 Federal State Treasury Department (Управление) of the Privolzhsko-Uralskiy Military Circuit became a legal successor of the debtor institution.
In 2012 the applicants sued various authorities for penalties for several years of the non-enforcement. By the final judgment of 5 February 2013 the Orenburg Regional Court rejected their claims in full, having found that they were based on an incorrect interpretation of the domestic law and that the applicants had failed to submit a calculation of the penalty.
According to the Government, in December 2013 the applicant’s house was included in a regional housing overhaul assistance program. The authorities prepared a project and the budget documentation, which were approved by the experts.
On 13 April 2015 Ms Konstantinova privatized the flat and acquired a title to it.
According to the Government’s latest observations of 31 May 2017, the judgments had remained unenforced at the material time.
Article 210 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation (The Burden of Maintaining the Property) provides that the owner bears the burden of maintaining the property in his ownership, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the contract.
Article 158 of the Housing Code of the Russian Federation (Expenses of the owners of living premises in apartment blocks) sets out the modalities of the flats’ owners’ participation in major overhaul of the apartment blocks.
Article 16 of the Privatisation of Housing Act (Law no. 1541-I of 4 July 1991, as in force at the material time) provided that privatisation of living premises requiring a major overhaul (требующих капитального ремонта) was conducted in accordance with the Act. The former landlord remained under obligation to perform the major overhaul of a house in accordance with the norms on maintenance, exploitation and overhaul of the housing fund.
Article 30 of the Privatisation of Housing Act provides that the burden of maintenance of the living premises is on its owner.
In the Review of Legislation and Courts’ Practice for II Quarter 2007 the Supreme Court of Russia clarified that, in line with a systematic interpretation of Article 16 of the Privatisation of Housing Act, Article 210 of the Civil Code and Article 158 of the Housing Code of Russia, once a landlord (a State or municipal authority) discharges of its obligation to perform a major overhaul of living premises and common property in an apartment block, the owners of the flats (including citizens who had privatized the flats) bear responsibility for subsequent major overhauls.
The Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation dealt with the question of constitutionality of Article 16 of the Privatisation of Housing Act in its decisions on inadmissibility No. 1334-O-O of 19 October 2010, No. 886OO of 14 July 2011 and No. 389-О-О of 1 March 2012, and ruled, in particular, as follows. In order to provide additional guarantees of the right to privatisation for citizens residing in housing requiring a major overhaul, the federal legislator set out a former landlord’s obligation to perform major overhaul of a house in line with the maintenance, exploitation and overhaul norms (Article 16 of the Act). This provision aimed at protection of the property and housing rights of the citizens. It applied to all former landlords of the housing subject to privatisation and requiring major overhaul, without any exception, irrespectively of the State or municipalities’ previous ownership of the housing concerned.