The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 9 September 1994, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention.  It originated in an application (no. 15523/89) against the  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by an Austrian national, Mr Peter Schmautzer, on 26 May 1989.
The Commission's request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46).  The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention.  
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings; the President gave him leave to present his own case (Rule 30) and to use the German language (Rule 27 para. 3).
On 24 September 1994 the President of the Court decided, under Rule 21 para. 6 and in the interests of the proper administration of justice, that a single Chamber should be constituted to consider the instant case and the cases of Umlauft, Gradinger, Pramstaller, Palaoro and Pfarrmeier v.  .
The Chamber to be constituted for this purpose included ex officio Mr F. Matscher, the elected judge of Austrian nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)).  On the same day, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr L. E. Pettiti, Mr R. Macdonald, Mr S.K. Martens, Mr I. Foighel, Mr J.M. Morenilla, Sir John Freeland and Mr J. Makarczyk (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43).  
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Austrian Government ("the Government"), the applicant and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the Government's memorial on 20 January 1995 and the applicant's memorial on 30 January 1995.  On 3 February the Commission supplied the Registrar with various documents that he had requested on the President's instructions.
In accordance with the President's decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 26 April 1995.  The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:  
(a) for the Government  
(b) for the Commission  
(c) the applicant
The Court heard addresses by Mr Weitzel, Mr Schmautzer and Mr Cede, and a reply to the question it put.  
On 30 April 1986 Mr Peter Schmautzer was stopped by the police while driving his car.  He was not wearing his safety-belt.  In a "sentence order" (Straferkenntnis) of 1 June 1987 the federal police authority (Bundespolizeidirektion) in  imposed on him a fine of 300 Austrian schillings (ATS) with twenty-four hours' imprisonment in default of payment, for an offence under section III(1) and (5)(a) of the third amendment to the Motor Vehicles Act (Kraftfahrgesetz - see paragraph 10 below).
The applicant appealed against that decision to the Styria regional government (Amt der Landesregierung), which upheld the decision on 2 February 1988 but reduced the fine to ATS 200 and the penalty in default to fourteen hours' imprisonment.
On 6 April 1988 the applicant applied to the  (Verfassungsgerichtshof).  He complained of an infringement of the principle that all citizens are equal before the law and alleged that his being sentenced to imprisonment in default by an administrative authority that was not an "independent and impartial" tribunal breached Articles 5 and 6 (art. 5, art. 6) of the Convention.  He also argued that the requirement to wear a safety-belt was an interference in his private life, contrary to Article 8 (art. 8) of the Convention.
On 27 February 1989, at the conclusion of a consideration of the case in private, the Constitutional Court declined to accept the appeal for adjudication (Article 144 para. 2 of the Federal Constitution (Bundes-Verfassungsgesetz) - see paragraph 12 below), since, in view of its case-law on Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention, it did not have sufficient prospects of success; moreover, the case did not lie outside the jurisdiction of the Administrative Court (Verwaltungsgerichtshof). 
At Mr Schmautzer's request, it also decided to refer the application to the .  
On 20 September 1989 the Administrative Court stayed the proceedings before it as Mr Schmautzer's application did not satisfy the substantive and formal requirements of section 34(2) of the Administrative Court Act (Verwaltungsgerichtshofsgesetz - see paragraph 14 below).
Section III of the 1976 Act as amended in 1984, which amended the Motor Vehicles Act 1967 (Kraftfahrgesetz), provides:
(a) the driver of a motor vehicle or      
(b) a passenger in a motor vehicle  
not to comply with the requirement in subsection (1), first sentence.  In the event of refusal to pay the ... fine, the authority may impose a fine of up to ATS 300, with up to twenty-four hours' imprisonment in default of payment.  
..."  
Article 90 para. 1 of the Federal Constitution (Bundes-Verfassungsgesetz) provides:
"Hearings by trial courts in civil and criminal cases shall be oral and public.  Exceptions may be prescribed by law."  
By Article 144 para. 1 of the Federal Constitution the Constitutional Court, when an application (Beschwerde) is made to it, has to determine whether an administrative decision (Bescheid) has infringed a right guaranteed by the Constitution or has applied regulations (Verordnung) contrary to the law, a law contrary to the Constitution or an international treaty incompatible with Austrian law.
Article 144 para. 2 provides:  
"Up to the time of the hearing the  may by means of a decision (Beschluß) decline to accept a case for adjudication if it does not have sufficient prospects of success or if it cannot be expected that the judgment will clarify an issue of constitutional law.  The court may not decline to accept for adjudication a case excluded from the jurisdiction of the  by Article 133."  
By Article 130 para. 1 of the Federal Constitution, the  has jurisdiction to hear, inter alia, applications alleging that an administrative decision is unlawful.
Section 34(2) of the Administrative Court Act (Verwaltungsgerichtshofsgesetz) provides:
"Applications which are not barred by any of the circumstances set out in subsection (1), but fail to satisfy the conditions as to form and content laid down in sections 23, 24, 28 and 29, must be adjourned for a brief period to enable their defects to be remedied (Behebung der Mängel); applications not rectified within the time-limit shall be deemed to have been withdrawn."  
Section 39(1) provides, in particular, that at the end of the preliminary proceedings (Vorverfahren) the  must hold a hearing where the applicant makes a request to that effect.
Section 39(2) reads as follows:  
"Notwithstanding a party's application under subsection (1), the  may decide not to hold a hearing where  
Sub-paragraphs 1 to 3 of section 39(2) were in force in 1958; sub-paragraphs 4 and 5 were inserted in 1964 and sub-paragraph 6 in 1982.  
Section 41(1) of the Administrative Court Act provides:
"In so far as the Administrative Court does not find any unlawfulness deriving from the respondent authority's lack of jurisdiction or from breaches of procedural rules (section 42(2)(2) and (3)) ..., it must examine the impugned decision on the basis of the facts found by the respondent authority and with reference to the complaints put forward ... If it considers that reasons which have not yet been notified to one of the parties might be decisive for ruling on [one of these complaints] ..., it must hear the parties on this point and adjourn the proceedings if necessary."  
Section 42(1) of the same Act states that, save as otherwise provided, the Administrative Court must either dismiss an application as ill-founded or quash the impugned decision.
By section 42(2), 
"The  shall quash the impugned decision if it is unlawful
(a) the respondent authority has made findings of fact which are, in an important respect, contradicted by the case file, or  
(b) the facts require further investigation on an important point, or  
(c) procedural rules have been disregarded, compliance with which could have led to a different decision by the respondent authority."  
If the Administrative Court quashes the impugned decision, "the administrative authorities [are] under a duty ... to take immediate steps, using the legal means available to them, to bring about in the specific case the legal situation which corresponds to the Administrative Court's view of the law (Rechtsanschauung)" (section 63(1)).
In a judgment of 14 October 1987 (G 181/86) the  held:
"From the fact that it has been necessary to extend the reservation in respect of Article 5 (art. 5) of the Convention to cover the procedural safeguards of Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention, because of the connection between those two provisions (art. 5, art. 6), it follows that, conversely, the limited review (die (bloß) nachprüfende Kontrolle) carried out by the Administrative Court or the Constitutional Court is insufficient in respect of criminal penalties within the meaning of the Convention that are not covered by the reservation."  
Pursuant to Article 129 of the Federal Constitution, administrative courts called "independent administrative tribunals" (Unabhängige Verwaltungssenate) were set up in the Länder with effect from 1 January 1991.  The functions of these tribunals include determining both the factual and the legal issues arising in cases concerning administrative offences (Verwaltungsübertretungen).
The instrument of ratification of the Convention deposited by the Austrian Government on 3 September 1958 contains, inter alia, a reservation worded as follows:
"The provisions of Article 5 (art. 5) of the Convention shall be so applied that there shall be no interference with the measures for the deprivation of liberty prescribed in the laws on administrative procedure, BGBl [Federal Official Gazette] No. 172/1950, subject to review by the Administrative Court or the Constitutional Court as provided for in the Austrian Federal Constitution."  
Mr Schmautzer applied to the Commission on 26 May 1989.  Relying on Articles 5 and 6 (art. 5, art. 6) of the Convention, he complained that in proceedings which could result in his being sentenced to a term of imprisonment he had not had access to an independent and impartial tribunal.  He also complained of an interference in his private life on account of the requirement to wear a safety-belt, contrary to Articles 8 and 14 (art. 8, art. 14) of the Convention.
On 10 May 1993 the Commission declared the application (no. 15523/89) admissible as to the complaint raised under Article 6 (art. 6) and declared it inadmissible as to the remainder.
In its report of 19 May 1994 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the opinion that there had been a violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) as regards access to a court (unanimously) and that no separate issue arose under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) as to the failure to hold a hearing (unanimously).  The full text of the Commission's opinion and of the concurring opinion contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment . 
In their memorial the Government asked the Court to hold that
"Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention is not applicable in the present case; or alternatively, that Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention was not violated in the administrative criminal proceedings underlying the application".  