.  The case originated in an application (no. 40562/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Iva Ezgeta (“the applicant”), on 24 May 2012.
.  The applicant was represented by Mr B. Škarda, a lawyer practising in Umag. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
.  The applicant alleged, in particular, that her case had not been heard and decided by a tribunal established by law as required by Article 6 § 1 of Convention. She also complained that she had been deprived of access to the Supreme Court when it had declared her appeal on points of law inadmissible ratione valoris.
.  On 20 May 2015 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
.  The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in Novigrad.
.  By a contract concluded in 1971 between a company, G.P. (hereinafter “the claimant”), and the Novigrad Municipality certain plots of land were given to the former for its permanent use with a view to the construction of residential buildings thereon. These plots of land were registered in the land register as being publicly owned. In accordance with the contract, the claimant built residential buildings and sold all of them.
.  During and after the construction of the residential buildings, the claimant instituted several sets of land register correction proceedings with regard to the land at issue in order to harmonise the record in the land register with the new situation. In one of the land register correction proceedings the Novigrad Municipality objected to the claimant’s application for a correction and therefore on 2 October 2000 the Land Registry Department of the Buje Municipal Court instructed the parties to initiate civil proceedings.
.  On 6 October 2000 the claimant brought a civil action before the Buje Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Bujama) against the Novigrad Municipality (hereinafter “the defendant”), seeking that the data concerning the size of certain plots of land be corrected in the land register of that court. Specifically, it complained that during the delineation – that is to say the process of subdividing the larger parcels into smaller ones – one part of the plots of land at issue had been registered as a public good (javno dobro). In its civil action the claimant indicated the value of the claim as 5,000 Croatian kunas (HRK).
.  Meanwhile, on 27 December 1999, the applicant and the claimant had concluded a purchase agreement in respect of the plots of land that surrounded the residential buildings the claimant had built and that were the subject of the proceedings instituted on 6 October 2000.
.  On 23 October 2000 the applicant asked to join the claimant in the proceedings as an intervener since she had bought some of the plots of land at issue.
At the hearing held on 14 June 2001 the Buje Municipal Court established that the claimant had raised the value of the claim to HRK 105,000 in its submissions of 4 June 2001. The defendant did not object to that valuation. After that, the defendant gave its reply to the claim on the record. Furthermore, the first-instance court adopted a decision allowing the applicant to join the claimant in the proceedings as an intervener because it held that she had a legal interest.
.  On 25 February 2005 the Buje Municipal Court allowed the claim.
.  Upon an appeal by the defendant lodged on 5 February 2007 the Pula County Court (Županijski sud u Puli) quashed the first-instance judgment and remitted the case for a fresh examination.
On 26 May 2009 the first-instance court dismissed the claim as ill-founded. In its reasoning it stated, inter alia, that at the moment of the delineation of the disputed parcels the claimant had not had any right to the property at issue and therefore by its correction the claimant would have become an owner of the property which he had never been given for permanent use. Further to this, the court had assessed the costs of the proceedings according to the value of the claim set at HRK 105,000 at the hearing on 14 June 2001. It ordered the claimant to bear these costs. At the bottom of the last page of that judgment was a note stating that the case had been conducted and the judgment had been drafted by J.G., the court administrator (sudski savjetnik).
.  The applicant lodged an appeal complaining, inter alia, that her case had been heard and decided by a court administrator who had not been authorised to conduct the impugned proceedings under the relevant procedural rules. She proposed that evidence be heard from J.G., as well as the parties to the proceedings and their legal counsel. The applicant further complained of the assessment of the amount of the litigation costs. She was of the opinion that the value of the claim was the one indicated in the civil action, namely HRK 5,000, which should have been taken into account by the first-instance court when calculating the costs.
.  On 18 October 2010 the Pula County Court upheld the first-instance judgment. It held, inter alia, that the value of the claim was the one established at the hearing on 14 June 2001, namely HRK 105,000, because the claimant had increased the value before the defendant had begun litigation on the merits. Furthermore, the second-instance court in its reasoning had stated that the case file had shown that the proceedings had been conducted by a trial judge in the presence of a court administrator.
.  The applicant then lodged simultaneously an appeal on points of law and a constitutional complaint. She complained, among other things, that her case had neither been heard nor decided by a tribunal established by law because the proceedings had been conducted and the judgment drafted and pronounced by a court administrator. She stated that the judge had not been present at the hearings and that the judge had signed the records of the hearings afterwards.
.  On 14 October 2011 the Supreme Court declared the applicant’s appeal on points of law inadmissible ratione valoris, considering that the value of the claim did not reach the statutory threshold of HRK 100,000. It held, contrary to the lower courts’ findings, that the value of the claim was the one indicated in the civil action because the claimant would have been allowed to alter that value only if it had also amended its claim at the same time.
.  On 2 December 2011 the applicant informed the Constitutional Court that her appeal on points of law had been declared inadmissible and that she wished to add the Supreme Court’s decision to her constitutional complaint. She argued that the Supreme Court had applied the relevant procedural provisions concerning the value of the claim in an arbitrary manner.
.  On 29 March 2012 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint as manifestly ill-founded.
.  The relevant part of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 113/2000, 28/2001 and 76/2010) reads as follows:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
.  The relevant part of section 62 of the Constitutional Court Act (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 49/2002) reads as follows:
“1.  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that an individual act on the part of a State body, a body of local or regional self-government, or a legal person with public authority, concerning his or her rights and obligations or a suspicion or accusation of a criminal deed, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms or his or her right to local or regional self-government guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter “a constitutional right”) ...
If another legal remedy exists in respect of the violation of the constitutional right [complained of], a constitutional complaint may be lodged only after that remedy has been used.”
.  The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991, 91/1992, 112/1999, 81/2001, 117/2003, 88/2005, 84/2008, 96/2008, 23/2008 and 57/2011,), as in force at the material time, provided:
“(1) Court administrators [sudski savjetnici] are authorised in the first instance to conduct litigation proceedings [parnični postupak], assess the evidence and establish the facts. On the basis of proceedings so conducted, the court administrator shall submit to the judge, who is so authorised by the president of the court, a written proposal on the basis of which the judge shall render a decision. In the introduction to the decision it shall be stated that the decision was rendered on the basis of a proposal by a court administrator.
(2) If he or she does not accept the proposal given by the court administrator, the competent judge shall conduct proceedings him- or herself.
(3) Court administrators are authorised in litigation proceedings to conduct proceedings and propose a decision to the judge in disputes for the payment of monetary claims, if the value of the claim does not exceed HRK 50,000.00 kunas, or in commercial disputes if the value of the claim does not exceed HRK 500,000.00.
(4) In second-instance proceedings and proceedings conducted on the basis of extraordinary legal remedies, judicial advisors shall report on the state of the case file and prepare a draft decision.”
“(1) A person who has a legal interest that one of the parties succeeds in litigation pending between other persons, may join that party.
...”
“(1) When the European Court of Human Rights has found a violation of a human right or fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms or additional Protocols thereto ratified by the Republic of Croatia, a party may, within thirty days of the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights becoming final, lodge an application with the court in the Republic of Croatia which adjudicated in the first instance in the proceedings in which the decision violating the human right or fundamental freedom was rendered, to set aside the decision by which the human right or fundamental freedom was violated.
(2) The proceedings referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be conducted by applying, mutatis mutandis, the provisions on the reopening of proceedings.
(3) In the reopened proceedings the courts are required to respect the legal opinions expressed in the final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights finding a violation of a fundamental human right or freedom.”
The relevant provision of the Courts Act (Zakon o sudovima, Official Gazette no. 150/2005, 16/2007 and 113/2008), as in force at the material time, provided:
“(1) Court administrators shall be authorised to independently conduct certain court proceedings, to evaluate evidence and establish facts.
(2) On the basis of proceedings conducted in the above way, the court administrator shall submit to a judge authorised by the president of a court a written proposal for a decision on the basis of which the judge shall issue a decision.
(3) Should the authorised judge not accept the proposed decision submitted by the court administrator, he or she shall conduct the proceedings him- or herself.
(4) Court administrators are authorised to conduct proceedings and propose decisions within the meaning of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article in the following proceedings:
in litigation proceedings for payment of a monetary claim or damages if the value of the claim does not exceed HRK 50,000.00, or in commercial courts if the value of the claim does not exceed HRK 500,000.00;
in enforcement proceedings;
in probate proceedings;
in land registry proceedings;
in non-contentious proceedings, except for proceedings for deprivation of business capacity, dissolution of co-ownership and disputes over landmarks;
in misdemeanour proceedings;
in second-instance proceedings and proceedings in extraordinary legal remedies, court advisors shall report on the status of the file and prepare draft decisions.”
.  In its decision no. U-III-2677/2007 of 14 February 2012 the Constitutional Court quashed the decisions of the lower courts and ordered a fresh consideration of the case. It found that the lower courts, when dismissing an appeal by an intervener because the defendant, who the intervener had joined in the proceedings complained of, had withdrawn her appeal against the first-instance judgment, had violated the intervener’s right of access to court. The relevant part of this decision reads as follows:
“... an appeal by the complainant of the constitutional complaint, who participated as an intervener on the defendant’s side, against the Zagreb Commercial Court’s judgment ... of 13 July 2005, was declared inadmissible;
...
The Constitutional Court notes that the complainant was not a party to the agreement (Agreement/97) that was a subject matter of the dispute in the civil proceedings preceding the Constitutional Court’s proceedings. However, on the basis of Agreement/97 (which the [first-instance] court in its judgment no. P-6463/2000 found to be null and void), K. [the defendant] became the owner of the disputed property, and – as a registered owner – later sold on the property in question (on the basis of Contract/98) to the applicant as a buyer (the intervener in the civil proceedings). Therefore, the applicant’s property rights concerning the disputed property on the basis of Contract/98 directly depend on the validity of Agreement/97. It follows that the disputed court decisions had a direct effect on the applicant’s property rights. That fact had a direct effect on the applicant’s procedural position in the proceedings in which the subject matter of the dispute was his property rights too.
Therefore the Constitutional Court accepts the applicant’s argument that in the instant proceedings the subject matter of the dispute was ‘a dispute between two parties’ which was decisive for ‘the rights of a third person, ... who had not been given an opportunity to independently participate in the all stages of the proceedings before the competent court’.
...
In view of the foregoing, ... [the courts] had to take into account whether the outcome of the instant civil proceedings had had a direct effect on the applicant’s ‘rights and obligations’ within the meaning of Article 29 § 1 of the Constitution, namely ‘the civil rights and obligations’ within the meaning of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.”
.  The Government referred to case no. U-III-998/2009 of 19 March 2009, in which the Constitutional Court upheld the decisions adopted in the enforcement proceedings conducted by a court administrator. In its reasoning the Constitutional Court found that the proceedings concerned had been conducted by a tribunal established by law because under section 120(4) of the Courts Act court administrators were authorised to conduct the enforcement proceedings.
In decision no. Rev 1355/15-2 of 7 October 2015 the Supreme Court held that a court administrator was only authorised to participate in litigation proceedings concerning a monetary claim where the value of the claim did not exceed the prescribed threshold, whereas a court administrator was not authorised to participate in any other type of litigation proceedings, irrespective of the value of the claim in those other litigation proceedings. The relevant part of the decision reads as follows:
“... in accordance with section 13(3) of the Civil Procedure Act, a court administrator is not authorised to participate in conducting proceedings or suggest a decision to a judge in litigation proceedings which do not concern payment of a monetary claim, irrespective of the value of the claim ...”