The case originated in two applications (nos. 51894/14 and 52073/14) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Slovak companies, framipek s.r.o. and AGRORACIO Senica, a.s. (“the applicant companies”), on 13 and 15 July 2014, respectively.
The applicant companies were represented by Mr B. Fridrich, a lawyer practising in Bratislava. The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
On 2 June 2017 notice of the applications were given to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the applications by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The first applicant company, framipek s.r.o., is a limited liability company with its registered office in Šenkvice. The second applicant company, AGRORACIO Senica, a.s., is a joint stock company with its registered office in Senica Čáčov. On 20 January 2017 the second applicant company changed its name to BALVI INVEST a. s. and its registered office to Bratislava.
In 2000 both applicant companies concluded business contracts with a company B. with a view to obtaining financial investment and provided it with a sum of money. However, the latter company failed to perform the contracts whereby both applicant companies withdrew.
On 18 October 2002 criminal proceedings were brought against an unknown person who, acting in the name of the company B., had concluded contracts with at least fifty-two businesses, had received sums of money from them but failed to perform the contracts. Thus, those businesses had suffered the equivalent of some 390,000 euros (EUR) worth of damage.
On 6 November 2002 and 29 May 2003, respectively, the statutory representatives of the applicant companies were interviewed by the Banská Bystrica Regional Police Directorate in connection with the above-mentioned criminal proceedings. They specified three representatives of the company B., that is J. B., P. M. and B. Š., who had been present during the negotiation of the contested business contracts. During the interviews the statutory representatives of the applicant companies lodged civil-party claims for damages and specified the sums claimed.
At the beginning of the interview of 6 November 2002, the statutory representative of the first applicant company, M. Č., stated:
“I am self-employed, the co-owner and only statutory representative of the company framipek s.r.o. with its registered office in Šenkvice ...”
After having described the negotiations with the representatives of the company B., he formulated his claim as follows:
“Having been informed under Article 43 of the [1961] Code of Criminal Procedure I declare that I request to be paid the amount of SKK 510,766.90 [ca. EUR 16,954] as compensation for damage I incurred by the offence.”
The statutory representative of the second applicant company, M. J., formulated the claim as follows:
“Finally, as a statutory representative of the company Agroratio Senica s.r.o. Senica – Čáčov, I declare that by the actions of the representatives of the company B. ... I incurred damage in the amount of SKK 1,035,672 [ca. EUR 34,378]. Having been informed under Article 43 of the [1961] Code of Criminal Procedure I state that I request to be reimbursed the abovementioned sum.”
On 29 December 2008 the criminal proceedings were discontinued on the ground that they did not concern a criminal offence. This decision was overturned by the Prosecutor General following an application lodged by some of the aggrieved parties, including the second applicant company. During subsequent investigation the documentary evidence was secured, witness statements obtained and bank account statements and other correspondence attached to the case file.
On 7 December 2009 charges for a criminal offence of embezzlement were brought against two representatives of the company B., J. B. and P. M. Later, on 29 March 2010, that decision was quashed and the case remitted to the investigator for further examination.
On 28 February 2013, the Bratislava I Police District Department discontinued the criminal proceedings again since there was no case to address. The decision was delivered on the applicant companies on 19 April 2013.
Both applicant companies challenged the discontinuation of the proceedings before the Bratislava Regional Prosecutor’s Office which, on 5 August 2013, dismissed the interlocutory appeal of the first applicant company as unfounded and that of the second applicant company as belated. This decision was delivered on the first applicant company on 9 August 2013.
On 3 and 8 October 2013 both applicant companies lodged constitutional complaints with the Constitutional Court, challenging the length of the proceedings before the law enforcement authorities in so far as they concerned their third-party claims for damages.
On 12 December 2013 the Constitutional Court (files nos. II. ÚS 660/2013 and II. ÚS 661/2013) rejected both complaints, noting that an aggrieved party claiming damages in the criminal proceedings only benefited from the right to a hearing within a reasonable time under Article 6 of the Convention after charges had been brought against a specific person. In that regard, the Constitutional Court observed that no charges against any specific person had been brought in the present case. Therefore, the applicant companies did not benefit from the constitutional guarantees relied upon.
The relevant domestic law and practice regarding the third-party claims attached to the criminal proceedings are summarised in Javor and Javorová v. Slovakia (no. 42360/10, §§ 17 et seq., 15 September 2015).