The present case concerns criminal proceedings against the applicant on charges of preventing the implementation of measures for the protection of a child. His conviction was based on statements given by his then wife and an employee of a social welfare centre, Mr H.M. The latter gave his statement to the prosecution only and was not heard at the applicant’s trial.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Zagreb. The applicant was represented by Ms V. Drenški Lasan, a lawyer practising in Zagreb.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 28 September 2009 a certain S.P. instituted divorce proceedings against the applicant seeking custody of their son.
On 13 October 2011 the Novi Zagreb Office of the Zagreb Social Welfare Centre (Centar za socijalnu skrb Zagreb, Ured Novi Zagreb) submitted a proposal to the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office (Općinsko državno odvjetništvo u Zagrebu) to institute criminal proceedings against the applicant on charges of preventing the implementation of measures for the protection of a child.
On 15 November 2011 H.M., the head of supervision of parental care at the Zagreb Social Welfare Centre and a witness, was interviewed before the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office. Neither the applicant nor his lawyer was present.
On 30 March 2012 the applicant was indicted in the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court (Općinski kazneni sud u Zagrebu) on charges of preventing the implementation of measures for the protection of a child, in particular, refusing to cooperate with the head of supervision of parental care appointed in his case.
During his trial before the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court the applicant refused to give oral evidence, but the statement he had given before the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office on 3 November 2011 was read out instead.
On several occasions throughout the proceedings the applicant unsuccessfully challenged the impartiality of all the judges of the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court and all the employees of the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office.
The Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court held a number of hearings in the case. At a hearing held on 3 March 2014 the court was to hear the witnesses S.P. and H.M. H.M. did not appear because a summons had not been properly served on him. After S.P., the applicant’s then wife, had given her oral testimony, the State Attorney’s Office withdrew its earlier motion that H.M. be heard in person, deeming the facts sufficiently established. The applicant, who was not represented by a lawyer at that hearing, insisted that H.M. be heard in person, but the trial court rejected his request and decided to admit the record of H.M.’s statement which had been given before the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office on 15 November 2011 (see paragraph 6 above). Neither party objected to the statement of H.M. which was read out.
On the same day the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to of one year’s imprisonment suspended for a three-year probation period. The finding of guilt in respect of the applicant was based primarily on the evidence given by H.M. and the applicant’s then wife S.P. The trial court held that from their two statements it was clear that the applicant had committed the criminal offence in question. The relevant part of the first-instance judgment reads:
“Based on the facts of the case which have thus been established, the court has found that [the applicant] committed the criminal offence he was charged with. This finding of the court relies primarily on the statements provided by S.P. and the statement provided by the witness H.M. which was read out, [a statement] to which the parties had no objections and which actually supplements S.P.’s statement. It should be stressed that the court gave [the applicant] several opportunities to present his defence, which he refused to do, stating that there was the mafia on one side and the court on the other, that he was not stupid ... [and] that he had been defamed. In these proceedings, he refused to state his plea, which was, in accordance with the Criminal Procedure Act, interpreted by the judge as a not guilty plea ...”
On 9 April 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal, arguing, inter alia, that H.M. had never been summoned to any hearing during his trial before the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court, and that he had not had the opportunity to examine him. On 9 January 2015 the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) dismissed the applicant’s appeal as ill-founded, upholding the first-instance judgment. The relevant part of the second-instance judgment reads as follows:
“The [applicant] is not correct to allege ... that there were unlawful procedural acts and omissions because he was not able to question the witness H.M., as he did not object to the statement of H.M. being read out ...”
On 24 March 2015 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), arguing that he had not had a fair trial, as he had not been given an opportunity to question H.M.
On 13 May 2015 the Constitutional Court rejected the applicant’s constitutional complaint as manifestly ill-founded. That decision was served on the applicant’s counsel on 29 May 2015.
The relevant provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 152/08, 76/09, 80/11, 91/12, 56/13 and 145/13) reads as follows:
Article 431
“(1)  Records containing the statements of witnesses ... may be read out following a decision given by a [trial] panel only in the following circumstances:
...
6)  if the parties agree that the direct examination of a witness or expert witness who has failed to appear, irrespective of whether he has been summoned or not, may be replaced by the records of his previous testimony being read out;
...”
Other relevant domestic law provisions and practice are set out in the case of Paić v. Croatia, no. 47082/12, §§16 and 20, 29 March 2016.