The cases originated in an application (no. 15067/04) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr İsmail Cevahirli (“the applicant”), on 5 April 2004. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 13 May 2009 the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant, a retired military officer, was born in 1955 and lives in Bolu.
By an order of the Turkish General Staff dated On 9 May 2002, the applicant's access to the army's social facilities (orduevi) was prohibited due to his non-compliance with the rules of conduct set out in the Internal Service Regulation of the Turkish Armed Forces (“the Internal Service Regulation”). It appears that while lodging in an army guesthouse in , the applicant had insisted on performing the Muslim prayer (namaz) in a communal area despite warnings. It further appears that the order of the Turkish General Staff was never served on the applicant.
On 24 December 2002 the applicant was refused entry to the army's social facilities in  on the basis of the order of the Turkish General Staff.
On 9 January 2003 the applicant brought an action before the  against the Ministry of Defence and requested the annulment of the order of the Turkish General Staff, along with the reinstatement of his right to benefit from the social facilities of the army.
The Ministry of Defence submitted certain documents and information to the  during the course of the proceedings, which were classified as “secret documents” under Article 52 (4) of Law no. 1602 on the . These documents were not disclosed to the applicant.
On 3 October 2003 the  dismissed the applicant's case. The court held that the decision of the Turkish General Staff had been in compliance with the Internal Service Regulation, considering in particular that the applicant had refused to perform his prayer in the area allocated to him and had acted in a disorderly fashion and argued with the officer who had warned him. It appears that this decision was served on the applicant on 26 October 2003.
A description of the relevant domestic law can be found in the decision of Karayiğit v. Turkey ((dec.), no. 45874/05, 23 September 2008).