The case originated in two applications (nos. 31145/96 and 35580/97) against the United Kingdom lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two British nationals, Mr Mark Wilkinson and Mr Kevin Allen (“the applicants”), on 13 April 1996 and 1 April 1997, respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr J. Mackenzie, a lawyer practising in London. The British Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr M. Eaton and Mr C. Whomersley, both of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
The applicants alleged, as regards their trial by court-martial, that they did not have a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law. On 31 May 1999 the Commission found a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. By letter dated 27 September 1999 the Government referred the cases to the Court explaining that the reference had been made not to contest the breach of Article 6 § 1 which had been found by the Commission but to seek a ruling pursuant to Article 41 on what just satisfaction, if any, should be awarded to the applicants.
In accordance with Article 5 § 4 of Protocol No. 11 to the Convention and Rules 100 § 1 and 24 § 6 of the Rules of Court, a panel of the Grand Chamber decided on 13 December 1999 that the applications should be considered by a Chamber constituted within one of the Sections of the Court. The applications were then allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court).
Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court. Sir Nicolas Bratza, the judge elected in respect of the United Kingdom, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28). While the Government initially appointed Sir Stephen Richards to sit as an ad hoc judge, by letter dated 9 November 2000 they agreed that Judge Costa, the judge elected in respect of France, would sit in place of Sir Nicolas Bratza (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
The Chamber decided to join the proceedings in the applications (Rule 43 § 1).
The applicants and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 2 in fine).
At the time of the events in question, both applicants were serving in the army and were tried by district courts-martial convened pursuant to the Army Act 1955.
Mr Wilkinson pleaded guilty to the armed forces’ disciplinary offence of absence without leave (contrary to section 38(a) of the Army Act 1955). Although the Army Board upheld his petition against the custodial part of his sentence, the charge for which he was convicted carried a potential sentence of two years’ imprisonment (see paragraph 17 below).
Mr Allen pleaded guilty to two charges of possession of controlled drugs contrary to the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, these being civilian criminal offences. The Army Board reduced the custodial element of his sentence to six months’ imprisonment.
The relevant provisions of the Army Act 1955 are set out in the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in the Findlay case (Findlay v. the United Kingdom judgment of 25 February 1997, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1997-I, §§ 32-51).
Central to the system under the 1955 Act was the role of the “convening officer”. This officer (who had to be of a specified rank and in command of a body of the regular forces or of the command within which the person to be tried was serving) assumed responsibility for every case to be tried by court-martial. He or she had the final decision on the nature and detail of the charges to be brought and the type of court-martial required, and was responsible for convening the court-martial.
The convening officer would draw up a convening order, which would specify, inter alia, the date, place and time of the trial, the name of the president and the details of the other members, all of whom he could appoint. Failing the appointment of a judge advocate by the Judge Advocate General’s Office, the convening officer could appoint one. He also appointed, or directed a commanding officer to appoint, the prosecuting officer.
Prior to the hearing, the convening officer was responsible for sending an abstract of the evidence to the prosecuting officer and to the judge advocate, and could indicate the passages which might be inadmissible. He procured the attendance at trial of all witnesses to be called for the prosecution. When charges were withdrawn, the convening officer’s consent was normally obtained, although it was not necessary in all cases, and a plea to a lesser charge could not be accepted from the accused without it. He had also to ensure that the accused had a proper opportunity to prepare his defence, legal representation if required and the opportunity to contact the defence witnesses, and was responsible for ordering the attendance at the hearing of all witnesses “reasonably requested” by the defence.
The convening officer could dissolve the court-martial either before or during the trial, when required in the interests of the administration of justice. In addition, he could comment on the proceedings of a court-martial. Those remarks would not form part of the record of the proceedings and would normally be communicated in a separate minute to the members of the court, although in an exceptional case, where a more public instruction was required in the interests of discipline, they could be made known in the orders of the command.
The convening officer usually acted as confirming officer also. A court-martial’s findings were not effective until confirmed by the confirming officer, who was empowered to withhold confirmation or substitute, postpone or remit in whole or in part any sentence.
Since the applicants’ trials, the law has been amended by the Armed Forces Act 1996 (see the above-mentioned Findlay v. the United Kingdom judgment, §§ 52-57).
A person convicted of absence without leave shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years (section 38(a) of the 1955 Act).