The case originated in an application (no. 32953/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Matko Škrlj (“the applicant”), on 6 May 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Milanović, a lawyer practising in Umag. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged that in minor-offence proceedings against him he had not been tried by an impartial tribunal as required by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, because a judge involved in the case had agreed, in another set of proceedings, to be removed from the case because of his animosity towards the applicant’s mother.
On 8 September 2015 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1991 and lives in Rijeka.
On 29 February 2012 Buzet police station (Policijska uprava istarska, Policijska postaja Buzet) issued a penalty notice, having found the applicant guilty of two minor road traffic offences: not stopping his vehicle in order to let a pedestrian cross at a pedestrian crossing, and not wearing a seat belt, offences proscribed by sections 134(4) and 163(8) of the of the Road Traffic Safety Act (Zakon o sigurnosti prometa na cestama, Official Gazette nos. 67/2008 and 74/2011, see paragraph 20 below).
The applicant challenged that penalty notice before the Pazin Minor Offences Court (Prekršajni sud u Pazinu, Stalna Služba u Buzetu). The case was assigned to Judge B.L.V.
On 13 June 2012 Judge B.L.V. issued a decision setting aside the penalty notice and ordering that summary minor-offence proceedings be conducted.
On the same day Judge B.L.V. summoned the applicant to a hearing scheduled for 6 July 2012. The summons, which contained a warning that the hearing could be held in the defendant’s absence in the event that his questioning was not necessary and relevant for lawfully and correctly deciding the case, was served on the applicant on 20 June 2012.
According to the applicant, on 28 June 2012 his lawyer, I.M., sent a fax to the Pazin Minor Offences Court, asking the president of that court to disqualify Judge B.L.V. from dealing with the case. The application stated that Judge B.L.V. had worked with the applicant’s mother, who was also a judge, and in order to remove any doubt as to Judge B.L.V.’s impartiality, he should be removed from the case.
According to the Government, such a fax was never received by the Pazin Minor Offences Court. The domestic case file does not contain any application by the applicant to disqualify Judge B.L.V. from dealing with the case.
Although duly summoned, neither the applicant nor his lawyer appeared before the Pazin Minor Offences Court on 6 July 2012. The competent prosecutor in the case did not appear either. Judge B.L.V. decided to hold the hearing in the absence of the parties. He found that the applicant’s questioning was not relevant for correctly establishing the facts of the case. He then examined a written report from the police officer who had directly observed the applicant committing the minor road traffic offences.
On the same day, concluding that there were no reasons to doubt the police officer’s written report, Judge B.L.V. found the applicant guilty of the charges listed in the penalty notice of 29 February 2012. He fined him 1,000 Croatian kunas (HRK – approximately 130 euros (EUR)) and ordered a term of imprisonment in default of payment.
As there was no possibility for the applicant to appeal to a higher court in the summary minor-offence proceedings, he lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske). He submitted that Judge B.L.V. had decided his case even though he had asked for the judge to be disqualified. He further submitted that he had also asked for Judge B.L.V.’s removal in another set of minor-offence proceedings before the same court, and on that occasion the judge had accepted to recuse himself, citing animosity between himself and the applicant’s mother (see paragraph 18 below). Pursuant to section 104(3) of the Minor Offences Act (Prekršajni zakon, Official Gazette no. 107/2007, see paragraph 21 below), Judge B.L.V. should therefore have immediately informed the president of the court that there were circumstances justifying his recusal. As Judge B.L.V. had failed to do so, the applicant had not been tried by an impartial court.
On 17 October 2012 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded. That decision was served on the applicant on 9 November 2012.
Upon request of the Government Agent, on 22 October 2015 the Registry of the Constitutional Court confirmed that the Pazin Minor Offences Court’s case file did not contain the applicant’s application for Judge B.L.V. to be disqualified from dealing with the case.
On 6 June 2012, in another set of minor-offence proceedings against the applicant before the Pazin Minor Offences Court, the applicant requested, through his lawyer, I.M., that Judge B.L.V. be disqualified from dealing with the case. In his application, he stated that Judge B.L.V. had worked with his mother, who was also a judge, and in order to remove any doubt as to Judge B.L.V.’s impartiality, he should be removed from the case.
After learning of the application for his disqualification, Judge B.L.V. discontinued all activity on the case and proposed that the application be accepted. In a statement to the President of the Pazin Minor Offences Court, he said that he had been in continuous conflict with the applicant’s mother, who had been president of the court where he had worked, and that they did not communicate with each other.
On 14 June 2012 the President of the Pazin Minor Offences Court disqualified Judge B.L.V. from dealing with the case, finding that there were circumstances which called his impartiality into doubt. That decision was served on the applicant on 23 June 2012.
The relevant provisions of the Road Traffic Safety Act read:
“(1)  If traffic at a marked pedestrian crossing is not controlled by traffic lights or by an authorised person, a driver is obliged to approach the pedestrian crossing at a speed which does not jeopardise pedestrians, so that he or she may stop his or her vehicle and let pedestrians who have already stepped onto the pedestrian crossing pass.
...
(4)  Drivers who do not comply with subsections 1 and 2 of this section shall be fined HRK 500 for a minor offence.
...”
“(1)  When travelling in a motor vehicle in seats installed with safety belts, drivers and passengers are obliged to use the seat belt[s] in the way designated by the seat belt manufacturer.
...
(8)  Drivers and other persons who do not comply with the provisions in this section shall be fined HRK 500 for a minor offence.”
The relevant provisions of the Minor Offences Act, as in force at the time, provided:
“(1)  A judge shall be excluded from a case:
if he or she has been injured by the minor offence [in question];
if he or she is the spouse, a relative by blood – either lineal, descending or ascending in any degree, or collateral [sharing the same ancestor] to the fourth degree – or related by affinity to the second degree to the defendant, his or her counsel, the prosecutor, the injured person, their legal guardian or legal representative, or the representative of a legal person;
if he or she is a legal guardian, ward, adoptive parent or adopted child, foster parent or foster child to the defendant, his or her counsel, the defendant’s spouse, the prosecutor, the injured person or the representative of a legal person;
if he or she has conducted the first-instance proceedings in the same case or has taken part in the first-instance proceedings as a decision-maker, prosecutor, defence counsel, legal guardian or legal representative of the injured person or the prosecutor, or if he or she has testified as a witness or as an expert witness, or has taken part in the inspection or other operation on whose basis the minor offence proceedings were initiated.
(2)  A judge may be removed from a particular case if it has been argued and proved that there are circumstances other than those listed in the previous subsection which call his or her impartiality into doubt.
(3)  A judge, as soon as he or she discovers grounds for [his or her] exclusion as referred to in subsection 1, or circumstances that justify his or her removal (subsection 2), shall immediately inform the president of the court, who shall appoint a substitute judge. ...
(4)  When a judge learns that an application for his or her removal has been lodged, he or she shall immediately discontinue all activity on the case, and in the event of a removal referred to in subsection 2, he or she may, before the ruling on the application, carry out only those procedural actions where there is a risk of delay.”
“(1)   Parties may ask for the disqualification of a judge.
(2)  Parties may lodge their application for disqualification up until the start of proceedings ..., and if they learn of a reason for the judge’s exclusion (section 104, subsection 1) at a later stage, they shall submit their application immediately after learning of that reason.
...”
“A hearing can be held and a judgment can be rendered if parties and other persons participating in proceedings, although duly summoned, do not appear. The hearing can be held in the defendant’s absence if his or her questioning is not necessary and relevant for lawfully and correctly rendering the judgment.”
“By means of a judgment, a charge against a defendant is dismissed, or the defendant is acquitted or found guilty.”
The other relevant provisions of the Minor Offences Act are set out in the case of Marčan v. Croatia (no. 40820/12, §§ 21-22, 10 July 2014).