The case originated in an application (no. 43045/08) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Ms Constanţa Dragomir (“the applicant”), on 11 July 2008.
The applicant was represented by Ms M. Sîrbu, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 14 February 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1946 and lives in Bucharest.
On 24 April 2002 she was hit by a car while crossing the street. The driver left the scene of the accident and took the applicant to hospital, where she was diagnosed with a fractured spine. She underwent surgery five days later and was released from hospital on 14 May 2002.
The police opened an investigation to clarify the circumstances of the accident.
On 19 June 2002 the police took a statement from the applicant, in which she complained that the driver had caused her bodily harm. She also requested 20,000 US dollars (USD) from him in civil damages.
On 5 July 2002 the police officer in charge of the investigation ordered a technical expert report.
On 8 July 2002 an eyewitness was interviewed by the police.
On 23 August 2002 a forensic medical report was attached to the investigation file. It stated that the applicant had suffered injuries which required forty to forty five days of medical care.
According to reports drafted by the investigating police officers, on 30 November 2002 and 16 January 2003 the applicant failed to attend the police station to take note of the objectives set for the expert report. On
On 18 February 2004 the police requested the assistance of an expert to prepare the technical expert report in the case.
On 29 March 2004 the expert examined the scene of the accident in the presence of the driver and the applicant. The driver declared that he agreed with the expert’s findings.
The technical expert report was finalised on 25 August 2004. It stated that the applicant was to blame for the accident because she had crossed the street in an unmarked place without paying attention. The driver, who had been turning his vehicle at the time, had not breached any traffic regulations. The expert appointed by the driver agreed with the report, while the expert appointed by the applicant drafted a dissenting opinion concluding that the fault lay entirely with the driver, who had turned his car without paying attention.
The applicant took note of the expert opinions on
On 31 January 2005 the Prosecutor’s Office attached to the Bucharest District Court decided not to prosecute the driver, since the fault of the accident lay entirely with the applicant. The applicant lodged a complaint against that decision, but it was rejected as ill-founded by a hierarchically superior prosecutor on 4 April 2005.
A complaint by the applicant against the two decisions was declared inadmissible by the Bucharest District Court on 2 June 2005. She lodged an appeal on points of law (recurs) against that judgment. On 4 August 2005 her appeal was allowed by the Bucharest County Court, which decided to send the case back to the prosecutor for a more thorough investigation since numerous facts had not been clarified.
On 29 December 2005 the applicant made enquiries with the prosecutor’s office about the status of the investigation.
On 26 April 2006 the same eyewitness was interviewed again.
A new expert report was requested by the prosecutor on 7 July 2006, and on 19 July 2006 the applicant informed the authorities that she would need additional time, until 9 September 2006, to decide whether to instruct a counter expert on her behalf.
On 10 August 2006 a first written statement was taken from the driver.
In statements given to the police on 11 May and 19 October 2006, the applicant mentioned that a new expert report would not be necessary in the case.
According to three reports drafted between 2 October and 29 November 2006 by the police officer in charge of the investigation, the applicant could not be contacted, or had failed to come to the police station to give the name of her counter expert.
On 23 January 2007, holding that a new expert report was not necessary, the prosecutor decided again not to prosecute the driver since the fault for the accident lay entirely with the applicant. The decision was upheld by a hierarchically superior prosecutor on 21 February 2007.
The applicant’s complaint against the prosecutors’ decisions was allowed by the Bucharest District Court on 8 May 2007. The court held that the investigative authorities had failed to follow the instructions given in the previous judgment of 4 August 2005. The judgment became final on 26 September 2007 when an appeal on points of law by the prosecutor was dismissed by the Bucharest County Court.
On 9 June 2008 the Prosecutor’s Office attached to the Bucharest District Court noted that the limitation period for the crime under investigation had expired on 24 April 2007 and decided to close the case.
The applicant appealed against that decision before the courts. She claimed 25,000 euros (EUR) in respect of non-pecuniary damage from the driver and the Prosecutor’s Office. She considered that the prosecutor was liable for the excessive delays in the investigation which had triggered the expiry of the limitation period for the crime committed against her.
On 27 August 2008 the Bucharest District Court rejected the applicant’s claim. The court held that because the limitation period for criminal responsibility in the case had expired it could not rule on the applicant’s claim for compensation. It further held that the applicant could bring such a claim before the civil courts. The judgment became final on
 30.  The provisions of the former Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure regarding the possibility of opening civil proceedings separately from or jointly with criminal proceedings read as follows:
“... (2) Civil claims may be brought during criminal proceedings, but also before the trial court, until the [date the] indictment has been read out in court.”
“ (1) If a victim has not joined criminal proceedings as a civil party, he or she may initiate separate proceedings before the civil courts for damages arising from the offence.
(2) Civil proceedings shall be stayed pending a final judgment of the criminal courts.
(3) A victim who has joined criminal proceedings as a civil party may also initiate separate civil proceedings if the criminal proceedings are stayed. If the criminal proceedings are reopened the civil proceedings opened before the civil courts shall be stayed.
(4) A victim who has initiated civil proceedings before a civil court may abandon these proceedings and lodge an application with the investigating authorities or the trial court if criminal proceedings have subsequently been opened ... The civil proceedings cannot be abandoned if the civil court has delivered even a non-final judgment.”
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code concerning the statutory limitation period for the crime under investigation in the current case were, at the relevant time, as follows:
“Criminal liability shall be statute-barred after: ...
(d) five years, where the law provides for a maximum sentence of between one and five years’ imprisonment ...
These limitation periods shall start to run from the date on which the offence was committed ...”
The relevant provisions on civil liability for tort, as provided by the Civil Code in force until 1 October 2011, read as follows:
“Any act committed by a person which causes damage to another shall render the person through whose fault the damage was caused liable to make reparation for it.”
“Everyone shall be liable for damage he has caused not only through his own act but also through his failure to act or his negligence.”
Under the provisions of Article 3 of Decree no. 167/1958, the general time-limit for lodging a claim for compensation is three years from the date when the damage occurred. Under Article 8, the time-limit starts to run from the moment the person becomes aware of the damage and knows who caused it. The situations in which the above-mentioned time-limit may be interrupted are as follows:
The running of the time-limit is interrupted:
(a) if the person who benefits from the running of the time-limit acknowledges the existence of a right [to compensation];...
(b) if a court action is lodged ...;
(c) by enforcement ...
 34.  The Government submitted examples of case-law to show that a civil action for damages under the general provisions on tort may be submitted after the closure of the criminal investigation and after the expiry of the three year limitation period. However, none of the six domestic judgments submitted concerned a situation similar to that in the present case, namely the lodging of a civil action for damages after the closure of the criminal investigation due to the expiry of the statutory limitation period for criminal responsibility and when the victim was aware of both the damage and the person who caused it.