The case originated in an application (no. 75834/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Şenol Uluslararası Nakliyat, İhracat ve Ticaret Limited Şirketi (Şenol International Transport, Export and Commerce Limited Company; “the applicant company”) on 11 June 2001. The applicant company was represented before the Court by Ms Berrin Ergen, a lawyer practising in .
The Turkish Government (“the Government”) did not designate an agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
Relying on Article 6 of the Convention the applicant company alleged, in particular, that the principle of equality of arms had not been respected in the course of the administrative proceedings by which it sought to annul a decision of the Ministry of Transport revoking its transportation licence. It also alleged that the administrative proceedings had not been concluded within a reasonable time.
On 21 October 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant company is a Turkish company specialising in international highway transportation.
On 1 June 1992 at Trieste port the Italian police discovered thirty kilograms of heroin stashed in a lorry which had been hired by the applicant company for the purpose of transporting walnut logs from Turkey to . The driver of the vehicle escaped. As soon as they found out about the incident the applicant company informed the Istanbul Police Headquarters and submitted all the documents in their possession concerning the transportation.
On 31 December 1992 the applicant company’s licence for international highway transportation was extended until 31 December 1994.
On 23 June 1994 the Ministry of Transport (“the Ministry”) revoked the applicant company’s licence pursuant to Article 53 (g) of International Highway Transportation Regulations, on account of the incident in .
On 12 July 1994 the applicant company brought an action before the  (“the ”) and requested the annulment of the Ministry’s decision of 23 June 1994. It also requested the  to grant an interim decision to suspend the execution of the Ministry’s decision.
The Ministry submitted written defence arguments, together with a number of supporting documents, to the  on 12 August 1994. The  forwarded the Ministry’s written defence arguments to the applicant company. The documents attached to the Ministry’s written defence arguments, however, were not forwarded to the applicant company but were placed in the case file of the .
On 31 August 1994 the applicant company submitted observations in response to those of the Ministry. In their observations the lawyers for the applicant company referred to a number of documents which had been appended to the Ministry’s written defence arguments of 12 August 1994 but which had not been communicated to them.
The applicant company’s request for the interim measure was refused by the  on 14 September 1994.
On 13 April 1995 the  dismissed the case. In the proceedings the applicant company had submitted that the drug trafficking had been carried out by the driver of the hired vehicle and that the company could not, therefore, be held responsible for the driver’s actions. In its decision the  held, inter alia, that since the impugned transportation had been undertaken by the applicant company under its licence, it was responsible for the transportation and therefore the Ministry had acted lawfully when revoking the licence.
An appeal lodged by the applicant company on 13 October 1995 was dismissed by the  on 8 October 1997.
On 19 October 2000 the  refused the applicant company’s request of 6 February 1998 for a rectification of the decision. That decision was served on the applicant company on 11 December 2000.