This case concerns the applicant’s conviction in a trial where a witness whose deposition was decisive for the outcome of the case, failed to appear for examination by the defence.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Budapest. The applicant was represented by Ms É. Asztalos, a lawyer practising in Érd.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Between 2006 and January 2009, Z.S. was the applicant’s partner. From time to time he would stay in a house owned by the applicant which otherwise remained uninhabited.
On 24 March 2009 Z.S. made a deposition to the police, reporting that the applicant and an accomplice were cultivating marijuana inside that property.
On 25 March 2009 criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant and the accomplice, J.B.
On 26 March 2009 Z.S. was heard by the police as a witness; however, no face-to-face confrontation was arranged between him and the applicant or J.B.
Thereafter, Z.S. became unavailable to attend any court hearings.
On 2 March 2010 a bill of indictment was preferred against the applicant and J.B.
On 5 July 2013 the Ráckeve District Court convicted the applicant and J.B. of possession of drugs and theft of electricity. It relied in essence on the deposition and the witness testimony of Z.S. made to the police (see, paragraphs 5 and 7 above), in addition to material and expert evidence. In establishing the applicant’s active participation in the offence, the court relied on the deposition and testimony made by Z.S. to the police, as well as on circumstantial evidence, on perceived contradictions in the applicant’s own testimonies and on the fact that she was the owner of the premises where the crime had taken place. The court noted that Z.S., who was wanted as a fugitive, was not available to testify as a witness; his earlier deposition and testimony were therefore read out in court.
The applicant appealed, pleading innocent. She argued in particular that the evidence given by Z.S. should be excluded, since he stood to gain from framing her for his own criminal activities which he might have wanted to cover up – yet he was entirely unavailable for examination by the defence.
On appeal, on 27 February 2014 the Budapest Surroundings High Court upheld the conviction while lowering the sentence. In the reasoning the High Court established that the District Court had unlawfully included Z.S.’s earlier witness testimony (see paragraph 7 above) as part of the evidence in that it had ignored the fact that the applicant and he had been a couple for part of the relevant period of time. It excluded that testimony from the case on the grounds that it was improperly obtained evidence, noting that, in the light of the other available material and expert evidence (see paragraph 10 above), the discovery of the procedural irregularity did not warrant the quashing of the judgment.
The High Court nevertheless accepted Z.S.’s deposition made to the police on 24 March 2009 (see paragraph 5 above) as evidence.
Upon a petition for review by the applicant, on 5 December 2014 the Kúria found that the offence of stealing electricity was in fact statute-barred but upheld the judgment in respect of the offence of possession of drugs. The Kúria held in particular as follows:
“... If a court ... included in its judgment exclusively the assessment of such evidence that was later excluded ... by the second-instance court, this would amount to a violation of the obligation to give reasons, which would entail the mandatory quashing of the [judgment]. ...
In contrast [to the above-mentioned situation], in addition to Z.S.’s witness testimony given during the investigations, the first-instance court also assessed several other pieces of evidence and reached the conclusion, as duly explained in detail in the statement of facts, that the [applicant] not only knew about the cultivation of narcotic [plants] but also participated in [it]. Moreover, in its reasoning, the second-instance court also explained why the exclusion of Z.S.’s witness testimony did not render the established findings of fact ill-founded ... and on what grounds the facts established in relation to the [applicant’s] participation in the [cultivation] could be maintained ... Therefore, no deficiency in the reasoning can be found in respect of the facts such as to entail unsuitability for review.”
Meanwhile, the applicant had filed a constitutional complaint alleging a violation of her right to a fair trial. On 4 November 2014 the Constitutional Court found no breach of the constitutional right to a fair trial. It pointed out that the principle of equality of arms had been respected. It also held that the impugned judgments had not been exclusively based on the testimonies of Z.S.; rather, the courts had had ample other evidence at their disposal, whose free assessment had resulted in the courts being firmly convinced of the applicant’s guilt.