The applicant complained about the refusal of the Supreme Court to partly exempt him from the payment of court fees for lodging an appeal on points of law in civil proceedings or to allow him to defer payment of those fees.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Varėna. He was represented by Ms E. Grucytė, a lawyer practising in Kaunas.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms L. Urbaitė.
In March 2011 M.K. lodged a civil claim against the applicant, claiming unpaid debt and late-payment fees, amounting to a total of 195,600 Lithuanian litai ((LTL), approximately 56,650 euros (EUR)), as well as 5% annual interest. The applicant disputed the claim and argued that, although he had signed a loan agreement with M.K., he had never received any money under that agreement.
On 12 August 2014 the Vilnius Regional Court allowed M.K.’s claim in full.
On 8 September 2014 the applicant appealed against that decision. He asked the Vilnius Regional Court to partly exempt him from the payment of court fees, in line with Article 83 § 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 26 below). He submitted that the amount of the court fees for lodging the appeal was LTL 4,912 (EUR 1,422) and he was unable to pay it – he earned a salary of LTL 455 (EUR 132), from which he had to pay maintenance to his children and pay for his own accommodation, food and medication. He did not have any real estate. The applicant submitted that he had already paid LTL 500 (EUR 145) in court fees for the lodging of the appeal but was unable to pay the remaining part. He enclosed the following documents: a court decision ordering him to pay maintenance to his two children, born in 1997 and 1999; a certificate from his employer indicating his salary; and a certificate from the Centre of Registers showing that he did not have any real estate.
The Vilnius Regional Court ordered the applicant to correct his request. It considered that he had not adequately demonstrated that his financial situation was difficult. In addition, the applicant was represented by a lawyer, which showed that he could afford qualified legal assistance. The court ordered the applicant to submit proof of his expenses for accommodation, food and medication.
On 2 October 2014 the applicant lodged a corrected request to be partly exempted from the payment of court fees. He submitted that he had been ordered by a court to pay maintenance of LTL 1,000 (EUR 290) to each of his two children, but because of his difficult financial situation he had been unable to pay it and was LTL 16,000 (EUR 4,634) in arrears. He also submitted that he had health problems for which he had been hospitalised and had to take medication, which cost around LTL 50 (EUR 15) per month; he enclosed a doctor’s certificate and receipts for medication. Lastly, he submitted that he did not have any real estate and lived with his mother in her apartment. His mother paid for the utilities and he bought the food, which cost around LTL 100 (EUR 29) per week; he enclosed receipts.
On 6 October 2014 the Vilnius Regional Court partly exempted the applicant from the payment of court fees, allowing him to pay LTL 500 (EUR 145) instead of LTL 4,912 (EUR 1,422) (see paragraph 5 above). It stated that the documents provided by the applicant, showing his salary, lack of real estate, obligation to pay maintenance, and other expenses, proved that his financial situation was difficult.
On 6 August 2015 the Court of Appeal quashed the Vilnius Regional Court’s decision of 12 August 2014 (see paragraph 4 above) and remitted the case for fresh examination.
On 15 October 2015 the Vilnius Regional Court, after a fresh examination, allowed M.K.’s claim in full.
On 9 November 2015 the applicant appealed against that decision and asked the Vilnius Regional Court to partly exempt him from the payment of court fees. He submitted similar arguments and supporting documents to those submitted in his request of 8 September 2014 (see paragraph 5 above).
On 22 February 2016 the Vilnius Regional Court partly exempted the applicant from the payment of court fees in line with Article 83 § 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 26 below) and allowed him to pay EUR 150 instead of EUR 1,422.
On 29 April 2016 the Court of Appeal quashed the Vilnius Regional Court’s decision of 15 October 2015 (see paragraph 10 above) and remitted the case for fresh examination.
On 21 September 2016 the Vilnius Regional Court, after a fresh examination, again allowed M.K.’s claim in full.
On 11 October 2016 the applicant appealed against that decision and asked the Vilnius Regional Court to partly exempt him from the payment of court fees. He submitted similar arguments and supporting documents to those submitted in his requests of 8 September 2014 and 9 November 2015 (see paragraphs 5 and 11 above).
On 21 October 2016 the Vilnius Regional Court partly exempted the applicant from the payment of court fees and allowed him to pay EUR 150 instead of EUR 1,422. It observed that the applicant had already been partly exempted from the payment of court fees and there was no information showing that his financial situation had improved.
On 15 February 2017 the Court of Appeal upheld the Vilnius Regional Court’s decision of 21 September 2016 (see paragraph 14 above).
On 6 April 2017 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law and asked the Supreme Court to partly exempt him from the payment of court fees. As in his previous requests, he submitted that his salary was EUR 175, from which he had to pay maintenance to one of his children who was still a minor, as well as pay for his own accommodation, food and medication; furthermore, he did not have any real estate. He stated that he had already paid part of the court fees – EUR 150 – but was unable to pay the remaining EUR 1,272. He enclosed similar supporting documents as he had in his previous requests (see paragraphs 5, 11 and 15 above).
In a decision adopted on 22 May 2017, the Supreme Court stated that the appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant met the relevant requirements of the Code of Civil Procedure and could be accepted for examination, but that the applicant had failed to pay the required court fees. The Supreme Court observed that a request to be exempted from the payment of court fees had to be adequately reasoned and supported by relevant evidence. Having assessed the reasons and the documents submitted by the applicant, it held that there were no grounds to exempt him from the payment of court fees in accordance with Article 83 § 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It ordered the applicant to pay the remaining EUR 1,272 by 5 June 2017 or to lodge a duly reasoned request to defer the payment (see paragraph 27 below), together with relevant evidence.
On 26 May 2017 the applicant lodged a request with the Supreme Court to defer the payment of the court fees. He repeated the arguments he had made in his previous request and enclosed the same supporting documents (see paragraph 18 above).
On 5 June 2017 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s request. It stated that the payment of court fees could be deferred on the basis of an individual’s actual financial situation, and not solely on the basis of the funds in his or her possession. When assessing someone’s ability to pay court fees, a court had to take into consideration all of that person’s assets and the value of those assets. It had to assess the entirety of the relevant evidence, such as the information provided by the individual about his or her movable and immovable property, monetary funds and income, as well as other circumstances describing his or her financial situation. In line with the domestic case-law, an individual’s financial situation could be demonstrated by, inter alia, certificates from the Real Estate Registry, banks, State social insurance funds or the Centre of Registers. Documents provided by credit institutions had to cover a certain period of time because information about the money in a bank account did not show the cash flows in that account.
The Supreme Court considered that the information provided by the applicant was “fragmented” and insufficient to prove his difficult financial situation. Furthermore, it transpired from the case file that he had entered into contracts concerning large sums of money and that he had agreed to pay a rather high amount of maintenance to his children (see paragraph 7 above). In the Supreme Court’s view, those circumstances did not give grounds to find that the applicant’s financial situation was difficult. It ordered the applicant to pay the remaining part of the court fees (EUR 1,272) by 15 June 2017.
On 12 June 2017 the applicant lodged a new request to be partly exempted from the payment of court fees or to defer the payment. He argued that the Supreme Court had incorrectly assessed the documents showing his financial situation and had unreasonably ordered him to pay the court fees, thereby restricting his right of access to a court. He repeated the arguments he had made in his previous requests (see paragraphs 5, 11, 15 and 18 above). He also submitted that his bank accounts had been frozen because he had a debt of EUR 11,370 for unpaid maintenance; he enclosed a copy of his banking records and a certificate from his employer. He further submitted that from the start of the proceedings he had never been able to pay the full amount of the court fees, but that had not precluded him from defending his rights before the courts, and there was no information that his financial situation had improved.
On 15 June 2017 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s request. It stated that it had already examined those same circumstances in its previous decision (see paragraphs 21 and 22 above), and that the additional information provided by the applicant did not constitute new grounds to find that his financial situation was difficult. Since the applicant had failed to pay the court fees, the Supreme Court refused to accept his appeal on points of law for examination.
Article 80 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter “the CCP”) lays down the rules for calculating the amount of court fees due in different types of cases. In cases concerning monetary disputes, the amount of the court fees is related to the amount in dispute.
Article 83 § 3 of the CCP provides that, at an individual’s request and taking into account his or her financial situation, a court may partly exempt him or her from the payment of court fees. A request to be partly exempted has to be well reasoned and based on relevant proof. The court must provide adequate reasons for its decision.
Article 84 of the CCP provides that a court, taking into account an individual’s financial situation, may defer the payment of court fees. A request to have the payment of court fees deferred has to be well reasoned and based on relevant proof.
Article 80 § 7 of the CCP provides that when procedural documents or their enclosures are submitted to a court electronically, only 75% of the required amount of court fees is due.
Article 20 § 1 of the Law on State-Guaranteed Legal Aid provides that individuals who are entitled to State-guaranteed legal aid are exempted from, inter alia, the payment of court fees in civil cases. Article 11 § 7 (4) of that Law provides that State-guaranteed legal aid is not provided in cases which concern claims arising from commercial activities.