The case originated in an application (no. 16553/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Alan Praunsperger (“the applicant”), on 28 December 2007.
The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 16 March 2009 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in .
On 3 August 1994 he obtained a final and enforceable judgment from the Rijeka Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Rijeci) ordering a private individual, M.Č. to pay the applicant a sum of money.
On 11 November 1994, as no payment had been made, the applicant instituted enforcement proceedings in the Makarska Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Makarskoj), seeking the enforcement of the above judgment through the seizure of movable property owned by M.Č in Makarska.
In February 1998, the Makarska Municipal Court initiated the seizure of the said movable property in order to satisfy the applicant's claim. However, this attempt failed because of the lack of movable property suitable for seizure.
On 26 November 2001 the applicant requested that the value of a flat owned by M.Č. be assessed by the Makarska Municipal Court for the purposes of the enforcement proceedings.
On 21 July 2003 the applicant sought enforcement through the seizure of the above-mentioned flat.
On 3 July 2006 the applicant lodged a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time with the Split County Court, complaining about the length of the above-mentioned enforcement proceedings.
On 1 March 2007 the  found a violation of the applicant's right to a hearing within a reasonable time. It awarded him compensation in the amount of 7,000 Croatian kuna (HRK) and ordered the Makarska Municipal Court to decide the case as quickly as possible but in any case within six months. The County Court's decision was served on the applicant on 23 March 2007.
On 2 October 2007 the applicant lodged another request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time with the Split County Court, complaining that the enforcement proceedings were still pending at first instance. On 10 March 2008 the  dismissed the applicant's complaint.
On 2 April 2008 the applicant appealed to the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) against the decision of the Split County Court, contesting it as being ineffective in his case and claiming compensation in the amount of HRK 500,000.
On 9 June 2008 the Supreme Court upheld the applicant's appeal in part and ordered the Makarska Municipal Court to complete the enforcement proceedings as quickly as possible but in any case within six months. The Supreme Court did not award the applicant any further compensation. The Supreme Court's decision was served on the applicant on 3 July 2008.
On 5 September 2008 the Makarska Municipal Court decided that the enforcement was not permissible under the relevant domestic law. The applicant appealed. On 15 January 2009 the  quashed the first-instance decision and remitted the case to the Makarska Municipal Court.
On 23 January 2009 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint about the length of the above-mentioned enforcement proceedings and also complained about the fact that both time-limits, the first one ordered by the Split County Court and the second by the Supreme Court, had not been complied with.
On 19 February 2009 the  (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) dismissed the applicant's constitutional complaint, treating it as an appeal against the Supreme Court's decision of 9 June 2008, on the ground that the findings of the lower courts had been correct.
On 6 April 2009 the Makarska Municipal Court decided again that the enforcement on the flat in question was not permissible. The applicant appealed and the case is still pending before the Split County Court.
Article 29 § 1 of the Constitution (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 41/2001 of 7 May 2001) reads as follows:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
The relevant part of section 63 of the Constitutional Act on the  (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 49/2002 of 3 May 2002 – “the Constitutional Court Act”) reads as follows:
“(1) The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint whether or not all legal remedies have been exhausted if the competent court fails to decide a claim concerning the individual's rights and obligations or a criminal charge against him or her within a reasonable time ...
(2) If a constitutional complaint ... under sub-section 1 of this section is upheld, the  shall set a time-limit within which the competent court must decide the case on the merits...
(3) In a decision issued under sub-section 2 of this section, the  shall assess appropriate compensation for the applicant for the violation of his or her constitutional rights ... The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date on which a request for payment is lodged.”
The relevant part of the Courts Act (Zakon o sudovima, Official Gazette nos. 150/05, 16/07 and 113/08), which entered into force on 29 December 2005, reads as follows:
PROTECTION OF THE RIGHT TO A HEARING WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME
Section 27
 “(1) A party to court proceedings who considers that the competent court failed to decide within a reasonable time on his or her rights or obligations or a criminal charge against him or her, may lodge a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time with the immediately higher court.
(2) If the request concerns proceedings pending before the High Commercial Court of the Republic of Croatia, the High Court for Administrative Offences of the Republic of Croatia or the Administrative Court of the Republic of Croatia, the request shall be decided by the Supreme Court of the .
(3) The proceedings for deciding the request referred to in sub-section 1 of this section shall be urgent. The rules of non-contentious procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis in those proceedings and, in principle, no hearing shall be held.
Section 28
 (1) If the court referred to in section 27 of this Act finds the request well founded, it shall set a time-limit within which the court before which the proceedings are pending must decide on a right or obligation of, or a criminal charge against, the person who lodged the request, and shall award him or her appropriate compensation for the violation of his or her right to a hearing within a reasonable time.
(2) The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months of the date on which the party's request for payment is lodged.
(3) An appeal, to be lodged with the Supreme Court within fifteen days, lies against a decision on the request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time. No appeal lies against a Supreme Court decision, but a constitutional complaint may be lodged.”