The case originated in an application (no. 42010/06) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Teodor Deli (“the applicant”), on 29 August 2006.
The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the relevant time, Mr V. Grosu.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the judge who had convicted him of contempt of court had lacked impartiality. He also complained that the Chișinău Court of Appeal had not properly summoned him.
On 8 December 2008 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Chișinău.
The applicant represented a party (X.) in civil court proceedings before the Ciocana District Court against another party (Y.). The hearing of 15 June 2006 was held before a single judge, B. According to the applicant, at a certain point during the hearing he objected to the judge acting in an intimidating manner towards X. In response, the judge threatened to have the applicant thrown out of court or even jailed.
When, allegedly as a result of this behaviour, the applicant requested the recusal of the judge (recuzare), the judge dictated the following text to the court assistant, which was recorded in the minutes of the hearing:
“During the examination of the claimant, his representative [the applicant] was cautioned for inappropriate behaviour at the hearing, manifested as disrespectful remarks addressed to the defendant’s representative, M.
Repeatedly during the examination of the claimant, his representative [the applicant] was cautioned for inappropriate behaviour at the hearing, manifested as disturbing order in the court by using unacceptable words and failing to heed warnings by the President of the Court.
Taking into account the above the court decides:
Under Article 200/7 of the Code of Administrative Proceedings of the Republic of Moldova, [the applicant] is fined the amount of ten conventional units, which represent 200 [Moldovan] lei [MDL, the equivalent of 12 euros at the time] for showing disrespect towards the court by disturbing order in the court hearing, by using expressions unacceptable in court proceedings, by shouting and by failing to heed warnings issued by the President of the Court.
A cassation appeal against this decision may be lodged with the Chişinău Court of Appeal within 10 days, through the Ciocana District Court in Chişinău.”
According to the applicant, he had persisted in challenging the judge, following which the proceedings had been suspended and the matter had been put before another judge. It had been alleged in the request for recusal that after Y. had asked X. the same question five times, X. had noted that he had already answered the question. The judge had then insisted, in a raised voice, that X. answer the question. In reaction to this, the applicant had objected to his client being harassed. The judge had responded that X. was not being harassed, but the applicant was being warned against misbehaving in court. Thereafter Y. had asked the same question again and the judge had shouted at X. for not answering. In response, the applicant had requested the recusal of the judge, and had asked that the complaint be reflected in the minutes of the hearing. The judge had then decided to sanction the applicant for contempt of court. The applicant had added in his request, which was supported by his client, that Judge B. had shown a biased and hostile attitude towards both of them, while favouring Y.
On 15 June 2006 the judge examining the applicant’s request for the recusal of Judge B. rejected it, finding that the grounds relied on did not correspond to any grounds for challenging a judge under Article 50 of the Code of Civil Procedure (“the CCP”, see paragraph 16 below). Thereafter, the proceedings in the civil case continued.
According to the Government, following the applicant’s repeated improper behaviour in court by using offensive language towards the other party’s representative, the applicant had been warned by the judge and then found in contempt of court, with the decision taken having been noted in the minutes of the hearing (see paragraph 7 above).
On 19 June 2006 the applicant asked for a copy of the minutes of the hearing. On 23 June 2006 he submitted his objections to the minutes of the hearing to the Ciocana District Court. He noted the absence of any record in the minutes of his request that the judge not shout at his client and not intimidate him, since his client had already answered the other party’s question, which had been asked five times in a row. Instead, the minutes noted that the applicant had initially been cautioned, which had not happened in reality. The minutes had not recorded the applicant’s repeated request for the recusal of the judge as a result of the latter’s further intimidation of the applicant’s client, or the resulting threats made to the applicant by the judge. Finally, he objected that the decision to fine him, as noted in the minutes, had never been delivered publicly, but had simply been dictated to the court assistant as a response to legitimate complaints made by him. The applicant’s client subscribed to these objections.
The applicant submitted that he had never received a reply to these objections and had not seen any decision by the court in that respect.
Also on 23 June 2006 the applicant lodged a cassation appeal with the Ciocana District Court, which the court forwarded to the Chişinău Court of Appeal, in accordance with the law. According to the applicant, the court did not annex his objections to the minutes of the hearing, or any response thereto, to the case file, as required by law. In his appeal the applicant noted that he had not received a copy of the decision sanctioning him on 15 June 2006. He argued, inter alia, that the decision had breached the provisions of Article 2651 of the Code of Administrative Offences and of Article 6 of the Convention.
On 6 July 2006 the Chişinău Court of Appeal rejected the applicant’s cassation appeal. In its judgment, the court reiterated the content of the lower court’s decision and noted that the applicant had been summoned to the hearing. Without giving any other details, the court decided to uphold the lower court’s decision. That decision was final.
On 11 October 2006, while the civil case between X. and Y. in which the applicant was representing X. (see paragraph 6 above) was still pending before the Ciocana District Court, the parties concluded an agreement settling the case. The court confirmed the settlement on 25 December 2006.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, as in force at the relevant time, read:
Article 50. Grounds for requesting recusal of a judge
“1.  The judge in charge of the case shall be recused if:
(a)  at an earlier examination of the case he or she participated as a witness, expert, specialist, interpreter, court assistant or bailiff;
(b)  he or she is a relative ... of one of the parties or other participants in the proceedings;
(c)  the judge, his or her spouse or relatives up to the third degree are a party to proceedings similar to the one under examination or to proceedings in the same court in which one of the parties is a judge;
(d)  he or she is the tutor, guardian or adoptive parent of one of the parties;
(e)  he or she has already expressed an opinion regarding the case under examination;
(f)  there has been a criminal case between him or her and one of the parties in the five years before the recusal;
(g)  he or she has a personal interest, direct or indirect, in the outcome of the case or there are other circumstances which give rise to doubts as to his or her objectivity and impartiality.
...”
Article 196.  Measures to be taken against persons disturbing order
during a court hearing
“1.  A person who disturbs order during a court hearing shall be cautioned, in the name of the court, by the judge presiding at the hearing.
If a participant in the proceedings or his or her representative repeatedly disturbs order during a court hearing, having already been cautioned, he or she, or his or her representative, may be removed from the courtroom by a court decision either for the entire period of the hearing or for a part thereof. In the latter case, after such persons return to the courtroom, the presiding judge shall inform them of the procedural acts that have taken place in their absence.
For a second disturbance of order during a court hearing, a person who is present at the hearing shall be removed from the courtroom by a decision of the presiding judge. The court shall also have the power to impose a fine of up to 10 conventional units on a person found guilty of disturbing order during a court hearing.
If the actions of a person who disturbs order during a court hearing include the elements of a crime, the court shall forward the relevant materials to the relevant prosecutor to enable criminal proceedings to be initiated.
...”
Article 274.  Contents of the minutes of the court hearing
“...
The minutes of the court hearing shall include:
...
(f)  decisions by the president of the hearing and any decisions of the court delivered without retiring to the deliberations room;
(g)  declarations, requests and explanations of the participants in the hearing and of their representatives;
...
(k)  the content of oral submissions;
...
(m)  the court’s explanation to the participants in the hearing of their right to read the contents of the minutes of the court hearing and to comment on the minutes;
...”
Article 276. Examination of the comments on the minutes of the court hearing
“The judge who signed the minutes of the court hearing shall examine any comments on them within five days of receiving such comments. If the judge agrees with the comments, he or she shall confirm them by noting ‘I agree’ and signing. If not, the judge shall deliver a reasoned decision rejecting the comments as a whole or in part. In all cases the comments on the minutes of the court hearing shall be annexed to the file.”
Article 398. The persons who have the right to lodge an appeal in cassation
“The following shall have the right to lodge an appeal in cassation:
(a)  The parties and other participants in the proceedings;
(b)  witnesses, experts, specialists, interpreters and representatives, in respect of compensation for legal costs owed to them.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Administrative Offences, as in force at the relevant time, read:
Article 2007.  Contempt of the court (Manifestarea lipsei de respect faţă de judecată)
“Lack of consideration for the court, expressed in the form of any person committing acts that show clear disrespect for the court or the rules established by the court shall be punished by a fine of up to twenty five conventional units [MDL 250] or by administrative detention of up to fifteen days.”
Article 209.  The courts
“...
Cases concerning administrative offences under Articles 2007 and 2008 of the present code shall be examined by the court against which the offences were committed ...”
Article 2651.  Recusal of the court
“... The official or the judge in charge of the case cannot take part in the examination of the case and shall be recused (recuzați) if:
...
circumstances have been put forward in relation to him or her which give rise to doubts as to his or her impartiality.
...”
Article 2827.  Decisions of appellate courts in respect of administrative offence cases
“After examination of a case concerning an administrative offence, the appellate court shall deliver a decision. The decision does not have to include the court’s reasoning, which means that it may be drafted in the form of a resolution.”