The case originated in an application (no. 13074/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Mikhail Yevgenyevich Balbashev (“the applicant”), on 18 January 2007.
The Russian Government (“the Government” ) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 12 May 2014 notice of the complaints concerning the applicant’s alleged illtreatment at the time of his arrest and while being held in police custody and the lack of an effective investigation into that alleged illtreatment, the use by the trial court of a confession given by him as a result of his alleged illtreatment and in the absence of a lawyer, and the excessive length of the criminal proceedings in question was given to the Government. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1980. He is currently serving a sentence of imprisonment in the Irkutsk Region.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, can be summarised as follows.
According to the findings of the domestic courts, in the early 2000s one F. and the applicant, together with several other persons, formed an armed gang.
In February 2003 the Department for Combating Organised Crime in Tulun, Irkutsk Region (“the UBOP”) obtained information to the effect that several members of the gang were preparing an armed attack on the house of a private entrepreneur, in the village of Sheragul. The UBOP officers, together with officers of the special rapid-response unit of Bratsk, Irkutsk Region (“the SOBR”) mounted a special operation to apprehend the perpetrators on the spot.
Late in the evening of 28 February 2003 four members of the gang, armed and wearing masks, attacked B.’s house. Two other members – the applicant and F. – waited for them in a VAZ car near a pub, some distance from the house.
Between 10 and 11 p.m. five SOBR officers and two police officers of Tulun police station, apprehended four attackers at the house. Immediately thereafter, at 11.35 p.m., they apprehended F. and the applicant near the pub.
According to the applicant, he did not resist the arrest. Dazzled by the headlights of the police cars, he exited the car and surrendered to the officers. He was unarmed. He was beaten in the course of the arrest.
According to the official account of the events, the people inside the VAZ car disobeyed repeated police orders to stop, and instead attempted to drive away. The officers fired at the car’s wheels. The applicant and F. resisted arrest, and the officers used force against them.
Immediately after the apprehension an assistant prosecutor of Tulun drew up an examination record of the car in the applicant’s presence. Then the applicant and five of the other arrested men were taken to the Tulun district police station (“the GROVD”).
According to the applicant, he and the other arrested persons were each taken to different offices in the GROVD building. The SOBR officers severely beat the applicant and the other co-accused there during the night.
At some point in the morning of 1 March 2003 he made a number of “surrender and confession” statements (явки с повинной). In particular, he confessed to having committed the robbery and murder of R. The parties did not submit a copy of the applicant’s statement in that regard. The file only contains a copy of another “surrender and confession” statement of 1 March 2003 (the exact time of the statement is illegible) by which the applicant submitted that: the night before he had taken F. to Sharagul; he had been acting on F.’s instructions and had understood that they had been going to cover for a robbery (that is to say act as “getaway drivers”); and F. had instructed him to hide when they had seen the lights of a police car. He had started to drive away, but the officers had opened fire. The applicant had stopped the car and had not resisted arrest.
At 3.23 a.m. on 1 March 2003 the assistant prosecutor drew up a record of the applicant’s arrest as a suspect. No lawyer was present. According to the Government, the record contained a note to the effect that the applicant had been notified of his procedural rights, including the right to remain silent and to have legal representation. It can furthermore be seen from the record that the applicant’s sister was immediately informed of his arrest. No copy of the arrest record was submitted by the parties.
At 4.10 a.m. on 1 March 2003 an unspecified officer conducted medical examination No. 186 of the applicant (освидетельствование) in the GROVD and recorded a “banded bruise” (полосчатый кровоподтёк) on the applicant’s right cheek and contusion of both lips.
At some point in the morning of 1 March 2003 the applicant asked to be provided with a lawyer. In the morning of the same day a lawyer was appointed to his defence.
On 1 March 2003 the applicant was questioned as a suspect in the presence of the lawyer who requested a medical examination of the applicant.
On 3 March 2003 a forensic medical examination of the applicant’s injuries was conducted on the basis of the above-mentioned record complied by a GROVD official (see paragraph 16 above). According to medical forensic expert report No. 198, compiled on that date, a forensic expert established that a bruise on the applicant’s right cheek and contusion of both lips had been found on the applicant. The injuries did not cause any harm to his health. They could have been caused by a solid blunt object with a limited surface area (с ограниченной поверхностью соударения), such as a hand or a foot, no more than one day before the initial examination date.
Neither the applicant nor any of his co-accused complained of the alleged illtreatment until 2005, when the trial in the criminal case against them was under way (see paragraph 29 below).
The applicant’s relatives subsequently retained the same lawyer to represent the applicant in the criminal proceedings.
On the morning of 1 March 2003 the SOBR officers (see paragraph 9 above) in written reports informed their hierarchical superior that the night before they had used physical force during the arrest of a group of armed men. Each officer stated in his respective report that he had used force in a manner in accordance with the Police Act in order to put an end to the armed and physical resistance presented by the criminals, as well as the criminals’ attempts to use firearms. The men had been wearing masks and had been armed with sawn-off rifles, their behaviour had been aggressive, they had disobeyed the police’s orders, and any inaction could have led to a loss of life.
On the same day the police officers (see paragraph 9 above) in separate written reports informed the Tulun inter-district prosecutor that they had used firearms during the arrest. One of them reported that he had had to open fire in order to stop the VAZ car in which the suspects had attempted to flee the crime scene, as they had disobeyed repeated police orders to stop. There had been no casualties.
It appears that on the same date all the SOBR officers who had participated in the apprehension gave oral explanations to a prosecutor regarding their use of force and firearms during the operation.
On 1 March 2003 the Tulun inter-district prosecutor conducted an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the use of physical force, handcuffs and firearms. The prosecutor observed that on 28 February 2003 a group of seven persons had committed an armed attack on a private entrepreneur in Sharagul. The SOBR and UBOP officers had used physical force, handcuffs and firearms in the course of apprehending the members of the group. Firearms had been used to stop the VAZ car being driven by the applicant, in which the group members had attempted to escape. The prosecutor found that the officers had acted in accordance with the Police Act. They had not exceeded the limits of the use of physical force, “special means” and firearms. The armed attack on the house had been real, and the attackers had possessed loaded firearms. Moreover, in response to the officers’ demand that they cease their unlawful actions, one of the attackers had opened fire, aiming at the police officers. Two suspects had attempted to escape in the VAZ car and had not reacted to repeated police warnings; the police had therefore had to use firearms, in strict compliance with law.
During the investigation the applicant confirmed the contents of his confession statements, in so far as they concerned the robbery and murder of R. He had made those statements on 31 March and 30 June 2004 (when he had been twice questioned as a suspect) and during an on-site verification of the applicant’s statements (проверка показаний на месте) on 13 April 2004 – each time in the presence of a lawyer.
On an unspecified date, apparently in spring 2005, the investigation in respect of the gang’s activity was completed and the case was sent to the Tulun District Court for trial.
In the course of the trial the applicant pleaded guilty in respect of all the charges, save for: the creation of and participation in an armed gang; one count of theft; the robbery and murder of R. (as his confession had allegedly been extracted from him under duress); and participation in the robbery on 28 February 2003 (as he had allegedly discontinued his participation in that offence of his own will).
At some point on or before 16 November 2005 the applicant and five other co-accused challenged the “statements of surrender and confession” that they had given on 1 March 2003 as having been extracted from them under duress. According to the applicant’s submissions (which were not supported by evidence), he complained about the alleged ill-treatment to the trial court in April 2005.
As can be seen from undated extracts of the trial record, the applicant submitted in the courtroom that the injuries recorded in the forensic medical examination had been inflicted on him by the SOBR officers during the arrest and further at the GROVD, added that he had also sustained unspecified “internal” injuries and claimed that he had only confessed to having committed the robbery and murder of R. because the SOBR officers had severely beaten and strangled him. He had allegedly learned the details of R.’s murder after studying a confession given by another co-accused. He had not lodged complaints about the ill-treatment as “everyone [at the police station] had been shocked by the SOBR officers’ conduct”, so there had been “no one to complain to”, and added that his lawyer had seen his injuries.
On 16 November 2005 the prosecutor in charge of the criminal case ordered an inquiry into the illtreatment allegations made by the applicant and the five co-accused.
On 22 November 2005, after the completion of a pre-investigation inquiry under Article 144 of the Code of Criminal procedure, the prosecutor of the Tulun interdistrict prosecutor’s office declined to initiate criminal proceedings. The decision was based on the following evidence:
-  statements by the two GROVD officers, who together with the SOBR officers had arrested the gang members and brought them to the GROVD premises, depositions of three more GROVD officers and a statement of the deputy prosecutor who had been present at the GROVD during the early hours of 1 March 2003. The officers denied using any force against the arrested men and maintained that the co-accused had made their confession statements of their own will. The deputy prosecutor stated that he had not seen any officers beating the arrested men;
-  statements by two of the SOBR officers who had participated in the apprehension of the gang members (three others were not questioned as they had been on mission in the Chechen Republic). They acknowledged that they had used force against the applicant and all other co-accused arrested on that date, as they had been armed and had resisted arrest. They stated that the SOBR officers had forced the apprehended men to the ground but had not hit them in the head and body. Then they had brought the arrestees to the GROVD for interrogation and had remained there until early morning. In the morning the SOBR officers had gone to the prosecutor’s office to report on the use of force and firearms and had then returned to Bratsk. They denied the allegations of illtreatment in the GROVD, either at the hands of the SOBR or any other persons.
All the officers noted that they did not remember certain details, as more than two years had passed since the time of the events in question. The prosecutor found no evidence of physical or psychological violence at the GROVD – either during the early hours or the daytime on 1 March 2003 – against the applicant or other co-accused on the part of either the SOBR or the GROVD officers. He concluded that in raising the ill-treatment allegations the co-accused had been attempting to avoid criminal liability.
The firstinstance court heard the SOBR and UBOP officers who had taken part in the arrest of the co-accused on 28 February 2003 and who had been present on the GROVD premises during the early hours of 1 March 2003. The applicant, the other co-accused and their lawyers put questions to them. Four SOBR officers and one of the police officers made the same submissions as they had in the course of the prosecutor’s inquiry (see paragraph 32 above). They added that the SOBR officers had not obtained any statements of surrender and confession. They denied the applicant’s and the other coaccused’s allegations of illtreatment in the GROVD. Three more police officers who had been present on the GROVD premises also denied either having participated in, or having seen any instance of, illtreatment in respect of the co-accused.
On 13 February 2006 the Irkutsk Regional Court convicted the applicant of participation in an armed gang (banditry) and the unlawful carrying of weapons, as well as on six counts of robbery, five thefts and two murders.
In particular, the court established that in 2001 the applicant and Sal., acting on F.’s instructions, had committed the robbery and murder of R. and had stolen his car, which they had subsequently refurbished and used for the gang’s needs. R.’s body had never been discovered, as a sandy river bank in which the perpetrators had buried it had been subsequently disturbed by flooding. The trial court based its findings in respect of the robbery and murder on the following evidence:
-  the applicant’s statement of surrender and confession of 1 March 2003;
-  interrogation records dated 31 March and 30 June 2004 in which the applicant, questioned as a suspect in the presence of his lawyer, had maintained the same account of events as that given in the abovementioned statement of surrender and confession and had provided additional details;
-  a record of the on-site verification of his statements of 12 April 2004, in which he had also maintained his initial account of the events;
-  surrender and confession statements by co-accused F. and Sal. recorded on 1 March 2003, as well as the testimony confirming their initial account of events that they had subsequently given in on several occasions during their questioning as suspects in the presence of lawyers;
-  a statement given by F. in the courtroom in which he had maintained that Sal. and the applicant had committed the murder;
-  an identification record confirming that Sal. had identified R. as the person murdered by the applicant;
-  statements given by one co-accused in respect of other unrelated criminal offences, whom the applicant and Sal. had told about the murder immediately after the events in question, and who confirmed that the applicant had used R.’s car before repainting and refurbishing it, as well as forging identification numbers for its major parts;
-  an on-site inspection record;
-  the record of an expert forensic examination and the record of an expert chemical examination confirming that the VAZ car seized from the applicant on 28 February 2003 had been assembled from parts belonging to two different vehicles – his own and that of R. – and repainted;
-  a statement by a town-planning and architecture expert, produced in the courtroom, to the effect that the sandy shores of the river indicated by the applicant and Sal. as R.’s burial site had been disturbed by flooding and that a human body could have been washed away by water;
-  statements made by five other persons who had known R., giving the date and time of his disappearance.
The court admitted the statements of the applicant, Sal. and F and two other co-accused given at the investigation stage as having been acquired in accordance with law and corroborated by several other items of evidence, including the statements given by the applicant and several other co-accused during the investigation.
With regard to the ill-treatment allegations, the judgment cited the following evidence: medical documents pertaining to the applicant (see paragraphs 16 and 19 above); medical certificates pertaining to some of the co-accused confirming the existence of bruises on them; the SOBR and GROVD officers’ statements given in the courtroom; their reports of 1 March 2003 on the use of force and the conclusion issued by the prosecutor on by the same date; and the prosecutor’s decision of 22 November 2005 (see paragraph 33 above). The trial court concluded from those documents that the injuries had been inflicted on the co-accused, including the applicant, through the use of force during their arrest. That use of force had been lawful and not excessive. The court rejected the allegations of the co-accused as regards their subsequent ill-treatment at the GROVD premises as not substantiated by any evidence.
The court sentenced the applicant to twenty-three years’ imprisonment. By the same judgment, thirteen other co-accused were convicted of various criminal offences, including several counts of murders, robbery and theft; nine of the co-accused were also convicted of banditry.
The applicant appealed. In particular, he challenged the admissibility of his statement of surrender and confession of 1 March 2003, in so far as it concerned the robbery and murder of R., as having been obtained under duress and in the absence of a lawyer. He maintained his allegations of illtreatment and claimed that F.’s and Sal.’s confessions had also been extracted under duress. He stated in general terms that during the subsequent investigation he had upheld his self-incriminating statement in respect of R.’s murder after further physical and psychological pressure had been applied to him, but that he had neither complained of nor secured any evidence in respect of the application of that pressure. Lastly, the conviction had been based to a decisive extent on the self-incriminating statements made by the applicant and other co-accused, while the body of the victim or the murder weapon had never been found. In respect of another crime of which he had been convicted he argued that the court had admitted a statement of surrender and confession that had not been given by another co-accused in the presence of a lawyer.
On 16 May 2008 the Supreme Court of Russia upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal but reduced the sentence to twenty-two years and six months’ imprisonment, given the expiry of the statutory limitation period in respect of some of the offences for which he had been convicted. The appeal court found that the lower court had duly and thoroughly assessed the evidence and had reached properly reasoned conclusions. With regard to the applicant’s illtreatment complaint, the court referred to the findings of the trial court, assessed them as thorough and well-founded, and concluded that there was no reason to depart from them. The court rejected the applicant’s plea of inadmissibility in respect of the testimony of the other co-accused, as domestic law did not provide for access to counsel in the event that a person made a statement of surrender and confession.
On 5 March 2010 the Ust-Kut Town Court brought the applicant’s sentence into conformity with amendments in the Criminal Code and reduced the sentence to twenty-one years and six months’ imprisonment.
The applicant submitted that several written requests lodged by him for information about the progress of the prosecutor’s inquiry in respect of his ill-treatment complaint (see paragraph 31 above) remained unanswered. The parties did not submit copies of the relevant requests.
As can be seen from the domestic courts’ findings (see paragraphs 48 and 49 below), on 27 March 2006 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Irkutsk regional prosecutor’s office regarding unlawful actions undertaken by the SOBR officers. He received no reply, so on 5 July 2006 he lodged a further complaint with the prosecutor’s office.
On 14 July 2006 the Irkutsk regional prosecutor’s office replied to the applicant, informing him that a preinvestigation inquiry under Article 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure had been held on 22 November 2005 in response to his respective complaint, and that a copy of the relevant decision had been sent to him.
On 20 July 2006 he received a copy of the decision of 22 November 2005, apparently sent to him on 9 July 2006.
The applicant lodged a complaint with the Kirovskiy District Court of Irkutsk regarding the inaction of the Irkutsk regional prosecutor’s office. No copy of the complaint has been submitted to the Court. On 3 August 2006 the District Court forwarded the case to the Tulun Town Court of the Irkutsk Region, in compliance with the relevant jurisdiction rules.
On 13 September 2006 the Tulun Town Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint. The court noted that the matter raised in his complaints of 27 March and 5 July 2006 had already been subject to a preinvestigation inquiry, which had ended on 22 November 2005 with a decision not to institute criminal proceedings. That decision had been wellfounded and lawful. The applicant had been informed of the outcome of the inquiry. Furthermore, the Court observed that the complaint about the alleged ill-treatment by the GROVD and SOBR officers had been examined in detail in the course of the applicant’s trial.
On 27 November 2006 Irkutsk Regional Court upheld the decision of 13 September 2006 on appeal, having noted, in particular, that the applicant’s allegations had been examined and duly assessed by the trial court in its judgment of 13 February 2006.