The case concerns the alleged fresh violation of the applicant’s right to fair criminal proceedings after the domestic courts reopened the proceedings against him as a result of the Court’s judgment in the case of Dan v. Moldova (no. 8999/07, 5 July 2011).
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Chişinău. He was represented by Mr M. Lupu, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr. O. Rotari.
At the time of the events the applicant was the principal of a high school in Chişinău. According to the materials of the domestic casefile, on an unspecified date the applicant was contacted by C., who requested that a pupil be transferred to the applicant’s high school. Since the applicant allegedly requested a bribe in exchange for the pupil’s transfer, C. contacted the police and, on 14 January 2004, an undercover operation was organised. For that purpose C. was instructed to meet the applicant and give him money marked with a special powder.
C. contacted the applicant and they agreed to meet in Chişinău central park. The scene was secretly observed by numerous police officers and filmed. However, later the police submitted that for technical reasons the actual scene of the bribe money being handed over had not been filmed. What had actually happened during the applicant’s meeting with C. was a matter of dispute during the criminal proceedings.
According to the police, the applicant and C. had not shaken hands upon meeting and had sat on a bench for several minutes. C. had given the applicant the bribe money. When apprehended, the applicant had dropped or thrown away the file, and all of its contents, including the money, had been scattered on the ground. It was later discovered that the applicant had traces of the powder from the money on his fingers.
According to the applicant, he had been contacted by C. on his way to the Ministry of Education and had agreed to meet him shortly afterwards in a park in the immediate vicinity of the Ministry. He had shaken hands with C. upon meeting him and, after a brief discussion, had suggested they sit on a bench in order to be able to write. He had placed his file between him and C. and had written on a sheet of paper a list of documents necessary for the pupil’s transfer. The applicant, who is missing an eye, had not seen C. put the money into his file. When apprehended, he had dropped the file. The bribe money had been picked up off the ground by a police officer, who had later handed him a pen to sign the arrest report. The traces of powder on his hands must have come either from shaking hands with C. or from the pen with which he had signed the minutes. The applicant alleged that he had been set up by the police.
During the course of the proceedings, the Buiucani District Court heard the applicant, the alleged bribe-giver, six prosecution witnesses who were all police officers involved in the applicant’s apprehension and one forensic expert. The court also watched the video of the undercover operation and examined other evidence, such as C.’s complaint to the police, the record of the marking of the bribe money with special powder, an expert report finding that following his apprehension the applicant had had traces of the special powder on his fingers and a report concerning the search of the applicant’s office and home.
The alleged bribe-giver, C., stated that he had met the applicant in a park. They had sat on a bench and the applicant had signalled to him to put the money in a file which had been placed between them. After placing the money in the file, they had got up and gone their separate ways. He had seen the applicant looking into the file after his departure.
Witness M. stated that he had seen C. placing something in the applicant’s file after the applicant had nodded to him. After the applicant and C. had parted ways, he and witness C.M. had apprehended the applicant.
Witness C.M. had only seen how C. and the applicant had met. He had not seen the moment when the money had been handed over but stated that he had apprehended the applicant together with witness M.
Witness B. only stated that he had been present at the marking of the bribe money with a special powder.
Witness V. stated that he had seen the applicant throw away the file when apprehended.
Witness C.C. stated that he had been in charge of filming the operation. However, he had only filmed the moment of the marking of the money and the moment of the apprehension. The moment when the money had been handed over had not been filmed for technical reasons. He did not state that he had seen the moment when the money was handed over.
Witness C.V. stated that he had seen C. putting the bribe money straight into the applicant’s hands and then the applicant placing the money in a file. The applicant had thrown away the file when apprehended.
The court considered C.’s testimony to the effect that the applicant had requested a bribe from him to be unsubstantiated because there was no other evidence but C.’s statements to that effect. The court also noted that C. and two other prosecution witnesses, who were police officers, had given different accounts of the moment when the applicant and C. had met and, in particular, of the manner in which the bribe money had been passed over. In that respect the court noted that, according to C. and witness M., the money had been inserted by C. into the applicant’s file, which had been placed on the bench between the two men, while according to another witness, C.V., the money had been given by C. directly into the applicant’s hands. One of the witnesses (C.M.), who had been positioned directly in front of C. and the applicant during the undercover operation, had not seen the money being passed over at all. The court also found contradictions in the accounts concerning the applicant and C. shaking hands and the fact that the applicant had been made to sign a paper with a pen lent by one of the officers who had previously manipulated the marked money. The court also gave weight to the fact that the video of the undercover operation had been interrupted precisely during the meeting between the applicant and C. and considered that fact to plead in favour of the applicant’s version of events.
In a judgment of 24 January 2006, relying on the above reasons, the Buiucani District Court acquitted the applicant. It concluded that the prosecution had failed to provide reliable evidence in support of the contention that the applicant had requested money from C. and that the applicant had been aware that C. had placed money in his file. In so far as the presence of traces of special powder on the applicant’s fingers was concerned, the court considered that it could not be ruled out that the traces had appeared as a result of his shaking hands with C. or using a pen lent to him by the police to sign the arrest report. In reaching this conclusion, the court relied on an expert report stating that the special powder could have been transmitted in any of the above-mentioned ways.
The Prosecutor’s Office appealed against this judgment.
On 23 March 2006 the Chişinău Court of Appeal held a hearing at which the applicant, his representative and the prosecutor were present. The court upheld the appeal lodged by the prosecutor and reversed the judgment of the first-instance court. In so doing the Court of Appeal did not hear the witnesses anew but merely made a different assessment of the testimony given before the first-instance court. The Court of Appeal considered all the witness statements to be reliable and did not find any major contradictions between them.
The applicant was found guilty as charged and sentenced to a criminal fine of 60,000 Moldovan lei (the equivalent of approximately EUR 3,350) and to five years’ imprisonment, suspended for two years. The applicant was also prohibited from occupying any administrative post for a period of three years.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the judgment and argued that the witnesses on whose testimony his conviction had been based were not credible. In particular, he submitted that C. was being investigated in two separate cases by the police department which had organised the undercover operation. He also submitted that all the prosecution witnesses had been police officers. One of those witnesses could not objectively have seen what had happened from his distant position because he had serious problems with his eyesight. The applicant also argued that the police had deleted part of the video of the undercover operation because it was not favourable to the prosecution and submitted that he had been the victim of entrapment.
On 21 June 2006 the Supreme Court of Justice examined the applicant’s appeal in the absence of the parties and declared it inadmissible.
On 18 December 2006 the applicant lodged an application with the Court and complained, inter alia, that in overturning his acquittal and convicting him, the Court of Appeal had not heard anew the witnesses but had merely read out their statements and given them a different interpretation from that given by the court that had acquitted him.
In a judgment of 5 July 2011 the Court held that the criminal proceedings against the applicant had been unfair and found a breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The Court found that the Court of Appeal, when convicting and sentencing the applicant – and, in doing so, overturning his acquittal by the first-instance court – could not, as a matter of fair trial, properly examine the case without a direct assessment of the evidence given by the prosecution witnesses. The Court stated that those who have the responsibility for deciding the guilt or innocence of an accused ought, in principle, to be able to hear witnesses in person and assess their trustworthiness and that the assessment of the trustworthiness of a witness is a complex task which usually cannot be achieved by a mere reading of his or her recorded words. No reasonable grounds that would dispense the Court of Appeal from that obligation were found.
After the Court had delivered the above-mentioned judgment, the applicant applied to the domestic courts to have set aside the domestic judgments finding him guilty. On 22 October 2012 the Supreme Court of Justice quashed the judgments of the Chişinău Court of Appeal and Supreme Court of Justice of 23 March and 21 June 2006 respectively and ordered a fresh examination of the appeal against the judgment of 24 January 2006.
On 5 June 2013 the Chişinău Court of Appeal upheld the prosecutor’s appeal and reversed the judgment of the Buiucani District Court of 24 January 2006. It found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to a criminal fine of 30,000 Moldovan lei and to five years’ imprisonment, suspended for two years. The applicant was also prohibited from occupying any administrative post for a period of two years.
In reaching its decision, the Court of Appeal heard the applicant and three witnesses out of the seven heard by the Buiucani District Court in 2006. The court did not hear the alleged bribe-giver, C., because he had died in the meantime, or witnesses M., B., and V. for reasons which were not stated in the decision. The court read out the statements given by the four absent witnesses before the first instance court.
Witness C.M. began by stating that he maintained his initial declarations of 2006 (see paragraph 10 above) and submitted that he had seen the moment when C. passed the money to the applicant without, however, saying whether the money had been placed in a file or handed directly to the applicant. He also stated that the moment the money had been handed over had been filmed and that he had seen the film.
Witness C.C. began by stating that he maintained his initial declarations of 2006 (see paragraph 13 above) and submitted that during the police operation he had been involved in the apprehension of the applicant and that he did not remember who was in charge of filming. He also stated that he had seen C. give the money to the applicant in a file or envelope and that he did not remember seeing the applicant shake hands with C.
Witness C.V. began by stating that he maintained his initial declarations of 2006 (see paragraph 14 above) and submitted that he had seen the moment when the money was passed over but that he could not remember exactly how it had been done. He did remember, however, that the handing over of the money had been filmed and that he had not seen the film afterwards.
The Chişinău Court of Appeal read out the rest of the witness statements but did not examine the video of the police operation because the cassette had been lost. Nevertheless, in reaching its decision, the court relied also on the video of the police operation. The court held that the possibility that the special powder had been on the applicant’s hand because he had shaken hands with C. or used the pen could not rule out his guilt, because what mattered was the fact that the money had been given to him. The court did not accept the applicant’s version according to which C. had acted as an agent provocateur and had placed the money in his file without his knowledge.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the abovementioned judgment and argued, inter alia, that the Court of Appeal had failed to hear all the witnesses heard by the first-instance court. The Court of Appeal had only selected three witnesses, who had made statements contradicting their initial statements before the first-instance court. Moreover, the applicant stated that all witnesses in the case were unreliable because they were all police officers, while the alleged bribe-giver, C., had two criminal investigations pending before the unit in which the same officers worked. The applicant also submitted that the whole operation had been nothing but a police incitement, that C. had acted as an agent provocateur and that the Court of Appeal had not directly examined the rest of the evidence examined by the first-instance court. In particular, the Court of Appeal had relied, inter alia, on the video of the operation without even seeing it and without giving the defence a chance to have the final statement.
On 28 January 2014 the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law and upheld the judgment of the Court of Appeal. It noted that the Court of Appeal had not heard four out of the initial seven witness; however, it did not consider that to be a problem since one of the witnesses had died (C.) and another one no longer worked for the police force (M.) and his address was unknown. Moreover, the court found that neither the applicant nor the prosecutor had objected to not hearing the rest of the witnesses anew.
Article 419 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the procedure for rehearing a case on appeal must follow the general rules for the examination of criminal cases at first instance.
The explanatory judgment of the Plenary Supreme Court of Justice No. 22 of 12 December 2005, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“Bearing in mind the provisions of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, after an acquittal judgment pronounced by a first-instance court, the appeal court cannot order the conviction for the first time without hearing the accused and without the direct administration of the evidence.”