The case originated in an application (no. 24959/06) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Igor Vadimovich Marutsenko (“the applicant”), on 24 June 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Pogasiy, a lawyer practising in Kirovohrad. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms V. Lutkovska, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 25 January 2010 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. In accordance with Protocol No. 14, the application was allocated to a Committee of three Judges.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Kirovohrad.
On 21 June 2005 the applicant lodged a civil claim with the Kirovskyy District Court of Kirovohrad (“the ”) against the Military Unit A-1405 for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage.
On 21 February 2006 the court decided to discontinue the proceedings as a result of the applicant’s failure to attend the hearings.
On 19 September 2007 the applicant requested an extension of time to lodge the appeal against the above ruling and submitted that he had become aware of the impugned ruling in July 2007.
On 24 October 2007 the Kirovohrad Regional Court of Appeal quashed the ruling of 21 February 2006. It remitted the case for examination by the first-instance court, having found that the applicant had not been duly notified of the time and date of the hearings. The Court of Appeal ruled that the first-instance court had erred in its decision to discontinue the proceedings.
On 18 July 2008 the  considered that it was not competent to deal with the case because it lacked jurisdiction ratione materiae. It discontinued the civil proceedings and held that the case should be examined within the framework of the administrative proceedings.
Following examination of the applicant’s appeal on its merits, on 24 December 2008 the Court of Appeal quashed the ruling of 18 July 2008. It held that the first-instance court had erred in its decision to discontinue the proceedings and considered that the case should be examined within the framework of civil proceedings. The Court of Appeal remitted the case for examination to the .
On 25 February 2009 the  decided to discontinue the proceedings because of the applicant’s failure to attend the hearings.
On 24 June 2009 the Court of Appeal quashed the ruling of the  on the ground that the applicant had not been duly notified of the time and date of the hearings and remitted the case for examination to the first-instance court.
On 16 June 2010 the  for the third time decided to discontinue the proceedings because of the applicant’s repeated failure to attend the hearings. The applicant did not lodge an appeal against that decision.
In the course of the proceedings sixteen hearings were adjourned, out of which three times because of the applicant’s failure to attend the hearings, once because of the failure of the respondent’s representative and five times because of the parties’ failure to attend the hearings. On seven occasions the hearings were adjourned for a total period of about nine months because of the judge’s or secretary’s absence or for technical reasons. The applicant adjusted his claims once.