The case originated in two applications (nos. 46311/08 and 2973/10) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ms Lyudmyla Ivanivna Kochkina (the first applicant) and Mr Oleksiy Ivanovych Kochkin (the second applicant).
The applicants were represented by Mr. Oleg Mykolayovych Rozhok, a lawyer practicing in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ivan Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the domestic authorities had breached their rights guaranteed by the Convention on account of the construction of concierge premises and an extension for a waste collection room near their apartment and the failure of the State authorities to enforce the court decision ordering to re-construct the above-mentioned premises.
On 9 December 2013 notice of the applications was given to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1948 and 1975 respectively and live in Kyiv. The first applicant is the second applicant’s mother.
Following an agreement of 21 February 2002 between a private company K. and a communal house maintenance company Z., concierge premises were constructed near the entrance to the building. As previously there was a waste collection room entrance on that spot, the waste collection room and the concierge premises were joined and the door to the waste collection room was moved. According to the photos, sent by the applicants, one of the walls of this construction adjoins the left side of their balcony. The entrance to the waste collection room is now perpendicular to their balcony and very close to it.
The applicants state that previously the wall was situated further away and the entrance to the waste collection room was facing the street and not their balcony. The waste collection smells and is a source of insects, especially in summer, the view from the balcony is partially blocked by the wall and rain from the construction roof pours onto the applicants’ balcony.
The applicants brought court proceedings against the Obolonskyy District State Administration, companies Z. and K. complaining of a breach of their property rights to the apartment, since the waste collection wall was adjacent to their balcony and the continuation of such a wall had been constructed directly against their balcony. On 24 December 2002 the Obolonskyy District Court of Kyiv found that, contrary to the construction project-plans (the plans), the construction in question had been built against the applicants’ balcony. The court held that company K. should re-construct the annex building in accordance with the approved plans. The court rejected the applicants’ claim against company Z. and Obolonskyy District State Administration. The court also rejected their claim for non-pecuniary damages finding that the applicants did not live in this apartment and wanted to sell it.
On 3 June 2003 the court adopted a resolution clarifying the manner in which the decision of 24 December 2002 was to be enforced. It noted that the construction wall had to be moved further away from the applicants’ balcony, so that the wall would not be adjacent to the applicants’ balcony and would not hinder the view from the balcony.
The case-file contains a copy of an undated letter signed by more than 30 inhabitants of a block of apartments which included the applicants’ one to the Head of the Obolonskyy District Court of Kyiv requesting the court to quash its decision of 24 December 2002. According to other case file materials, the letter was allegedly signed following a meeting in July-August 2003 but in any case not later than October 2006. It stated that the applicants did not want to pay for concierge services and did not live in the apartment in question.
On 11 February 2003 the State Bailiffs’ Service instituted enforcement proceedings. On two occasions, in March 2003, M., company K.’s director, was fined for failure to enforce the court decision. On 9 February 2004 the Obolonskyy District Prosecutor’s Office instituted criminal proceedings against M. for failure to enforce the court decision.
On 28 January 2005, upon the request of the Obolonskyy District Prosecutor’s Office, a forensic technical construction expert examination concluded that it was impossible to enforce the decision of 24 December 2002, but it was possible to enforce the decision of 3 June 2003 (see paragraph 11 above), for which the new project should be developed and approved in accordance with the law, taking into account any dangerous consequences for the exploitation of the multi-storey building. The expert concluded that the construction was in conformity with its plans except for one corner. It was, however, “impossible to establish whether the distance between the construction and the applicants’ balcony was in conformity with the plans”. It was also concluded that rain water from the construction roof could leak onto the applicants’ balcony. The applicants also had no access to one side of their balcony from the outside so the balcony’s renovation could not be done from that side. The expert noted that there were no construction norms for the concierge premises constructed on the entrance side of the building.
On 18 October 2005 the Obolonskyy District Prosecutor’s Office terminated criminal proceedings against M. as no crime had been committed. The prosecutor noted that company K. decreased the width of the wall near the applicants’ balcony by half a brick width; M. could not reconstruct the premises without the approved project, while it was within the authority of the communal company Z. to develop and approve project documentation.
On 23 October 2006 the Obolonskyy District Prosecutor’s Office, in reply to the applicants’ request for representation of their interests before the domestic courts, confirmed again that “the additional audit established that M. could not reconstruct independently the concierge premises without the state authorities’ approval of the reconstruction project. The project documentation could only be drawn up (“оформлювати”) by a construction developer (“замовник будівництва”), i.e. by communal company Z., the Kyiv City State Administration and the Obolonskyy District State Administration, thus, it was technically impossible to enforce the court decision by M.” The prosecutor also advised the applicants to address the above entities to decide on the reconstruction of the premises.
On 12 April 2006 the State Bailiffs’ Service terminated the enforcement proceedings in the case for “the failure to enforce the decision without the defendant’s assistance”.
On 25 March 2011 the Obolonskyy District Court ordered that a duplicate of the execution writ of 11 February 2003 be issued to the applicants. Company K. unsuccessfully challenged the decision of 25 March 2011 before the appellate and cassation courts.
On 10 August 2011 the State Bailiffs’ Service instituted enforcement proceedings. On two occasions, in January and September 2013, M., company K.’s director, was fined again for failure to enforce the court decision. The state bailiff also lodged a request with the prosecuting authorities stating that M. was criminally liable for failure to comply with the court decision.
On 21 March 2014 the State Bailiffs’ Service terminated the enforcement proceedings in the case noting that the decision of 24 December 2002 remained unenforced and could not be enforced without company K.’s assistance.
On 28 May 2014 the Obolonskyy District Court quashed the resolution of 21 March 2014. Having analysed the legal provisions the court concluded that the State Bailiffs’ Service was not precluded to enforce the court decision of 24 December 2002, without company K.’s cooperation, since the legal provisions vested the State Bailiffs’ Service with the authority to involve necessary authorities, companies, institutions and organisations with the purpose of the enforcement. The debtor should be liable for the payment of relevant expenses. It appears that the state bailiffs did not comply with the court’s recommendations.
In August 2006 the applicants instituted court proceedings requesting company K. to demolish the concierge premises. They stated that, according to the forensic technical construction expert examination of 28 January 2005, it was impossible to enforce the decision of 24 December 2002, therefore, the concierge premises should be demolished.
On 9 November 2006 the Obolonskyy District Court found against the applicants. The court held that the construction in question had been carried out following an agreement between communal company Z. and company K. Since it was not a construction but “premises maintenance work” (“облаштування приміщень”) no special permission for such construction was needed.
On 12 November 2007 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal upheld this decision. The court found that on 31 January 2002 the Kyiv City State Administration provided financing for the construction of concierge premises in the existing buildings. The district administrations were obliged to draw up the plans of those premises. On 21 February 2002 communal company Z. concluded an agreement with company K. for concierge premises construction. The agreement provided that company Z., as a developer, furnished company K. with all the necessary documentation for construction work, performed supervision and technical control over quality, quantity and value of the performed construction work, their compliance with construction norms and rules, etc. Upon completion, company Z. approved the construction and did not claim any defects. Therefore, company K. duly discharged its obligations and “cannot be obliged to dismantle the construction since it did not build it”. Moreover, the subject matter of the agreement was not the waste collection room but the concierge premises. The court stated that the applicants were not precluded to bring court proceedings against the appropriate respondent.
On 18 March 2008 the Supreme Court of Ukraine rejected the applicants’ request for leave to appeal on points of law.
In July 2006 the applicants instituted court proceedings against companies K. and Z. challenging the lawfulness of the construction of the concierge premises and the construction acceptance act (“акт прийняття в експлуатацію”). They stated that there was no construction permission and no construction project plan, therefore, the construction was unlawful.
On 22 December 2006 the Obolonskyy District Court found against the applicants. On 16 April 2007 the Kyiv Court of Appeal quashed the decision of 22 December 2006 and remitted the case to the first-instance court for fresh examination. The court of appeal ordered the first-instance court to examine carefully the compliance of the plans for the concierge premises with the Resolution of the Kyiv City State Administration no. 144 of 31 January 2002 and to involve the Obolonskyy District State Administration as a co-defendant. The appellate court also pointed out that the double door of the waste collection room may have been insufficient to eliminate the negative consequences of the close location of the latter to the applicants’ balcony.
On 28 August 2008 the Obolonskyy District Court found against the applicants. The court held that company K. had constructed the concierge premises in accordance with the plans furnished by company Z. The construction was accepted by company Z., which meant that the work had been performed correctly. The court referred to the decisions of 24 December 2002 and 9 November 2006 and held that there were no grounds for finding that the construction was unlawful. The court noted that company K. reduced the corner of the left ledge of the annex building by about 0.6 m, which ensured access and exploitation of the façade of the applicants’ balcony, the construction did not prevent natural light to enter the apartment and in order to avoid unpleasant smells from the waste collection room, the premises had double doors.
On 11 November 2008 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal upheld this decision. On 27 January 2009 the Supreme Court of Ukraine rejected the applicants’ request for leave to appeal on points of law.
In the beginning of 2008 the Obolonskyy District Prosecutor’s Office and the Kyiv Main Department of the Emergency Situations informed the applicants that the project of the concierge premises had not been approved by the fire security authorities.
Relevant provisions of the Law of Ukraine "On Local SelfGovernance" read as follows:
“Article 30
The powers in the sphere of housing and public utilities, consumer, trade services, catering, transport and communications
The powers of the executive bodies of village, town and city councils shall include
a) own (self-governing) powers:
1) management of housing and public utilities, consumer, trade services, transport and communications of municipal property, ensuring their proper maintenance and effective operation, adequate level and quality of public services;
...
6) decision of issues of collection, transportation, recycling and disposal of waste.
Article 31
Powers in the construction sphere
The powers of the executive bodies of village, town and city councils shall include
a) own (self-governing) powers:
1) organisation, at its own expense and on a shared participation basis, construction, reconstruction and repair of public utilities and socio-cultural objects, residential buildings;
...
9) permitting construction of urban objects irrespective of ownership type according to the law.”
Relevant provisions of the Housing Code read as follows:
“Article 181
Technical maintenance and repair of buildings of public residential stock and of household cooperatives
State services in charge of housing operation, repair and construction perform, under contractual arrangements, technical maintenance and repair of buildings of public residential stock and of household cooperatives.”
Relevant provisions of the Decree of the Kyiv State Administration no. 144 of 31 January 2002 read as follows:
“According to Article 30 of the Law of Ukraine “On Local Self-Governance” and the decision of the Kyiv City Council “On Kyiv Budget for 2002” no. 172/1596 of 20 December 2001:
The district state administration in Kyiv shall:
1. formulate proposals to the urban program on maintenance work of concierge premises on the basis of relevance and in compliance with applicable law;
2. attach to proposals to the urban program the schemes concerning a planned option of location of concierge premises indicating utilities connection points and the approvals by district architects and district fire security departments.
The district state administrations shall be responsible for completeness and quality of provided schemes.
The Main Department of City Improvement Control (...) shall expediently issue orders for carrying out maintenance work of concierge premises of Kyiv existing residential fund.”
According to paragraph 2 of Article 75 of the Law if the court decision is not enforced and enforcement cannot be completed without the debtor’s cooperation the bailiff shall organise enforcement pursuant to the powers granted to him by the law and notify the police authorities in order for the latter to bring the debtor to liability according to the law.
Under Section II of the Instruction “Participants of Enforcement Proceedings” the bailiffs shall use all their powers and authority in order to ensure timely and proper enforcement of a decision. In particular, under para 2.5 and 2.6 of Section II of the Instruction the bailiffs are entitled to involve other authorities, companies, institutions, organisations, officials, individuals, business entities if their involvement may contribute to timely and proper enforcement of decisions.