The case originated in an application (no. 38789/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Nikolay Vasilyevich Gurepka (“the applicant”), on 27 September 2004.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev, from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, the impossibility of an appeal against the decision of the first-instance court in the administrative offence proceedings (Article 2 of Protocol No. 7) and his absence from those proceedings (Article 6 § 1) .
On 26 May 2009 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in .
On 6 September 2005 the Court found a violation of Article 2 of Protocol No. 7 in the applicant's case having established the lack of an effective remedy against the decision of 1 December 1998 by the first-instance court ordering the applicant's administrative arrest and detention (see Gurepka v. , no. 61406/00, §§ 59-62, 6 September 2005).
After the above judgment of the Court became final, the applicant was paid the awarded amount of non-pecuniary damage.
On 4 January, 20 February and 2 October 2006, the applicant sent requests for review of the decision of 1 December 1998 to the President of the Supreme Court but to no avail.
On 8 May 2003 the applicant and two other individuals instituted proceedings in the Kievsky District Court against the Krymenergo Power Supply Company for cutting off the electricity supply to the apartment in which the plaintiffs had an office.
On 27 April 2005 the court found in part for the applicant and ordered the defendant to restore the electricity supply. The judgment was not appealed against and became final. According to the applicant it was enforced on 14 October 2005.
On 3 March 2004 the applicant failed to appear before the Simferopolsky District Court in the civil proceedings in which he was participating as a representative of the plaintiff. The same day, in the applicant's absence, the court registry drew up a report on the administrative offence of contempt of the court on account of the applicant's failure to appear for the hearing which demonstrated his disrespect to the court.
On 19 April 2004 the Zheleznodorozhny District Court found the applicant guilty of contempt of court under Article 185-3 of the Code on Administrative Offences and fined him 136 hryvnias (UAH, around 20 euros (EUR) at the material time). The applicant was not present at the hearing. In the court's decision it was mentioned that the applicant had been duly informed of the court's hearing. According to the applicant, he was not summoned to the above hearing.
On 8 August 2004 the applicant requested the President of the Crimea Court of Appeal to review the decision of 19 April 2004.
By a letter of 30 August 2004, the Acting President of the Crimea Court of Appeal informed the applicant that there were no grounds for review of his case, since the decision of 19 April 2004 had been well-founded and there had been no procedural violations.
Paragraph 1 of Article 185-3 of the Code provides as follows:
“Contempt of court, which is defined as malicious avoidance of summons by a witness, victim, plaintiff or defendant; or as failure by the above persons or others to comply with the orders of the presiding judge; or as violation of public order during a court hearing, or the committal by any person of acts which indicate blatant disrespect for the court or for the rules of court, shall be punishable by a fine of six to twelve times the monthly minimal income of citizens or by administrative arrest for up to fifteen days.”
By Amendment Act of 24 September 2008 the second level of jurisdiction had been introduced in the administrative offence procedure (Article 287 of the Code on Administrative Offences).
Other relevant provisions of the Code summarised in the Gurepka v. Ukraine judgment (cited above, §§ 28-32), and Nadtochiy v. Ukraine (no. 7460/03, § 13, 15 May 2008).
The relevant paragraphs of the explanatory report to Protocol No. 7 are worded as follows:
“17. This article recognises the right of everyone convicted of a criminal offence by a tribunal to have his conviction or sentence reviewed by a higher tribunal. It does not require that in every case he should be entitled to have both his conviction and sentence so reviewed. Thus, for example, if the person convicted has pleaded guilty to the offence charged, the right may be restricted to a review of his sentence. As compared with the wording of the corresponding provisions of the United Nations Covenant (Article 14, paragraph 5), the word 'tribunal' has been added to show clearly that this provision does not concern offences which have been tried by bodies which are not tribunals within the meaning of Article 6 of the Convention.
...
Paragraph 2 of the article permits exceptions to this right of review by a higher tribunal:
- for offences of a minor character, as prescribed by law;
- in cases in which the person concerned has been tried in the first instance by the highest tribunal, for example by virtue of his status as a minister, judge or other holder of high office, or because of the nature of the offence;
- where the person concerned was convicted following an appeal against acquittal.
When deciding whether an offence is of a minor character, an important criterion is the question of whether the offence is punishable by imprisonment or not.”