The issue in this case is whether judgments in the applicant’s civil proceedings were “pronounced publicly”, given that only their operative part was read out in open court.
The applicants’ details are set out in the appended table.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Since 1987 the applicant had served under a contract in the Russian army units located at the Baykonur complex in Kazakhstan. In 2006 her military unit was disbanded following the reduction of Russian military formations in the area. She continued to be formally attached to other military units and to receive her pay without actually occupying a post. That situation continued beyond her reaching the maximum age for carrying out military service pending her provision with housing in Russia, as provided for by domestic law. During this time the payment of certain allowances was stopped. In December 2008 she was dismissed from military service.
The applicant brought several actions challenging the nonpayment of allowances before her dismissal (the first set of proceedings) and her employer’s compliance with the obligation to provide her with housing and respect other rights related to her dismissal (the second and third sets of proceedings). Her claims were examined by the 26th Garrison Military Court in Baykonur in open hearings held in her presence. At the close of the hearings the court read out the operative part of its judgments, stating that her claims were dismissed (judgments of 6 October 2008 and 20 January 2009) or allowed in part (judgment of 26 March 2009). It later prepared and served the complete judgments on her. It held that the allowances were only to be paid to those who occupied posts, which the applicant had not, that she had been provided with housing in the Moscow region, and that her other rights had been respected. It also ordered a 15% increase in her severance pay.
She appealed, arguing, inter alia, that the court had failed to pronounce its judgments publicly, as required by Article 6 of the Convention. Her appeals were dismissed by the 3rd Circuit Military Court, which held that the first-instance court had acted in accordance with domestic law. The applicant was not present at the appeal hearings, which took place in the Moscow region on 14 January, 6 May and 24 June 2009. A military prosecutor (who sought the dismissal of the appeals) was present at the two latter hearings. According to the applicant, the appellate court only read out the operative part of its judgments. According to the Government, it read out the two earlier judgments in their entirety, and the case file concerning the most recent proceedings was destroyed upon expiry of the statutory storage time-limit.
The applicants are retired servicemen. They brought proceedings challenging the amount of their pensions (see the appended table). Their representative was present at the open hearings held by the Pskov Town Court. The court only read out the operative part of its judgments at the close of the hearings. The applicants appealed, arguing, inter alia, that the court had failed to publicly pronounce its judgments (which were prepared and served on the applicants later), as required by Article 6 of the Convention. Their appeals were dismissed by the Pskov Regional Court, which stated that the complaint was unsubstantiated. Neither the applicants nor their representative were present at the appeal hearings. The appellate court only read out the operative part of its judgments.
The applicant was a law student at the Nizhniy Novgorod Academy of the Ministry of Interior of the Russian Federation, a higher education institution. In April 2007, while in her third year, she was expelled for failure to comply with the requirements of the curriculum. She brought proceedings challenging her expulsion. On 12 January 2010 the Ordzhonikidzevskiy District Court of Perm held an open hearing and dismissed her claim. Her representative did not attend the hearing, having asked the court to examine the case in her absence. The applicant was also absent. The applicant’s representative was present at a hearing on 30 March 2010 held by the Perm Regional Court, which dismissed an appeal by the applicant against the first-instance court’s judgment. It does not appear from the material in the case file that the applicant complained in her appeal about the District Court’s alleged failure to pronounce its judgment publicly. Both courts only read out the operative part of their judgments at the close of their hearings. The complete judgments were prepared and served on the applicant later.
The applicant served in the Russian Army under a contract for seven years and nine months until her dismissal in December 2009. She brought proceedings complaining that certain benefits in connection with her dismissal, such as the provision of clothing, additional days of annual leave and professional retraining, had not been provided to her. On 5 April 2010 the Perm Garrison Military Court held a hearing in her presence and dismissed her claim.
The applicant appealed. In her additional statement of appeal she complained that only the operative part of the first-instance court’s judgment had been read out at the hearing. On 21 May 2010 the Privolzhsk Circuit Military Court dismissed her appeal, without addressing the above complaint, at a hearing held in Samara. The applicant was not present or represented. According to the applicant, the appellate court only read out the operative part of its judgment at the hearing. According to the Government, the case file was destroyed upon expiry of the statutory storage time-limit.
In 1997 criminal proceedings were brought against the applicant (the founder and managing director of a commercial organisation) under Article 204 of the Criminal Code (commercial bribery), and he was remanded in custody for more than two months. In 1999 the criminal proceedings against him were terminated for lack of the constituent elements of a crime. In 2010 he brought proceedings for compensation in respect of nonpecuniary damage suffered as a result of the criminal proceedings against him. On 26 March 2010 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Barnaul held an open hearing in his presence and dismissed his claim. On 12 May 2010 the Altay Regional Court examined an appeal by him against that judgment in the presence of his representative. It quashed the first-instance judgment and allowed his claim, ordering the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation to pay him 10,000 roubles in respect of nonpecuniary damage. Only the operative parts of the judgments were read out by both courts at the close of their hearings.
In an application for supervisory review of the appellate court’s judgment of 12 May 2010, the applicant complained, inter alia, that neither court had pronounced its judgments publicly. His application was dismissed by the Altay Regional Court on 8 October 2010.
The relevant domestic law is summarised in the Court’s judgment in the case of Malmberg and Others v. Russia (nos. 23045/05 and 3 others, §§ 30-41, 15 January 2015).