The case originated in an application (no. 19855/03) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Ivan Petrovych Donichenko (“the applicant”), on 30 May 2003.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev.
On 3 April 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility. It also decided to give priority to the case under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court in view of the applicant's age.
The applicant was born in 1919 and lives in the .
On 16 August 2000 the applicant instituted proceedings in the  against the Boryspil Town Police Department and the State Treasury, seeking compensation. The applicant alleged that Messrs K. and M. had unlawfully attempted to enter and search his flat and insulted him in the presence of his neighbours. Messrs K. and M. took part in the proceedings as third parties. On 30 August 2000 the court found against the applicant. On an unspecified date the Kyiv Regional Court of Appeal quashed that decision and remitted the case for a fresh consideration.
On 11 September 2001 the  found in part for the applicant and awarded him UAH 12,125.09 in compensation for non-pecuniary damage and court expenses. On an unspecified date the Kyiv Regional Court of Appeal quashed that decision and remitted the case for a fresh consideration.
On 24 May 2002 the  ruled in part for the applicant. It found that two acting police officers, Messrs K. and M., had been ordered by the Boryspil Town Police Department to check the applicant's flat. On 25 April 2000, in the course of execution of the above order, they had unlawfully attempted to enter the applicant's flat and had made abusive statements in his respect. The court held that the State authorities were responsible for the acts of the police officers and ordered the State Treasury to pay the applicant UAH 2,393.09 in compensation for non-pecuniary damage and court expenses. The court, referring to Article 25 of the Police Act (see paragraph 18 below), further ordered Messrs K. and M. to apologise for their unlawful actions in the presence of the applicant and his neighbours who had witnessed the incident.
On 1 July 2002 the same court rejected the applicant's request for leave to appeal for failure to pay court fees and to comply with other procedural formalities. On 9 August 2002 and 2 January 2003, respectively, the Kyiv Regional Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of Ukraine upheld the decision of 1 July 2002.
On 26 April 2003 the Pecherskyy District Bailiffs' Service initiated enforcement proceedings in respect of the monetary award of 24 May 2002.
On 27 August 2003 the applicant was paid the full amount of the award.
On 5 September 2003 the applicant submitted to the Boryspil Town Bailiffs' Service a writ of execution for the non-pecuniary part of the judgment.
On 8 September 2003 the Bailiffs' Service initiated enforcement proceedings in respect of the obligation of Mr K. to apologize to the applicant.
On 3 and 14 October 2003 the Bailiffs' Service fined Mr K. for his failure to comply with the judgment of 24 May 2002.
On 22 October 2003 the Bailiffs discontinued the enforcement proceedings against Mr K., no reasons having been given for this decision.
On 23 March 2004 Mr K. retired. His present place of residence is unknown.
On 25 April 2006 Mr M. together with two other police officers visited the applicant's place of residence. According to the Government, the applicant and his daughter received the apologies from Mr M. for the events of 25 April 2000. The applicant stated that he had been absent during that visit.
On 14 September 2006 the Trudova Slava local newspaper (газета “Трудова Слава”) published an announcement which read as follows:
“...[Mr M.], an employee of the MIA [Ministry of Internal Affairs], officially apologizes to [Mr] Donichenko, Ivan Petrovych, for the moral damage caused to him by the police officer in the course of exercise of his duties in 2001.”
Article 25 of the Police Act regulates the questions of legal responsibility of the police officers.
Paragraph 1 of that Article provides that police officers shall act in accordance with the Police Act, shall make decisions on their own, and that they shall be disciplinary or criminally liable for their unlawful acts or inactivity.
Pursuant to paragraph 2, if a police officer violates citizen's rights or lawful interests, the police shall adopt measures necessary for restoration of these rights and for payment of compensation for pecuniary damage. The police shall also publicly apologise upon the citizen's request.
Paragraph 3 releases the police officer from a responsibility to compensate damages, if he carried out his duties in accordance with law. The damage shall be compensated at the expense of the State.
Under paragraph 4, the lawfulness of the acts of a police officer may be challenged before the police, prosecutors or courts.
Paragraph 5 provides that a person serving in the police, who violated the law or failed to carry out his duties, shall be liable in accordance with the law.
The above provisions of the Police Act are applied in the light of the Constitution, adopted on 28 June 1996, and, in particular, the following provisions:
Article 56
 “Everyone shall have a right to compensation from public or municipal bodies for losses sustained as a result of unlawful decisions, acts or omissions by public or municipal bodies or civil servants in the performance of their official duties.”