The case originated in an application (no. 560/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Nikolay Vasilyevich Zhukov (“the applicant”), on 28 November 2001.
The applicant was represented by Mr I.V. Novikov, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic judicial authorities had reconsidered a judgment given in his favour having improperly used the procedure for reconsidering judgments on the basis of newly discovered circumstances.
By a decision of 17 November 2005 the Court declared the application admissible.
The Government, but not the applicant, filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the applicant replied in writing to the Government's observations.
The applicant was born in 1928 and lives in .
The applicant receives an old-age pension. The Law of 21 July 1997 on the Calculation and Upgrading of State Pensions (“the Pensions Act”) introduced, from 1 February 1998 onwards, a new method for calculating pensions. The idea behind this method, based on what is known as an “individual pensioner coefficient”, was to link the pension to the pensioner's previous earnings.
The authority in charge of the applicant's pension, the Pension Fund Agency of the Sovetskiy District of Novosibirsk (“the Agency”), fixed the applicant's coefficient at 0.525. The applicant challenged the Agency's decision in the Sovetskiy District Court of Novosibirsk. He argued that his coefficient should be 0.7.
On 26 August 1999 the District Court found for the applicant, considering that the Agency had misinterpreted the Pensions Act. In particular, it held as follows:
The District Court decided that the Agency was to recalculate the applicant's pension using a coefficient of 0.7 from 1 February 1998.
The Agency appealed against the judgment. On 11 November 1999 the  upheld the judgment, which became enforceable on the same day. The judgment was never executed.
On 29 December 1999 the Ministry of Labour and Social Development (“the Ministry”) issued an Instruction on the “Application of Limitations” established by the Pensions Act (“the Instruction”). The Instruction clarified how to apply the Pensions Act.
On 24 January 2000 the Agency lodged an application with the District Court for the reconsideration of the applicant's case owing to newly discovered circumstances. They asked the court to take account of the Instruction, which supported their arguments that had been rejected by the court during the initial examination of the case. They pointed out that the Ministry was empowered to give an official interpretation of laws.
Some time thereafter a group of individuals challenged the Instruction before the Supreme Court of the . On 24 April 2000 the Supreme Court dismissed the complaint. It found that, contrary to what the complainants had suggested, the Ministry of Labour had not acted ultra vires in issuing the Instruction, and that the Ministry's interpretation of the Pensions Act had been correct. On 25 May 2000 the Cassation Division of the Supreme Court upheld this judgment on appeal.
From 1 August 2000, following changes to the pension regulations, the applicant's pension was calculated based on a coefficient of 0.7125. After 1 May 2001 the coefficient was fixed at 0.9.
On 6 June 2001 the District Court examined the Agency's request. The Agency submitted at the hearing that the Instruction had been upheld by the Supreme Court. The applicant argued that the Instruction was subordinate to the Pensions Act, that it was not a newly discovered circumstance and that the Agency had missed the statutory time-limit for requesting the reconsideration.
The District Court noted that the Instruction had been issued after the judgment in the case had become enforceable, that the Pensions Act itself had not changed and that the Instruction had been required because of the “different interpretation of the [Pensions] Act's provisions by claimants, officials and the RF Pension Fund”. The court further noted that the Instruction had been upheld by the Supreme Court. It held as follows:
“When delivering its judgment on 26 August 1999 the court interpreted the provisions of the [Pensions] Act on its own. The newly discovered circumstances in this case are the official interpretation of the [Pensions] Act in the Instruction of the RF Ministry of Labour and the case-law of the RF Supreme Court”.
The court noted that the Agency's application had reached the court on 24 January 2000 and that, therefore, it was not time barred.
In a decision of 6 June 2001 the District Court granted the Agency's application, under Article 337 of the Code of Civil Procedure, quashed the judgment of 26 August 1999, as upheld on 11 November 1999, and ordered a fresh examination of the case. It stated that its decision was final and not subject to appeal.
As a result of the fresh examination of the case the District Court delivered a judgment of 21 June 2001 in which it relied on the Instruction and rejected the applicant's claims in full. The applicant appealed on the grounds, inter alia, that the court had unlawfully reopened the case and quashed the judgment of 26 August 1999. On 11 September 2001 the  dismissed the applicant's appeal and upheld the judgment of 21 June 2001.
The Code of Civil Procedure of 1964 (“CCivP”), in force at the material time, provided as follows:
Article 333. Grounds for reconsideration
“[Judgments] which have come into force may be reconsidered on the basis of newly discovered circumstances. The grounds for reconsideration ... shall be as follows:
significant circumstances which were not and could not have been known to the party who applies for reconsideration; ...
cancellation of a court [judgment] or of another authority's decision which served as legal basis for the [judgment] in question.”
Article 334. Lodging of application
“... [An application for reconsideration of a [judgment] owing to newly discovered circumstances] shall be lodged within three months after the discovery of the circumstances.”
Article 337. Court decision on reconsideration of a case
“After examination of an application for reconsideration of a [judgment] owing to newly discovered circumstances, the court may either grant the application and quash the [judgment], or dismiss the application.
The court decision by which an application for reconsideration of a [judgment] owing to newly discovered circumstances is granted shall not be subject to appeal. ...”
On 2 February 1996 the Constitutional Court of the  adopted a ruling concerning certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“CCrP”). In that ruling the  decided that Article 384 of the CCrP (“Grounds for reconsideration of a [criminal] case on the basis of newly discovered circumstances”, which was in many respects similar to Article 333 of the CCivP) was unconstitutional in that it limited the grounds for the reopening of a criminal case to situations of “newly discovered circumstances”. In that ruling the  suggested that this provision of the CCrP prevented rectification of judicial errors and miscarriages of justice. In its ruling of 3 February 1998 the Constitutional Court came to the conclusion that Article 192 § 2 of the Code of Commercial Procedure was unconstitutional in so far as it had served as a basis for the dismissal of applications for reconsideration of judgments of the Presidium of the Supreme Commercial Court, where the judgment had been delivered as a result of a judicial error which had not been and could not have been established earlier.
The Instruction of the Ministry of Labour and Social Development of 29 December 1999 on the “Application of Limitations” established by the Pensions Act was registered by the Ministry of Justice on 31 December 1999 and became binding in February 2000, ten days after its official publication.