The case originated in an application (no. 42895/14) against the Republic of North Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian/citizen of the Republic of North Macedonia, Ms Ajše Adilovska (“the applicant”), on 3 June 2014.
The applicant was represented by Ms N. Dimitrova, a lawyer practising in Skopje. The Government of North Macedonia (“the Government”) were represented by their former Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov, and then by their current Agent, Ms D. Djonova.
The applicant complained that her civil claim had not been examined on the merits owing to the domestic courts’ finding that she had lacked standing to sue. She relied on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 24 August 2016 notice of the application was given to the Government.
On 1 June 2018 the President of the Section decided, in accordance with Rule 38 § 1 of the Rules of Court, to admit the applicant’s belated observations of 4 April 2018 to the file.
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Skopje.
On 27 May 2004 the applicant, through her lawyer, lodged a claim against N.S. for establishment of title to a plot of land that the applicant’s late father (Ib.O., who died in 1994) had allegedly bought from his brother (the opponent’s late father-in-law) in about 1965. Soon thereafter, the applicant’s two sisters joined the proceedings as co-claimants.
After one remittal, on 22 March 2011 the applicant amended her claim, seeking in addition the annulment of a sale contract for the plot of land in issue, concluded in 2010 between N.S., as the seller, and I.O. and B.O., as the buyers. She also sought an injunction preventing any disposal of the property in dispute.
On 19 March 2012 the Skopje Court of First Instance (Основен суд Скопје – “the first-instance court”) granted the applicant’s claim, declared the sale contract null and void, and established title to the plot of land in favour of the applicant and her sisters. No decision was made on the applicant’s application for an injunction.
At a public hearing held on 4 October 2013, the Skopje Court of Appeal (Апелационен суд Скопје – “the Court of Appeal”) overturned the first-instance judgment and dismissed the applicant’s claim. It established that Ib.O. had eight children from his two marriages; they included the three claimants, but also the father of the second and third defendants (I.O. and B.O.) in the proceedings, and four other heirs who were not among the claimants. Since the civil action lodged by the applicant and her two sisters had only three of Ib.O.’s legal heirs (законски наследници) on the side of the claimants, the court considered that the applicant and her sisters did not have full legal standing in the proceedings (нема целосна активна легитимација) to claim recognition of title to the entire plot of land, and that they consequently had no legal interest (немаат правен интерес) to seek that the impugned sale contract be declared null and void. The court did not take into consideration the arguments raised by the applicant’s lawyer at the hearing to the effect that the other heirs, although aware of the proceedings, had expressed no intention to join the proceedings. That was also corroborated by B.O., Ib.O.’s son, who gave an oral statement on that account before the first-instance court.
The applicant received a copy of that judgment on 16 December 2013.
Under section 31(3) of this Act, there is a presumption of equal individual shares for the co-owners (сосопственички делови) when their individual shares of an undivided object have not been determined.
Section 13 of this Act provides that the deceased’s children and spouse, forming the first line of succession (прв наследен ред), are to inherit equal portions of his or her estate (оставина).
According to section 2 of this Act the domestic courts shall decide within the limit of the claims as put forward by the parties. Sections 143, 314, 380, 381 and 422 stipulate various procedural rules which apply in cases when domestic courts partially uphold a claim.