The case originated in an application (no. 287/07) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a company incorporated in the United Kingdom, Kenzie Global Limited Ltd (“the applicant company”), on 27 December 2006.
The applicant company was represented by Mr A. Briceac, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Apostol.
The applicant company alleged, in particular, that it had not been summoned to the hearing of the Supreme Court of Justice and that, as a result, it had suffered damage after losing the case.
On 24 May 2012 the application was communicated to the Government. On the same date the United Kingdom Government were informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings, in accordance with Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1(b) of the Rules of Court, but they did not wish to avail themselves of that right.
The applicant is a company incorporated in the United Kingdom.
At the time of the events the applicant company was the creditor of company C. which, in its turn, was the creditor of company P. On 1 October 2005 the applicant company and company C. concluded an agreement by which the debt owed by company P. to company C. was assigned to the applicant company in lieu of the debt owed by company C. to the applicant company.
Later company P. became bankrupt and the insolvency procedure was commenced in its respect. On 10 May 2006 the applicant company requested that the Chişinău Economic Court allow it to replace company C. in the list of creditors of company P. In so doing, the applicant company relied on an agreement that it had concluded on 1 October 2005 with company C.
On 5 June 2006 the Chişinău Economic Court held a public hearing in the case and accepted the applicant company’s request. As a result the applicant company replaced company C. in the list of creditors of company P. with a debt of some 14,015,000 Moldovan lei (MDL) (the equivalent of some 901,000 euros (EUR)).
On 16 October 2006 company C. lodged an appeal against the above decision on the ground, inter alia, that the agreement of 1 October 2005 was faulty and that the persons who had signed it from both sides had acted ultra vires.
On 9 November 2006 the Supreme Court of Justice examined the appeal lodged by company C. in a hearing to which the applicant company had not been summoned to appear. The other parties participated in the hearing. The Supreme Court upheld the appeal and reversed the judgment of the lower court. In particular, the Supreme Court held that the person who had signed the agreement of 1 October 2005 on behalf of company C. had acted ultra vires, because at the relevant time she had been on maternity leave. The decision of the Supreme Court of Justice was final and the applicant company was excluded from the list of creditors of company P.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure read as follows:
(1)  The summons ... shall be sent by registered mail with confirmation of delivery or through a person authorised by the court. The date of service of the summons ... shall be written on the summons, as well as on the receipt, which shall be returned to the court.
...
(5)  The summons ... addressed to a natural person shall be served on him or her personally and shall be countersigned on the receipt. The summons ... addressed to a legal person shall be served on the authorised employee and shall be countersigned on the receipt; if such a person is absent, the summons shall be served on another employee in the same conditions...”
... (2)  The President of the Chamber [of the Supreme Court of Justice] shall set, within one month, the date for hearing the appeal in cassation and inform the parties accordingly. A copy of the appeal in cassation shall be sent to the other parties together with a summons to attend the hearing, indicating that a written reply should be submitted to the court not later than five days before the hearing.
... (2)  The appeal in cassation shall be examined after the parties have been summoned. However, their failure to appear shall not prevent the examination of the appeal.”
On 12 December 2005 the Plenary Supreme Court of Justice adopted a decision “Regarding the application of the rules of the Code of Civil Procedure to the examination of cases by the first-instance courts”. In point 5 of that decision the court noted that examining a case in the absence of a party which had not been properly summoned was contrary to the law. It added that under Article 105 § 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure a person should be considered as lawfully summoned only if he or she had been personally served with the summons and had countersigned the receipt.