The case originated in an application (no. 1006/07) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Aviakompaniya A.T.I., ZAT (“the applicant company”), on 17 November 2006.
The applicant company was declared liquidated on 8 October 2015 but its only shareholder, East/West Alliance Limited − an Irish company − (“East/West”) indicated its interest in the examination of the case to be continued (see paragraph 14 below).
The applicant company was represented by Mr I.O. Savchuk of “International Law Firm “Consulting” TOV, a law firm based in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were most recently represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant company alleged, in particular, that the Supreme Court had overstepped the limits of its jurisdiction in the applicant company’s case.
On 27 May 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant company was a Ukrainian joint-stock company registered in Kyiv. At the relevant time it operated a commercial air carrier business (see East West Alliance Limited v. Ukraine, no. 19336/04, § 7, 23 January 2014).
On 12 March 2003 the applicant company brought a claim for damages, in particular loss of profit, against the State Aviation Safety Department. The claim was based on a delay on the defendant’s part in issuing a safety certificate, which the Department had been required to issue in 2001 by a court judgment.
On 16 August 2005 the  allowed the claim in part.
On 18 October 2005 the Kyiv Commercial Court of Appeal quashed the first-instance court’s judgment and rejected the claim, mainly on the grounds that the applicant company had failed to prove the loss of profit it had claimed. It considered the estimates of the loss profit speculative.
On 21 February 2006 the Higher Commercial Court reversed the ruling of the Court of Appeal and upheld the judgment of the first instance court. The Higher Court held that because the defendant’s inaction prevented the applicant company from operating its business as from 2001, the first instance court was correct in accepting the information about the applicant company’s gross income for 1999 and 2000.
On 6 June 2006 the Supreme Court quashed the ruling of the Higher Commercial Court and upheld the ruling of the Court of Appeal. The Supreme Court considered that no causal connection has been proven between the defendant’s culpable inaction and the alleged loss of profit. It held, in particular, that the applicant company had failed to prove that it had realised a profit, rather than gross income, prior to 2001, or that its income for the preceding years came from operations which required a safety certificate.
Following communication of the case and unsuccessful friendly settlement negotiations, on 2 September 2014 the Government informed the Court of their intention to resolve the issue raised by the application. They produced a unilateral declaration, in which they acknowledged a breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and offered to pay the applicant company a sum to cover any pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage together with any costs and expenses. The Government requested that the Court strike out the application in accordance with Article 37 § 1 of the Convention.
On 7 November 2014 the applicant company objected to the striking out of its application, wishing to have its merits determined with a view to obtaining appropriate redress. It argued, in particular, that under domestic law the unilateral declaration, unlike a Court’s judgment finding a violation, would not provide grounds for reexamination of its case by the Supreme Court. The Government’s unilateral declaration would therefore not lead to actual restoration of the applicant company’s rights.
The Government were invited to comment and on 10 July 2015 informed the Court of the relevant domestic legislation (see paragraphs 15 and 16 below). They submitted a letter from the Supreme Court informing the Government Agent there was no relevant domestic caselaw on the matter.
On 3 November 2015 the applicant company’s only shareholder, East/West, informed the Court that on 2 October 2014 the Kyiv City Commercial Court had declared the applicant company bankrupt and opened liquidation procedure and on 8 October 2015 had declared it liquidated. Accordingly, East/West requested that any just satisfaction award due to the applicant company be paid to East/West. Asked to comment, the Government responded on 18 January 2016 that they “do not object against the applicant’s request as to the payment to its sole shareholder the awarded compensation and, thus, leave this question on the Court’s discretion”.
Article 111-16 of the Code of Commercial Procedure provides that the Supreme Court may reopen proceedings which have ended in a final decision where “an international judicial institution, whose jurisdiction Ukraine has recognised, establishes that Ukraine breached its international obligations in the course of judicial proceedings” (“встановлення міжнародною судовою установою, юрисдикція якої визнана Україною, порушення Україною міжнародних зобов’язань при вирішенні даної справи судом”). Under Article 111-15 of the Code, reopening can be requested by the party in whose favour the international institution delivered its ruling (“може бути подана особою, на користь якої постановлено рішення міжнародною судовою установою, юрисдикція якої визнана Україною”).
Article 237 of the Code of Administrative Procedure, Article 445 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and Article 355 of the Code of Civil Procedure contain analogous provisions.
Section 1 of the Law on the Execution of Judgments of the European Court of Human Rights (the “European Court Law”) defines a “decision” of the European Court subject to execution under the Law as including not only final judgments of the Court but also decisions of the Court approving the terms of a friendly settlement or of a unilateral declaration. Section 10 § 3 of the European Court Law provides that “execution” of a European Court “decision” includes, in particular, reopening of domestic proceedings.
Following the Court’s judgments in Bazalt Impeks TOV v. Ukraine (no. 39051/07, 1 December 2011) and Firma Veritas TOV v. Ukraine (no. 2217/07, 15 May 2012), in which the Court found that the Supreme Court had overstepped the limits of its jurisdiction in the applicant companies’ cases, the Supreme Court on 5 November 2012 quashed its own decisions, which had been criticised by this Court, and remitted the cases to lower courts for reexamination. A case (no. 30814/13) concerning the fairness of those proceedings concerning Firma Veritas is currently pending before the Court.
Article 80 of the Code of Commercial Procedure provides that a commercial court must discontinue proceedings if “a commercial entity which was one of the original parties to the case has ceased its activity, provided that the relevant legal relations do not allow for succession” (“припинено діяльність суб’єкта господарювання, які були однією із сторін у справі, якщо спірні правовідносини не допускають правонаступництва”).
Article 104 § 1 of the Civil Code provides that a legal entity ceases to exist either through reorganisation (merger, division, transformation) or through liquidation. In the event of reorganisation, its assets, rights and obligations pass to its successors.
The relevant domestic law concerning the powers of the Supreme Court in commercial cases, as it stood at the time the Supreme Court examined the applicant company’s case, is summarised in Sokurenko and Strygun v. Ukraine (nos. 29458/04 and 29465/04, §§ 10-12, 20 July 2006).
On 19 January 2000 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation No. R (2000) 2 to member States on the re-examination or reopening of certain cases at domestic level following judgments of the European Court of Human Rights. In that document the Committee of Ministers:
“I. Invites, in the light of these considerations the Contracting Parties to ensure that there exist at national level adequate possibilities to achieve, as far as possible, restitutio in integrum;
Encourages the Contracting Parties, in particular, to examine their national legal systems with a view to ensuring that there exist adequate possibilities of reexamination of the case, including reopening of proceedings, in instances where the Court has found a violation of the Convention, especially where:
the injured party continues to suffer very serious negative consequences because of the outcome of the domestic decision at issue, which are not adequately remedied by the just satisfaction and cannot be rectified except by re-examination or reopening, and
the judgement of the Court leads to the conclusion that