The case originated in an application (no. 2515/11) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Agil Zaur oglu Jafarzade (Aqil Zaur oğlu Cəfərzadə – “the applicant”), on 7 January 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Alizade, a lawyer based in Baku. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
On 23 September 2013 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1989 and lives in Baku.
According to the applicant, on 16 September 2010 his friend committed suicide and he was questioned as a witness at the Yasamal district police station in that connection on the same day. On 17 September 2010 the applicant was taken by the police to the Yasamal district prosecutor’s office where he was again questioned about the suicide of his friend. Then, at around 4.00 p.m., the applicant was taken back to the Yasamal district police station where he was subjected to ill-treatment. Police officers beat him with truncheons, kept him without food or drink and did not allow him to use the toilet until the next morning, in order to elicit a confession that he had incited his friend to commit suicide.
According to the Government, following the suicide of a certain T.H. on 16 September 2010, investigators had established that the deceased had had contact with the applicant on the day before the suicide. On 17 September 2010, at around 7.00 p.m. the applicant was approached by a police officer who invited him to produce his identification documents, which he failed to do. The applicant was then invited to proceed to the police station to establish his identity. When the applicant refused to do so, he was taken by force to the Yasamal district police station. After the applicant’s identity had been established through the relevant database and a record had been drawn up for the administrative offence of deliberate noncompliance with a lawful order of a police officer under Article 310.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”), the applicant was released at around 8.30 p.m. on the same day.
On 18 September 2010 the applicant was brought before the Yasamal District Court.
By a decision of 18 September 2010 the Yasamal District Court sentenced the applicant to five days’ “administrative” detention. The decision was based on a self-incriminating statement given by the applicant in the courtroom to the effect that he had refused to go to the police station when a police officer had demanded his identity documents. According to the applicant, he had visible injuries on his face and arms and was walking with a limp when he was brought before a judge of the Yasamal District Court, but the judge did not ask any questions about his injuries.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged an appeal against the decision of the Yasamal District Court of 18 September 2010, complaining that before being brought before the first-instance court he had been illtreated while at the police station and that he had been forced by the police to give false self-incriminating statements at the court hearing. He further argued that his conviction had been based on unlawfully obtained evidence and that the first-instance court had failed to properly assess the admissibility and reliability of the evidence against him.
On 14 October 2010 the Baku Court of Appeal rejected the applicant’s appeal without assessing his allegations of ill-treatment and forced self-incrimination. According to the transcript of the hearing the applicant was informed of the date and the venue thereof both by letter and by telephone but failed to appear. The appellate court’s decision was not amenable to a further appeal.
Following a complaint by the applicant of ill-treatment at the police station, lodged with the Prosecutor General’s Office on an unspecified date, an investigator at the Yasamal district prosecutor’s office ordered a forensic examination of the applicant. According to an expert examination report dated 27 September 2010, the applicant had scratches on his left arm and the back of the neck which, as the applicant himself explained, had been obtained on 11 September 2010 when he had been climbing a tree, and on 13 September 2010 during sexual intercourse with his girlfriend, respectively.
On 15 November 2010 the deputy prosecutor of the Yasamal district prosecutor’s office issued a decision not to institute criminal proceedings into the alleged ill-treatment. The prosecutor concluded that the available evidence did not disclose any appearance of a criminal act and his decision was based on the conclusions contained in the forensic examination report and on three witness statements.
The applicant did not lodge any complaint against this decision.
A summary of the relevant provisions concerning administrative proceedings is provided in the case of Gafgaz Mammadov v. Azerbaijan (no. 60259/11, §§ 32-38, 15 October 2015).
The relevant provisions of domestic law concerning proceedings by which parties to criminal proceedings could challenge acts or decisions of the prosecuting authorities are described in detail in the cases of Pirali Orujov v. Azerbaijan (no. 8460/07, § 24, 3 February 2011), and Abbas Ahmadov v. Azerbaijan ((dec.), no. 55650/07, § 31, 12 November 2013).