The case originated in an application (no. 49526/07) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Anatoliy Vasylyovych Kuzmenko (“the applicant”), on 1 November 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr D.Y. Piddubko, a lawyer practising in Chernigiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented, most recently, by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had had no access to a court in order to ventilate his complaint concerning an unlawful search of his flat.
On 23 October 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Chernigiv.
On 25 January 2007 the Desnyanskiy District Court in Chernigiv (“the District Court”) issued a warrant to search the applicant’s flat for a mobile telephone, which had been reported stolen. The relevant part of the ruling read:
“Acting investigator has applied to the court with a request to authorize search of the dwelling of [the applicant] ... with a view to locating a mobile telephone “Nokia7270” stolen from private entrepreneur [K.] ... [theft] having taken place on 2 December 2006 at night.
During the hearing, the acting investigator and the prosecutor have supported their request ...
Having heard the acting investigator [and] the opinion of the prosecutor, and having examined the material of the criminal case, the court concludes that ... [it] has been provided with sufficient data indicating a possibility that the Nokia 7270 mobile telephone may be at the [applicant’s] place of residence.”
On 30 January 2007 the police searched the applicant’s flat in his presence and seized three mobile telephones, which, according to the applicant, belonged to him and his family members. As appears from a poorly legible copy of the list of the seized items prepared by the police, two of these telephones were apparently of Samsung and one – of Nokia make. According to the applicant, on an unspecified date the seized telephones were returned, and neither he nor any of his family members were ever indicted or involved in any other way in the criminal proceedings giving rise to the search warrant.
On 3 March 2007 the applicant lodged an administrative complaint with the District Court, alleging that his home had been searched arbitrarily and seeking moral damages for breaching inviolability of his home.
On 5 March 2007 the District Court refused to examine the above complaint, citing a lack of jurisdiction. It noted that all complaints regarding the unlawfulness of procedural actions by law-enforcement authorities taken in connection with a criminal investigation had to be lodged within the framework of relevant criminal proceedings based on Articles 234 and 236 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of Ukraine (“the CCP”), then in force.
The applicant appealed against that decision. He alleged that there was no meaningful opportunity for him to obtain redress on the basis of the CCP provisions, since a criminal court could only examine complaints concerning the actions of investigation authorities in the context of its examination of a criminal case. In the applicant’s situation, such a remedy would not be effective, since he had no procedural status in the criminal proceedings at issue, and had never been informed of the progress of those proceedings. Moreover, it was not certain whether or when the case would reach trial stage. However, as the applicant considered himself to have been a victim of an arbitrary search, regardless of the outcome of the relevant criminal investigation, he also considered that he had standing to bring an administrative complaint under Articles 2 and 4 of the Code of Administrative Justice of Ukraine (“the CAJ”).
On 15 May 2007 the Kyiv Administrative Court of Appeal rejected the appeal by the applicant, having essentially endorsed the findings of the first-instance court.
The applicant appealed in cassation. He reiterated the arguments raised in his ordinary appeal and additionally submitted that his claim against the police for non-pecuniary damages could not be examined and resolved within the framework of criminal proceedings against a third party.
On 13 May 2009 the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine rejected the applicant’s cassation appeal.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of Ukraine read:
“Everyone shall be guaranteed the inviolability of his or her dwelling.
Any entry into, examination of or search of the dwelling or other possession of a person shall not be permitted other than in accordance with a reasoned court decision.
In urgent cases connected to the saving of human life and the preservation of property, or the direct pursuit of criminal suspects, the law may provide for a different procedure for entering into, examining or searching the dwelling or other possession of a person.”
“Human and citizens’ rights and freedoms are protected by the courts.
Everyone is guaranteed the right to challenge in court the decisions, actions or omissions of bodies of State power, bodies of local self-government, officials and officers. ...
Everyone has the right to protect his or her rights and freedoms from violations and illegal encroachments by any means not prohibited by law.”
The relevant provisions of the CCP, as formulated at the material time, read:
“...Acts and decisions of bodies of inquiry may be appealed against to a court.
Complaints concerning the acts and decisions of bodies of inquiry shall be examined by a first-instance court in the course of a preliminary hearing in the case, or during its examination on the merits, unless otherwise provided for by this Code.”
“A search shall be carried out if there are sufficient grounds to believe that the means of committing an offence ... and other items and documents important to the case are kept on certain premises. ...
A search of a person’s home and other possessions may be conducted only on the basis of a reasoned court decision, except for in urgent cases ... A court decision authorising a search is not open to appeal.”
“... Complaints in respect of the acts of an investigating officer may be lodged with a court.
Complaints in respect of the actions of an investigating officer shall be considered by a first-instance court in the course of a preliminary hearing in the case, or in the course of its consideration on the merits, unless otherwise provided for by this Code ...”
“... A complaint regarding a prosecutor’s actions may be lodged with a court.
Complaints regarding a prosecutor’s actions shall be considered by a first-instance court in the course of the preliminary consideration of the case, or in the course of its consideration on the merits, unless otherwise provided for by this Code.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Administrative Justice read:
“1. The role of the administrative justice system shall be the protection of the rights, freedoms and interests of individuals, and the rights and interests of legal entities, in the field of public-law relations from violations by public authorities ...
Any decisions, acts or omissions to act on the part of public authorities may be appealed against before the administrative courts, except in cases where the Constitution and laws of Ukraine set out a different procedure of judicial appeal against such decisions, acts or omissions to act ...”
“...
Jurisdiction of the administrative courts shall cover all disputes in the public-law sphere, except disputes where the law establishes a different procedure for judicial resolution.”
“1. The jurisdiction of the administrative courts shall cover legal relationships arising in the course of the exercise of public administrative powers by ... public authorities ...
...
Jurisdiction of an administrative court shall not cover legal relationships in the public-law sphere:
...