The case originated in an application (no. 88/05) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Valentin Vladimirovich Danilov (“the applicant”), on 11 December 2004.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms Karinna Moskalenko and Ms Anna Stavitskaya, lawyers of the Centre of Assistance to International Protection based in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mr P. Laptev, Ms V. Milinchuk and Mr G. Matyushkin, the former Representatives of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by their successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant complained that as a result of an unfair trial by a partial tribunal, he had been convicted on the basis of unforeseeable domestic law for having divulged data which had been available from open sources. He relied on Articles 6, 7 and 10 of the Convention.
By a decision of 14 April 2015 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The parties submitted observations. The Government filed further written observations, but the applicant did not (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber takes the decision, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits is required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine).
The present case concerns the applicant’s criminal conviction for high treason in the form of disclosure of State secret information related to space studies.
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Novosibirsk, Novosibirsk Region.
The applicant is a renowned physicist, whose research deals with the effect of solar activity on satellites.
At the relevant time the applicant was employed as the head of the Thermophysics Centre at Krasnoyarsk State Technical University (“the University”, Теплофизический центр Красноярского государственного технического университета).
In November 1998 the applicant was in correspondence with two Chinese citizens who were acting on behalf of the Lanzhou Institute of Physics of the Chinese Academy of Space Technology. The applicant was invited to develop a laboratory-scale experimental setup to simulate a space environment (a “space simulator”), a device to be used in the field of space research. Upon receiving a draft contract from the Chinese colleagues, the applicant made a number of modifications to the preliminary specifications for the device and sent it back to them. The applicant signed the contract on 11 March 1999 in the city of Lanzhou, China.
In late 1999 the applicant continued his partnership with the Chinese citizens. Their correspondence was about “Aquagen”, a space simulation system installed in the cosmophysics laboratory belonging to the University.
On 18 May 2000 an investigator from the Federal Security Service (“the FSB”, Федеральная служба безопасности РФ) opened a case in relation to a suspicion that State secrets had been disclosed by a person with security clearance. The authorities firstly questioned the applicant and then charged him in that connection. After a number of amendments to the charges, the applicant was eventually accused of high treason in the form of disclosure of a State secret, and fraud in respect of his employer, the University.
On 1-2 August 2000 and 24 October 2000 the investigator ordered four expert examinations to ascertain whether the data divulged by the applicant had amounted to a State secret.
It appears that four expert reports nos. 50/2000-73 DSP of 4 August 2000, B-7/10 DSP of 7 August 2000, 50/2009-93 of 27 October 2000 and 37-51-107 DSP of 1 November 2000 all stated that the divulged data had to be considered “a State secret” within the meaning of Russian law, including paragraph 5.2.9. of the “Detailed list of information to be classified within the system headed by the Ministry of General and Professional Education of Russia” approved by that ministry on 16 April 1998 (“the 1998 Detailed List”).
On 24 January 2002 the applicant asked the first-instance court to admit as evidence documents written by a number of Russian scientists which supported his position that the data divulged by him did not contain any State secrets.
In view of that evidence, the prosecutor requested that the case be remitted for further investigation.
On 6 February 2002 the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court (“the Regional Court”) granted that application. The court decision of 6 February 2002 was classified. According to the applicant, the court identified a number of deficiencies in the bill of indictment, including the use of expert conclusions. It also noted that an additional expert examination should be carried out, taking into account the scientists’ opinions submitted by the defence.
On 24 April 2002 the Supreme Court of Russia (“the Supreme Court”) rejected an appeal by the applicant and upheld the decision of 6 February 2002.
During the fresh investigation into the case, the investigator ordered four additional expert examinations.
The four additional expert reports dated 6-7 June, 10 June (two reports) and 1011 September 2002 indicated that the information concerning the space simulator and the “Aquagen” space simulation system had to be considered a “State secret”.
By a decision of 24 July 2002 the charges were amended. The applicant was additionally accused of having divulged the description of the “Aquagen” space simulation system to the Chinese nationals.
On 3 December 2002, having received the case file from the prosecution, the Regional Court refused to examine it, and returned the case to the investigating authorities for further investigation. The court held that the investigation had been tainted by serious defects. In particular, the bill of indictment had lacked a precise list of the classified information divulged by the applicant, an interpretation of the expert conclusions, or any references to the applicable law.
On 5 February 2003 the Supreme Court, presided over by Judge K., upheld the above decision on appeal.
The charges against the applicant were amended, and on an unspecified date the case was resubmitted to the Regional Court for examination on the merits. It appears that the charges against the applicant were based on the eight expert reports in the case file which had previously been obtained by the prosecution (see paragraphs 14 and 20 above).
On 16 May 2003 the Regional Court held a preliminary hearing in the applicant’s case. By a decision of that date the court found that the investigator had committed various breaches of domestic procedure, and once again it remitted the case for further investigation, citing reasons which were largely the same as those in the decision of 3 December 2002 (see paragraph 22 above).
The prosecution appealed against the decision of 16 May 2003.
On 23 July 2003 the Supreme Court, sitting in a composition which included Judge K., granted the appeal and remitted the case to the Regional Court for examination on the merits. It concluded that the charges against the applicant were sufficiently specific. It also held that the defects which had been noted by the court were insufficient to justify the decision to remit the case for additional investigation.
On 3 September 2003 the Regional Court decided to have the case heard by a jury. It appears that on 3 December 2003 the Regional Court excluded as inadmissible a number of documents submitted by the defence, including opinions by Russian scientists (see paragraph 15 above).
By a verdict of 29 December 2003 the jury acquitted the applicant, and on 30 December 2003 the Regional Court rendered a judgment clearing him of all charges.
On an unspecified date the prosecution appealed against the applicant’s acquittal.
On 9 June 2004 the Supreme Court, presided over by Judge K., accepted the prosecution’s arguments and quashed the judgment, owing to various procedural irregularities, including errors in the procedure for counting and submitting the votes of the jury. Accordingly, the case was remitted for a retrial.
First-instance judgment
On 12 July 2004 the Regional Court initiated the jury selection procedure.
According to the applicant, several jurors in his case failed to disclose relevant information which could have disqualified them from taking part in the trial.
On an unspecified date the defence unsuccessfully challenged eleven jurors. Seven of them were challenged on account of the fact that they had security clearance.
The court refused to dismiss the seven jurors who had security clearance, because national law did not prevent such jurors from participating in criminal proceedings. Four out of those seven potential jurors with security clearance became jurors in the applicant’s case.
According to the applicant, during the trial he did not dispute the fact that he had communicated the information in question to the Chinese nationals; the only contentious point was the classified status of the information divulged. The presiding judge considered the issue of whether the information constituted a State secret a legal question, and excluded it from the jury’s examination.
On 25 October 2004 the applicant lodged an application to examine ten experts for the prosecution who had drafted reports in his criminal case, and seventeen other experts who would be witnesses on his behalf. The application read as follows:
“... During the trial the prosecution submitted several expert reports.
In order to ensure the exercise of my right provided for under Article 6 § 3 (d) of the Convention, I request that [the experts] who took part in the preparation of the expert reports be questioned.
I also request that the following experts be questioned on behalf of the defence: [a list of experts followed].”
The prosecution submitted that the applicant had not substantiated his application, but had merely referred to the Convention.
Having examined the parties’ submissions, the court dismissed the applicant’s application to question ten experts for the prosecution and summon seventeen experts for the defence. According to the applicant, the judge’s reasoning for his decision was as follows:
“The defence’s application of 25 October 2004 to call and question experts and specialists should be dismissed, owing to the lack of legal grounds and necessity.
Under Article 282 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a court has the right to question experts to clarify and supplement an opinion which has been given. [Neither] the content of the [applicant’s] application [nor] the material of the case indicates that any clarification or additional information is necessary. The contents of the application also do not contain legal grounds for calling the indicated people as specialists. The material of the case also does not contain such grounds.”
On 5 November 2004 the jury unanimously rendered a guilty verdict.
On 24 November 2004 the Regional Court convicted the applicant as charged for having committed high treason by disclosing to Chinese nationals information about the space simulator and the “Aquagen” space simulation system which constituted a State secret, in breach of Article 275 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 58 below); the applicant was also convicted of fraud in respect of his former employer, the University, an offence in breach of Article 159 § 3 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 59 below). The applicant was sentenced to fourteen years’ imprisonment.
The parties did not submit a copy of the judgment of 24 November 2004, owing to its classified status. It appears that the judgment relied on the eight expert reports prepared during the pre-trial stages of the investigation.
On 25 November 2004 there was a seminar of physicists who specialised in the electrisation of space mechanisms in orbit. Leading scientists – including Dr V. Ginzburg, a Nobel laureate and astrophysicist, and Dr S. Kapitsa, a physicist – discussed the preliminary specifications drafted by the applicant. The scientists concluded that those specifications did not contain any State secrets. All data included in the preliminary specifications had been published a long time ago and were known to the specialists of all countries dealing with space studies. During the seminar the scientists also noted that the expert examinations of the preliminary specifications drafted by the applicant had been performed by people who had no specific expertise in the relevant subject area. For instance, the scientists observed that the same people had prepared expert reports in both the applicant’s case, which had concerned the electrisation of space mechanisms, and another similar case regarding the movement of an object in a gas cavern in water. The scientists considered that experts who were not competent had made erroneous findings which had then become the basis of the applicant’s conviction.
The applicant appealed against the judgment of 24 November 2004. He complained that his conviction had been based on only the expert findings concluding that the data included in the preliminary specifications had been a State secret. The applicant contested the expert reports and their conclusions on a number of grounds. He complained that the expert examinations had been carried out on the basis of the investigator’s requests at the pre-trial stage of the investigation. The applicant claimed that he had not been informed about those requests, and thus in particular he had had no opportunity to challenge the experts, suggest other people as experts, put additional questions to the experts, attend the expert examinations or provide his own explanations.
Furthermore, the applicant asserted that the experts had no pertinent or sufficient expertise in the relevant area of physics.
In particular, he observed that expert report 50/2000-73DSP of 4 August 2000 had been prepared by four experts from Baltic State Technical University (“BSTU”) called S., Sch., B. and I. The only information about them was as follows: S. worked for the university’s security department and was a graduate of an artillery school; Sch. worked for the department of launching facilities; B. had “experience with the thermal regulation of space objects”; and I. worked in the university’s security services.
Report B-7/10DSP of 7 August 2000 had been prepared by two employees of Moscow State Technical University (“MSTU”), Sych. and P., who also had identification documents showing that they were FSB experts. Their area of expertise was indicated as being “rocket and space technologies”. The applicant also noted that those two experts had participated in expert examinations in a similar “spy” case against another scientist, but one which had concerned a different area of physics.
Report 37-51-107DSP of 1 November 2000 by the Ministry of Education, MSTU and Moscow State Technical Aviation University (“MSTAU”) had been prepared by Sh., U. and A. Sh. had graduated from a school for border guards, U. was a “main specialist in a special department” of the Ministry of Education, and A. (from MSTAU) had a “radio-technical specialisation”.
The other expert reports had been prepared by the same people mentioned above, working in other combinations. No further information about the experts’ areas of specialisation, experience, academic research publications or other publications had been available.
The applicant complained that despite his application, the Regional Court had refused to question the ten experts for the prosecution and summon experts in his defence. That refusal had effectively prevented him from challenging the conclusions of the expert reports.
The applicant joined the records of the scientific seminar on 25 November 2004 (see paragraph 43 above) to his appeal.
The applicant also asserted that the jury in his case had not been selected in accordance with the applicable laws. He further claimed that the jury had not been independent and impartial. In particular, some of the jurors had withheld certain information about themselves demonstrating that they were not independent from the FSB. Furthermore, the jurors with security clearance should not have participated in his trial, as they also could be deemed to be not independent from the FSB. The applicant also complained that the jury had been precluded from examining the only contentious matter in the case – whether the information divulged had constituted a State secret – as that matter had been reserved to the experts and the presiding judge.
On 29 June 2005 the Supreme Court, presided over by Judge K., held an appeal hearing.
The defence challenged Judge K.’s involvement in the appeal proceedings, on the grounds that she had previously taken part in the examination of the applicant’s case: on 23 July 2003, when the Supreme Court had granted the prosecutor’s appeal against the remittal of the case for additional investigation (see paragraph 27 above); and on 9 June 2004, when the court had quashed the applicant’s acquittal and remitted the case for a retrial (see paragraph 31 above).
The Supreme Court rejected the challenge. The court held that during the examination of the applicant’s case Judge K. had made no statements disclosing any personal interest as to the outcome of the proceedings. The court found no other circumstances which would prevent her participation in the proceedings.
As to the alleged bias of some of the jurors, the Supreme Court held that security clearance did not indicate, as such, a lack of impartiality, and that there was no evidence to conclude that the jurors had withheld any relevant information which could have cast doubt on their impartiality. The court also held that the Regional Court’s refusal to summon the prosecution’s experts had been justified, in view of the nature of the proceedings before a jury. The relevant part of the decision read as follows:
“The court is not persuaded by the defence’s arguments about the alleged flaws in the formation of the jury.
...
... the parties questioned the [potential jurors] to establish any individual circumstances which might have prevented their participation in the proceedings.
...
There is no indication that the selection of the jury was not random.
...
As regards the defence’s allegation that members of the jury were biased because they had security clearance, such an argument has no basis in law. The procedure whereby access is granted to State secrets, [which is] established in the State Secrets Act, does not make a person with security clearance dependent on the Federal Security Service.
The above [argument] is also not [supported by] the Russian Constitutional Court’s ruling no. 8-П of 27 March 1996 relied on by the defence. The legal position of the Constitutional Court in that ruling is related to the impossibility of removing an advocate from a case owing to a lack of security clearance. [This] is based on the fact that the FSB authorities which perform the verification procedures [for security clearance] actually predetermine the decision[s] on access to State secret[s]. Due to this circumstance (the procedure to obtain security clearance), the advocate objectively becomes dependent on the authorities carrying out the criminal prosecution. There is no prohibition in either the Code of Criminal Procedure or section 80 of the Federal Law on the Judiciary of the RSFSR [Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic], which were applicable at the material time, on a citizen participating as a juror because of his security clearance. The Federal Law on Lay Judges in the Russian Federation also does not contain such a prohibition.
The applications challenging the jurors were duly examined by the trial court ...
...
... [the crime of] disclosure of a State secret, [an act] criminalised by Article 275 of the Criminal Code, has two mandatory elements: the transfer of information in a sphere of State activity ..., which represents the factual circumstances of the crime; and an indication that that information is protected by the State because its disclosure might damage Russian security. Those circumstances have a legal nature, because their establishment requires specialist knowledge in a particular sphere of State activity related to [State] security and within the competence of relevant agencies and State officials, as set out in the State Secrets Act.
Therefore, the [act of] categorising particular information as a State secret and giving it classified status ... is performed by the heads of State authorities, in accordance with the [official] list of State officials who are vested with such powers, which is approved by the Russian President. ...
In accordance with section 6(4) of the [State Secrets] Act, the justification for categorising information as a State secret and giving it classified status is established by means of an expert assessment of [both] the reasonableness of classifying particular information [and] the potential and other consequences of that act, based on the balance between vitally important interests of the State, society and citizens.
Therefore, the question of categorising as a State secret the information whose disclosure [was] imputed to the accused [was] a legal one, and ... it could not be put before the jurors ...
...
As indicated by the case-file material, the trial court examined only admissible evidence. The allegation that inadmissible expert reports were examined is not supported by the material of the case file, which indicates that in order to perform expert examinations the investigating authorities engaged people with a specialised, high level of education who had specialist knowledge about the research issues in this criminal case, and who had carried out academic research, including [research] on the subject matters related to the charges against the applicant; they [had] extensive work experience in these areas. ... the applicant and his defence [team] were acquainted with this information.
The procedure whereby the experts were appointed and the performance of the expert examinations in this criminal case were in accordance with Chapter 27 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The expert findings concerned the technical features of the devices which had been disclosed by the applicant, and the issue of whether the information constituted a State secret. The experts had to [come to conclusions] about the latter issue, because under section 6(4) of the State Secrets Act, the justification for categorising information as a State secret had to be established by an expert assessment.
The jury verdict was based on a careful examination of the circumstances of the case and the case-file documents. The court cannot accept the defence’s argument that the trial court’s refusal to summon and question ... the experts ... was arbitrary ... The case-file material shows that the trial court did examine the expert reports. Questioning the experts was incompatible with the nature of the proceedings before a jury ...
The records of the seminar at the International Engineering Institute on 25 November 2004, which took place after the judgment had been issued in the present case, are not evidence, because they do not comply with the requirements of Articles 74 and 86 of the Code of Criminal Procedure defining the notion of the collection of evidence and [the relevant] procedure.
...”
On the same day the Supreme Court upheld, for the most part, the judgment of 24 November 2004, reducing the sentence to thirteen years’ imprisonment.
Article 275 of the Criminal Code defines high treason as espionage, disclosure of State secrets or assistance otherwise provided to a foreign State, a foreign organisation or their representatives for ... subversive activities undermining the external security of the Russian Federation, committed by a citizen of the Russian Federation, which is punishable by the deprivation of liberty for a term of twelve to twenty years, with or without a fine.
Under Article 159 § 3 of the Criminal Code, fraud committed by a person through his official position is punishable by deprivation of liberty for a period of two to six years.
Rules governing the information to be classified as officially secret are set out in the State Secrets Act (Закон о государственной тайне) No. 5485-1, dated 21 July 1993. The Act specifies the type of military information which is protected by State secrecy, subject to its specification in a list approved by the President and duly published (sections 5 and 9).
The justification for categorising information as a State secret and giving it classified status is established by means of an expert assessment of both the reasonableness of classifying particular information and the potential economic and other consequences of that act, in view of the balance between vitally important interests of the State, society and citizens (section 6(4) of the State Secrets Act).
Article 5 of Presidential Decree no. 1203 of 30 November 1995 contains a detailed list of information which must be considered a State secret.
The relevant provisions of Russian law were summarised in Danilov v. Russia (dec.), no 88/05, §§ 81-90, 14 April 2015.
In accordance with the applicable legislation in force at the material time (the Federal Law of 8 July 1981 on the Judiciary of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) as amended on 12 July 2003 (section 80), and Federal Law No. 113-ФЗ of 20 August 2004 on Lay Judges of the Federal Courts of General Jurisdiction in the Russian Federation (section 3)), lists of potential jurors could not include the following people: people not on recent voters’ registers; people under twenty-five years old; people with a criminal record; people who were fully or partially legally incapable; people with a registered history of addiction or mental disorders; people suspected or accused of criminal offences; people who did not understand the language of proceedings; and people with a physical or mental handicap preventing them from participating fully in proceedings.
At their own request, the following people could also be excluded from jury duty (the Federal Law of 8 July 1981 on the Judiciary of the RSFSR as amended on 12 July 2003 (section 80), Federal Law No. 113-ФЗ of 20 August 2004 on Lay Judges of the Federal Courts of General Jurisdiction in the Russian Federation (section 7), and Article 326 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”)): people without knowledge of a local language; people with certain physical or mental handicaps; people over sixty years old; heads and deputy heads of legislative and executive authorities; people in the military; judges; prosecutors; investigators; advocates; notaries; police officers; officers in the firefighting service; State security officers; priests and other people who considered that they could not serve as jurors owing to their religious beliefs; women with children under three years old; people whose absence from work could negatively affect public or State interests, such as doctors, teachers, pilots and others; and other people with valid reasons.
At the material time parties had the right to make an unlimited number of challenges for cause and two peremptory challenges in respect of potential jurors. The presiding judge decided on the challenges. After deleting the names of the successfully challenged potential jurors, the court secretary or the judge’s assistant made up a list of the remaining potential jurors, whose names were to appear in the same order as on the first list. The twelve potential jurors whose names appeared first on the list formed the jury, and the two potential jurors whose names appeared next became substitutes. Before the jury was sworn in the parties could challenge the entire panel if they argued that, owing to the particular features of the criminal case in question, the panel would be unable to render an objective verdict. The presiding judge was to decide on any such challenge in respect of the empanelled jury (Articles 326-330 of the CCrP).
In accordance with the State Secrets Act (section 21), security clearance is to be granted on a voluntary basis. It may be granted to State officials and other citizens.
The Russian legislation in force at the material time did not contain an exhaustive list of persons who might obtain security clearance. The State Secrets Act and the Rules on Security Clearance approved by the Russian Government on 28 October 1995 indicate that it may be granted to, among others: military officers, crew members, ambassadors, judges, lawyers, members of the Russian Parliament, high-ranking officials, employees of private and State companies working with secret information, students and other citizens.
Security clearance is granted after competent authorities carry out a verification check on the person concerned (sections 21 and 22 of the State Secrets Act). In accordance with the Federal Law on the Federal Security Service (section 12(k)), its agencies have an obligation to ensure the confidentiality of State secrets in State authorities, military formations, companies, establishments and organisations (regardless of whether they are publicly or privately owned) and implement measures related to citizens’ access to State secrets, in accordance with the established procedure.
In ruling no. 8-П of 27 March 1996 (paragraph 5), the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation held as follows:
“Criminal procedural law confers on FSB agencies the power to investigate most criminal cases containing material which constitutes a State secret. Under sections 21 and 22 of the State Secrets Act, the same agencies perform the verification procedure in respect of people applying for security clearance, and thus predetermine the decision[s] on the grant of such applications. In such circumstances, an advocate objectively becomes dependent on the agencies carrying out the criminal prosecution, which puts the defence and the prosecution in an unequal position.”
Chapter 27 of the CCrP regulates the obtaining of expert opinions at the investigation stage (namely, before the trial). Article 195 § 2 provides that a “judicial expert examination” (for use in court) must be carried out by “State forensic experts or other experts who have specialist knowledge”. Article 193 § 3 provides that the investigator must notify the defendant about the decision to order an expert examination. Under Article 198, the defendant has the right to challenge the expert, request that the examination be entrusted to another expert institution, ask the investigator to put additional questions to the expert and, with the approval of the investigator, participate in the expert’s examination and provide him or her with comments.
Under Article 282 of the CCrP, the court, on its own initiative or at the parties’ request, may call for the expert who has prepared a forensic report at the pre-trial stage to be questioned, to clarify or supplement that report.