The case originated in an application (no. 32053/13) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Konstantin Grigoryevich Ustimenko (“the applicant”), on 3 May 2013.
The applicant was represented by Ms Y.N. Ashchenko, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were most recently represented by their Agent, Mr B. Babin, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that he had not been duly informed about the appeal proceedings in his case and that the extension of the time-limit for appeal and the quashing of a final judgment in his favour breached the principle of legal certainty.
On 17 December 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Dnipropetrovsk.
On 18 October 2010 the applicant lodged with the Dnipropetrovsk Amur‑Nyzhnyodniprovskyy District Court (“the District Court”) an administrative claim against the Department of the Pension Fund for the Dnipropetrovsk Amur‑Nyzhnyodniprovskyy District (“the defendant”) seeking an increase in his pension based on the rise in the average wages in the country since his retirement.
On 1 December 2010 the District Court, having considered the applicant’s claim by way of an abridged administrative procedure, allowed the claim. In the judgment it was pointed out that any appeal must be lodged by the appellant within a period of ten days following their receipt of a copy thereof.
The defendant received a copy of the judgment on 27 December 2010.
The defendant lodged its first appeal with the District Court on 13 January 2011 and did not request an extension of the time-limit for appeal.
On 11 April 2011 Judge N. of the Dnipropetrovsk Administrative Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) dismissed the defendant’s appeal on the grounds that it had been lodged after the time-limit for appeal had expired and the defendant had failed both to explain the reasons for the late lodging of the appeal and to submit a request for an extension. The ruling stated that it could be appealed against before the Higher Administrative Court. The defendant did not appeal.
On 1 June 2011 the District Court, at the applicant’s request, issued a writ of enforcement confirming that the judgment had become final on 11 April 2011.
With effect from 1 August 2011 the defendant complied with the judgment and increased the applicant’s pension.
On 17 June 2011 the defendant lodged a second appeal with the District Court. By letters of 21 June and 5 July 2011 the District Court forwarded the case file, including the appeal and its copy for the applicant, to the Court of Appeal. The case file gives no indication of any steps to follow up on the matter.
On 15 August 2011 the defendant lodged a third appeal, requesting that the Court of Appeal extend the time-limit for its submission. As grounds for its request the defendant stated that it “had begun the process of appealing against” the District Court’s judgment on 31 December 2010.
On 26 October 2011 Judge N. of the Court of Appeal scheduled a hearing for 26 January 2012 to examine the question of extending the time-limit for appeal.
According to a summons dated 26 October 2011 addressed to both the applicant and the defendant, they were summoned to attend a hearing of the Court of Appeal on 26 January 2012 at which the court was to examine the applicant’s request for an extension of the time-limit for appeal. The summons included the warning that failure to appear would not prevent the Court of Appeal from examining the matter.
It is apparent from the domestic case file that no other document was added to it between 26 October 2011 and 26 January 2012.
On 26 January 2012 a panel of the Court of Appeal, presided over by Judge N., extended the time-limit for appeal, stating that the defendant had missed the deadline for “valid reasons”. The Court of Appeal recounted the sequence of events in the case from 1 December 2010 to 15 August 2011, found it established that the first appeal had been lodged outside the time-limit, namely on 13 January 2011, and observed that the defendant had requested the extension because it had received a copy of the judgment only after the time-limit for appeal had already expired.
On 27 January 2012 Judge N. of the Court of Appeal ruled that appeal proceedings be opened, that copies of the ruling be sent to the parties, and that the applicant be sent a copy of the appeal and be invited to provide his reply.
According to a summons dated 30 January 2012 and addressed to both the applicant and the defendant, they were summoned to attend a hearing of the Court of Appeal on 13 June 2012 at which the court was to examine the appeal. This summons also contained the warning that failure to appear would not prevent the Court of Appeal from examining the matter.
On 13 June 2012 the Court of Appeal quashed the judgment of 1 December 2010 and rejected the applicant’s claim, holding that the first-instance court had erred in its interpretation of the relevant legislation governing pensions.
On 27 November 2012 the defendant sent a letter to the applicant informing him that his pension had been reduced in accordance with the decision of the Dnipropetrovsk Court of Appeal of 13 June 2012.
On 12 December 2012 the applicant lodged a complaint with the prosecutor’s office for the Dnipropetrovsk Amur‑Nyzhnyodniprovskyy District alleging that Judge N. had intentionally failed to inform him about the appeal proceedings.
On 29 December 2012 the prosecutor’s office made an entry in the Unified Register of Pre-Trial Investigations to investigate the suspicion that offences of delivering of an intentionally unjust court decision and of failure to enforce a court decision may have been committed.
On 17 May 2013 the prosecutor’s office decided to discontinue the investigation concerning the applicant’s complaint. The prosecutor’s office found, in particular, that the defendant had dispatched the original appeal against the judgment of 1 December 2010 on 31 December 2010 that is to say within the time-limit. As to the applicant’s allegations that he had not been informed about the reopened appeal proceedings, the prosecutor’s office noted that the case file contained copies of court summonses dated 26 October 2012 and 30 January 2012.
On 21 May 2013 the District Court and on 27 May 2013 the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Court of Appeal upheld the prosecutor’s decision.
Article 102 of the Code provides that the procedural time-limit can be extended if the court, at the request of a party to the proceedings, determines that the party to the proceedings missed the original time-limit for valid reasons. The question of extension may be decided in written proceedings or at a hearing, at the court’s discretion. A failure to appear by those duly notified does not prevent the court from considering the question.
Article 183-2 of the Code provides, inter alia, that claims concerning social and pension payments are to be considered by way of an abridged procedure without summoning the parties. The day after the adoption of a judgment by the first-instance court, copies thereof must be sent to the parties by registered letter. The judgment may be appealed against before a court of appeal. The decision of the court of appeal shall be final.
Article 186 of the Code provides that an appeal must be lodged within a period of ten days following pronouncement of a judgment. If the court decides to prepare a full text of the judgment after pronouncing only its operative part, or if the judgment is delivered in writing, any appeal must be lodged within a period of ten days following receipt by the appellant of a copy of the judgment.
At the material time, paragraph 3 of Article 189 of the Code provided that a judge rapporteur was to return to the appellant any appeal lodged outside the time-limit if no request to extend the time-limit had been lodged.
Article 197 of the Code provides that a court of appeal may consider an appeal sitting in camera on the basis of the evidential material in the case file in particular if the case concerns social benefits or pension payments and was decided at first instance by way of an abridged procedure.
At the material time Articles 189 and 190 of the Code provided that all new cases arriving at a court of appeal were to be allocated to a judge rapporteur. The judge, having decided to open appeal proceedings, had to send the parties, within ten days of having opened those proceedings, a copy of the ruling by which the proceedings were opened, together with a copy of the appeal, and to set a time-limit for replying to the appeal.
Article 191 of the Code provides that parties other than the appellant have the right to reply to an appeal within the time-limit set by the judge of the administrative court of appeal in the ruling opening the appeal proceedings.
Paragraph 2 of Article 211 of the Code provides that interlocutory rulings of the first-instance and appellate courts can be appealed to the courts of appeal and the Higher Administrative Court respectively, provided that such decisions prevent proceedings in the case from advancing. Objections against all other rulings can only be submitted, together with the appeal on points of law, after the first-instance court judgment has been reviewed on appeal.
According to Article 254, a judgment becomes final upon expiration of the time-limit for appeal if no appeal has been lodged. In cases where an appeal has been lodged, the judgment becomes final when the appeal is returned, when a judge of the appellate court refuses to open appeal proceedings, or when the appeal decision delivered upon review of the first-instance court’s judgment becomes final.