The case originated in an application (no. 50054/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Valeriu Mitrofan (“the applicant”), on 15 November 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Bivol, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Grosu.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been detained in inhuman conditions and that the courts which convicted him did not examine the main arguments in his defence.
On 10 July 2009 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Chişinău.
At the time of the events the applicant was the head of a private high school (V.) and acting head of the Industrial and Construction College (C., a State-funded institution). In 2004 a criminal investigation was opened into fraudulent acts and abuse of power allegedly committed by the applicant. He was accused of having accepted money from two students for their studies at V. and failing to disclose those payments in the school’s accounts.
On 24 September 2004 the applicant was arrested and remanded in custody on the basis of a warrant issued by the Centru District Court that day. On 30 September 2004 the Chişinău Court of Appeal overturned the lower court’s decision, finding there was no reason to believe that the applicant would abscond or interfere with the investigation, noting that he had a fixed address, a family and an under-age child, and that he had undertaken to appear before the investigation authorities whenever summoned. He was released on the same day.
On 20 November 2006 the Grigoriopol District Court sentenced the applicant to three years’ imprisonment for fraud. He was acquitted of all the other charges mainly owing to a lack of evidence that he had illegally accepted money from the students. On the same day he was arrested and placed in prison no. 13 in Chișinău.
On 8 February 2007 the Chişinău Court of Appeal partly quashed the first-instance court’s judgment. The court found that the applicant had been negligent in admitting two new students to V. and accepting tuition fees from them, even though by order of 25 December 2003, the Ministry of Education had suspended V’s licence and the applicant had been ordered to transfer all pupils to other educational institutions. The applicant was thus convicted under Article 329 (1) of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 19 below) and his custodial sentence was reduced by the appellate court to eight months.
In an appeal on points of law, the applicant argued that he could not be convicted of a violation of Article 329 (1) of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 19 below) because two elements of the crime set out therein had not been met, namely that it had to have been committed by a “public official” and that the damage caused as a result had to be “large-scale”. Firstly, the conviction had been based on his alleged wrongdoing as head of V. As the head of a private institution, he could not be considered a public official (persoană cu funcţii de răspundere), a notion expressly defined in Article 123 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 19 below). He could not therefore be accused of negligence in carrying out any official duties by accepting pupils to study in his private school.
Secondly, the value of the alleged damage caused (3,020 Moldovan lei (MDL)) was less than the minimum MDL 10,000 required under Article 329 for large-scale damage, as defined in Articles 64 and 126 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 19 below).
Finally, the applicant argued that he had admitted new pupils to his school because he had challenged the Ministry of Justice’s order of 25 December 2003 in court, which in his opinion meant that the order had been suspended and thus had no legal effect pending the outcome of the litigation.
On 28 June 2007 the Supreme Court of Justice partly quashed the lower court’s judgment. The court dealt with the applicant’s arguments raised in his appeal on points of law as follows:
“As concerns [the applicant’s] arguments that he must be acquitted under Article 329 (1) of the Criminal Code because the elements of the crime were not present in his actions, these [arguments] are unsubstantiated and are contradicted by the material evidence; the accused’s refusal to admit liability should not necessarily lead to his acquittal since there is pertinent and conclusive evidence which corroborates as a whole and proves with certainty his guilt in having committed the crime: contract no. ... of enrolling S.N. as a student ... concluded between L.G. and the head of [V.]; receipts for [cashing of] MDL 2,000 lei on 30 August 2004 and of MDL 1,000 and MDL 20 on 6 July 2004; [Ministry of Education] order of 25 December 2003 suspending the activity of the private education institutions founded by [V.].”
The court noted, however, that the lower courts had not taken into consideration the applicant’s mitigating circumstances, such as the fact that he had no previous convictions and was well regarded in society. In the absence of any aggravating circumstances, the lower courts had incorrectly decided to imprison him. The court therefore ordered the applicant to pay a fine instead of giving him a custodial sentence. He was therefore released on the same day, after approximately seven months of detention in prison no. 13. Taking into account the fact that he had already served time in prison, he was dispensed from paying the fine.
The applicant described the conditions in which he had been held for more than seven months in Chişinău Prison no. 13. The prison was situated in a 165-year-old building. He was detained in a cell measuring 26 square metres which he shared with between eleven and fourteen other detainees. The cell was unventilated, the only air coming in from several holes in a net covering the window. The cell was very cold in winter and very hot in summer, the walls and ceiling were damp and the toilet was not separated from the rest of the cell. During the first five months of detention, the applicant was not issued with any bedding and had to sleep on a bare mattress. When bedding was finally provided, it was changed very rarely. The cell was never cleaned; his mattress was full of parasitic insects and he could not sleep as a result. The light was too weak in the cell for reading. Showers were only allowed once a week and the shower day did not coincide with the day of the week when fresh bedding was issued, which meant the continuous presence of parasitic insects. Food was inadequate and of poor quality; the portions did not conform to the standard decided upon by the Government, particularly in respect of meat, fish, eggs and dairy products.
The applicant made a total of forty-four complaints to various authorities about the conditions of his detention. He asked, inter alia, for the number of persons in cell no. 75 (in which he was being detained) to be reduced to no more than eight detainees instead of the fourteen who were held there at the time of making the complaint, so as to observe the statutory minimum requirement of 4 square metres of living space per detainee. The applicant also asked for an additional hour of exercise time for all the detainees in his cell in an attempt to improve the overcrowding situation. The applicant made six complaints between 19 March and 15 May 2007 about the lack of ventilation and access to fresh air aggravating the overcrowding. On 25 March 2007 he asked to be transferred to a non-smoking cell because he was subjected to passive smoking, which he argued was “a far more serious punishment than the eight months of imprisonment to which [he] had been sentenced”. On 3 May 2007 he complained about the failure to provide adequate food as required by the relevant Government decisions, claiming, inter alia, that reduced quantities of sugar and bread had been distributed to detainees in his cell. The applicant asked for portion sizes to be checked periodically to ensure they were meeting the statutory minimum. On four occasions between 30 March and 28 May 2007 the applicant complained about the presence of parasitic insects and asked for fresh bedding to coincide with shower day so as to avoid the risk of continued infestation. On 12 May 2007 the applicant asked for various materials in order to carry out repairs to their cell (together with his cell mates), as the ceiling was dark and the paint was peeling off the walls.
The applicant received a total of five letters in response, informing him that he would only be transferred to another category of prison following the final determination of his criminal case. The responses, however, failed to address the majority of his complaints. The applicant stated that on 17 May 2007, after repeatedly complaining about the unventilated space, a window was opened in the corridor opposite his cell, providing more fresh air. On 7 June 2007, in reply to his request to be allowed to use the prison library’s reading room, he was informed by the relevant authorities that prison no. 13 had no such facility.
On 19 February and 26 March 2007 the applicant complained that he was being detained in a closed prison, despite having been sentenced to detention in a semi-open prison where, he submitted, he would have had a right to move freely within the prison area (as opposed to having one hour of exercise time in the closed prison).
On 2 July 2007 the prison doctor examined the applicant and informed him that he had been exposed to the risk of contracting tuberculosis. The doctor referred the applicant to a consultant and an eyesight specialist.
The relevant provisions of domestic law are set out in, among other authorities, Ostrovar v. Moldova (no. 35207/03, 13 September 2005); Sarban v. Moldova (no. 3456/05, 4 October 2005 and Becciev v. Moldova (no. 9190/03, 4 October 2005).
In addition, the relevant provisions of the Civil Code read as follows:
Article 1398: Grounds and general conditions of liability in tort
“1.  A person who intentionally commits an unlawful act towards another shall compensate for any pecuniary damage caused, and, in cases provided for by law, shall also compensate for non-pecuniary damage caused by his acts or omissions.
Compensation for non-pecuniary damage caused by lawful acts in the absence of intent shall be paid only in the cases expressly provided for by law.
...”
Article 1422: Compensation for non-pecuniary damage
“1.  If a person is caused non-pecuniary damage (mental or physical suffering) by acts which violate his or her personal moral rights, as well as in other cases provided for by law, the court shall have the power to order the person responsible to pay monetary compensation.
Compensation for any non-pecuniary damage shall be paid regardless of the existence and extent of any pecuniary damage caused.
Compensation for non-pecuniary damage shall also be paid in the absence of intent by the wrongdoer if the unlawful act was caused by unlawful conviction, illegal indictment, illegal detention or illegal imposition of an undertaking not to leave town, illegal administrative arrest or unpaid community work, and in other cases provided for by law.”
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code read as follows:
Article 64: Fines
“...2.  ... A conventional unit of a fine shall be equal to MDL 20.”
Article 123: Public official (persoană cu funcţie de răspundere)
“1.  A public official is a person who, in an enterprise, institution, State or local public administrative body or a subdivision thereof, either permanently or temporarily, by law, appointment, election or assignment, has been entrusted with certain rights and obligations with a view to exercising the functions of a public authority, taking administrative decisions or organisational and economic measures.”
Article 126: Very large-scale, large-scale, considerable and essential damage
“1.  The value of ... the damage caused by a person or a group of persons shall be considered very large-scale or large-scale if, at the time the crime was committed, the monetary value of the damage exceeds 1,500 and 500 conventional units of a fine respectively.”
Article 329: Negligent performance of duties
“1.  Failure to perform or the improper performance of duties by a public official as a result of a negligent or careless attitude towards such duties, provided that such an action caused large-scale damage to the public interest or to the rights and legally protected interests of individuals or other legal entities, shall be punished by a fine of up to 500 conventional units or by imprisonment for up to three years...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure read as follows:
Article 414: Examination of an appeal
“... 5.  The appellate court shall decide on each ground of appeal. ...”
Article 427: Grounds for appeals on points of law
The judgments of the appellate courts may be appealed against on points of law in order to rectify legal errors of the first-instance courts and appellate courts on the following grounds:
(6) ... the appellate court has not decided on all the grounds raised in the appeal or the judgment appealed against does not contain the reasons on which the conclusion is based ...”
Under Article 225 of the Enforcement Code (in force since 1 July 2005, as amended on 5 November 2010), the minimum living space for each detainee must be at least 4 square metres.
According to the Government, following the enactment of two amnesty laws (nos. 278 (16 July 2004) and 188 (10 July 2008)), as well as amendments to the Criminal Code (Law no. 194-XVI (29 June 2006), which had the effect of decriminalising certain less serious offences and prohibiting detention as a form of punishment for other types of offence), the overall number of detainees in Moldovan prisons decreased from 10,591 on 1 January 2004 to 6,335 on 1 December 2010. Moreover, more than 400 cases concerning the reduction of custodial sentences were pending before the domestic courts.
On 24 October 2003 Parliament adopted Decision no. 415-XV approving the National Human Rights Action Plan for 2004-2008. The plan included a number of objectives to be achieved over a four-year period and was aimed at improving conditions of detention, including reducing overcrowding, improving medical treatment, introducing detainees to employment and encouraging their social reintegration, as well as carrying out training for personnel. Regular reports were to be submitted regarding the implementation of the Action Plan.
By Government Decision of 31 December 2003 on the principles of reorganisation of the prison system, the Moldovan authorities implemented the 2004-2013 Plan of Action for the Reform of the Prison System, both having the aim, inter alia, of improving the conditions of detention in prisons.
On 23 December 2003 the Government published the Concept Paper for Prison System Reform and the Action Plan for 2004-2020 for achieving its objectives.
On an unspecified date the Ministry of Justice produced a report entitled the “Implementation by the Ministry of Justice of Chapter 14 of the National Human Rights Action Plan for 2004-2008, approved by Parliamentary Decision no. 415-XV of 24 October 2003”. On 25 November 2005 the Parliamentary Commission for Human Rights also produced a report on implementation of the National Action Plan. Both reports confirmed the insufficient funding of the prison system and the resulting failure to fully implement the National Human Rights Action Plan in Moldovan prisons, including Chişinău Prison no. 13. The first of these reports stated, inter alia, that “as long as the objectives of [the National Human Rights Action Plan] do not have the necessary financial support ... it will remain only a good intention of the State to protect human rights as described in Parliamentary Decision no. 415-XV of 24 October 2003, the result of which is non-implementation, or partial implementation [of the Action Plan].”
The Government submitted copies of several judgments (Drugalev v. the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Finance; Gristiuc v. the Ministry of Finance and the Prisons Department; Ipate v. the Prisons Department; and Ciorap v. the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Prosecutor General’s Office), all cases in which the applicants had been compensated for ill-treatment and/or inhuman conditions of detention. In awarding compensation, the domestic courts relied on the Health Care Act (enacted on 28 March 1995), Article 1422 of the Civil Code (in the case of Gristiuc) and Article 1398 of the Civil Code (in the case of Ipate). In the cases of Drugaliov and Ciorap the courts found that domestic law did not provide any legal basis for awarding compensation and relied directly on the Convention and the Court’s case-law.
In the “Conditions of Detention” chapter of its report for 2010 (page 142 et seq.), the Centre for Human Rights of Moldova (which also acts as the Moldovan Ombudsman) found, inter alia, that:
“Failure to adhere to the statutory cell size (4 square metres per person) in the living blocks of the institution has become an unpleasant problem which now affects the prison system across the entire country. ...
The same situation was confirmed during a visit to Chişinău Prison no. 13 in on 9 September 2010. In some cells the living space was not proportionate to the number of detainees. During the visit, eight detainees were being held in cell no. 38, which measured 24 square metres. This situation has been seen repeatedly during visits by the Centre’s staff to the Chişinău Pre-trial Detention Centre. Similar findings were made during visits to Rusca Prison no. 7 on 19 May 2010, where six detainees were being held in a cell measuring 15.5 square metres and to Cricova Prison no. 4, where (in living block no. 7) over twenty detainees were being held in a cell measuring 65 square metres.
Overcrowding comes directly within the Ombudsman’s remit as part of the National Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture, which on many occasions has recognised overcrowding in the country’s prisons. ...
... [T]he Prisons Department informed the Ombudsman that meat and fish products are provided [to detainees] whenever possible. At the same time, the authority stated that, owing to the difficult financial situation, during 2010 the detainees in Rezina Prison no. 17 received only 75% and 80% of their normal quotas of meat and fish products respectively. In this connection, the Minister of Justice provided information to the Ombudsman about the expenditure on prisoners’ food in 2010. The cost amounted to MDL 24.05 million, whereas the budgetary need for the same year was, according to the Ministry of Finance’s draft budget, MDL 29.05 million. The daily cost of feeding a detainee in 2010 was MDL 10.24, whilst the daily budgetary need was MDL 12.35. This statistic was often cited by prison authorities to justify why they were unable to provide detainees with meat and fish.
...
As regards sanitary conditions, lighting and ventilation problems continue to exist in the majority of living blocks in Moldovan prisons, with the exception of Taraclia Prisons no. 1 and Rusca Prison no. 7.
The  inherited old gulag-type prisons in dilapidated buildings, corresponding to former Soviet standards. The prisons do not conform to current national and international standards; however, the budget constraints upon the State do not allow for their reconstruction or renovation.
In the prisons, with the exception of Taraclia Prison no. 1, detainees are held in large-capacity cells insufficiently equipped for their daily needs, namely areas for sleeping, for everyday living and for sanitary equipment. Detainees are held in extremely overcrowded, dark, damp and unventilated spaces full of cigarette smoke. In certain prisons the bunk beds essentially prevent daylight from reaching the living space.”
The relevant parts of the report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) on its visit to Moldova between 14 and 24 September 2007 (CPT/Inf (2008) 39) read as follows (unofficial translation):
 “46.  At the outset of the 2007 visit the Director of the Prisons Department of the Ministry of Justice provided the delegation with detailed information on measures already taken or planned with a view to reforming the Moldovan prison system and implementing the CPT’s recommendations. One particularly welcome outcome of these measures was the reduction of the country’s prisoner population. At the time of the 2007 visit the total number of prisoners stood at 8,033 (including 1,290 in pre-trial detention), compared to 10,591 in 2004. This positive trend can be attributed to recent legislative changes, including the entry into force in July 2005 of a new Execution of Sentences Code and amendments to both the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. As a result, there has been an increase in the number of conditional early releases, as well as a wider use of alternatives to imprisonment and a more selective application of pre-trial detention by the courts.
Furthermore, the implementation of the ‘Concept Paper for the Reform of the Prison System 2004-2013’ has been supported by an increase in the budgetary allocation (from MDL 75.8 million in 2004, to MDL 166.1 million in 2007), as well as by an increasing contribution of foreign aid. This has enabled, inter alia, improved quality of food provided to prisoners and improved health care, as well as the execution of refurbishment works at several custodial facilities (e.g. Taraclia Prison no. 1, Rusca Prison no. 7 and Rezina Prison no. 17).
Lastly, and above all, there has been a significant shift in mentality through improved staff recruitment and training procedures. The delegation was informed that the governors of many custody facilities had changed over the past year, following a competitive examination and probationary periods. Furthermore, new staff training programmes had been developed, placing particular emphasis on human rights issues (see also paragraph 100).
The CPT can only welcome the above-mentioned measures taken by the Moldovan authorities. Nevertheless, the information obtained by the Committee’s delegation during the 2007 visit shows that much remains to be done. In particular, overcrowding continues to be a problem; despite the fact that all the institutions visited were operating well within their capacities, there was on average only 2 square metres of living space per detainee, rather than the standard of 4 square metres required by Moldovan legislation.
The CPT is convinced that the only viable way to control overcrowding and achieve the standard of at least 4 square metres of living space per detainee is to implement policies designed to limit or adjust the number of persons receiving custodial sentences. In this connection, the Committee must stress the need for a strategy covering both admission to and release from prison to ensure that imprisonment really is the last resort. This implies, firstly, placing emphasis on non-custodial measures in the pre-trial period and, secondly, the adoption of measures which facilitate the social reintegration of persons who have been deprived of their liberty.
The CPT trusts that the Moldovan authorities will continue their efforts to combat prison overcrowding and in so doing, will be guided by Recommendation Rec(99)22 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe concerning prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, as well as Recommendation Rec(2003)22 on conditional release (parole).”