The case originated in an application (no. 52682/07) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by the Religious Community of Jehovah’s Witnesses (“the applicant community”) and a Norwegian national, Mr Oddvar Hansen (“the individual applicant”), on 16 November 2007.
The applicants were represented by Mr R. Cook, Ms I. Revazishvili and Mr R. Kohlhofer, lawyers practising in London, Gardabani and Vienna respectively. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been deprived of their right to a fair trial, and that the domestic authorities had unlawfully interfered with their right to freedom of religion.
On 11 July 2017 notice of the complaints concerning Articles 6, 9 and 14 of the Convention was given to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Norwegian Government were informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings in respect of the individual applicant’s complaints (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 of the Rules of Court), but they did not avail themselves of that right.
The applicant community is a local religious community of Jehovah’s Witnesses with its registered seat in Baku, and the individual applicant, Mr Oddvar Hansen, is a Norwegian national who was born in 1950 and lives in Fervick.
On 24 December 2006 approximately 200 Jehovah’s Witnesses met for worship in a religious assembly at their meeting hall, situated on the second floor of a private building.
The building was owned by the individual applicant, who had rented it out to the applicant community under a lease (without payment) for the purposes of holding religious meetings.
According to the applicants, a “raid” on one of the religious meetings took place on 24 December 2006, involving more than forty officials, including: officers from the Khatai District Police Department, from police station no. 34; a representative from the State Committee for Work with Religious Associations; officials from the Khatai district prosecutor’s office and the Ministry of National Security.
According to a record compiled by the investigator from the Khatai District Police Department, search and seizure procedures were carried out on the applicants’ premises in order to prevent an unauthorised religious meeting, and eighteen items – consisting of computers and computing equipment as well as religious literature – were seized in the presence of attesting witnesses.
On 7 February 2007 the applicants lodged a complaint (in court supervisory proceedings – məhkəmə nəzarəti qaydasında icraat) with the Khatai District Court. Relying on the relevant Articles of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”) and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, they requested that the court find that the search had been unlawful and order the return of the seized computer equipment, religious literature and other property.
According to affidavits (akt) dated 2 and 30 March 2007, the seized property was returned to the chairman of the applicant community.
On 7 May 2007 the Khatai District Court allowed the complaint in part and held that the search of the premises and the seizure of the private property had been unlawful, since the procedures had been carried out without a court order, which was contrary to the requirements of the CCrP. The court further held that all the computer equipment and literature registered in the report had already been returned to the applicant community.
On 10 May 2007 the Khatai district prosecutor lodged an appeal against the decision of 7 May 2007, requesting that the appellate court quash the part of the decision that was in the applicants’ favour. He submitted that the authorities had not broken into the building, as the doors had been open and the owner had permitted entry.
On 21 May 2007 the Baku Court of Appeal examined the case in the absence of the applicants, but in the presence of the prosecutor and a representative from the police. It stated that the applicants had been notified of the hearing, but had failed to appear or inform the court of the reasons for their absence. The court allowed the prosecutor’s appeal and stated that the police search and seizure had been lawful. It found that the measures had been implemented in accordance with Article 177.6 of the CCrP, which provided that a court order was not required when the owner of premises permitted entry. The decision was not amenable to further appeal.
While the transcript of the hearing states that a notification had been sent to the applicants but they did not attend the hearing, the applicants alleged that they had not received either the notification or a copy of the prosecutor’s appeal. According to the applicants, their lawyer, who happened to be at the Baku Court of Appeal in conversation with a police representative at the relevant time, did not learn until 22 May 2007 that the first-instance decision had been appealed against and subsequently quashed.
Chapter LII (Execution of the court supervision) of the CCrP lays down the procedure by which parties to criminal proceedings can challenge the acts or decisions of prosecuting authorities before a court in court supervisory proceedings. Article 449.1.3 provides that an accused (or a suspected) person or his counsel can challenge the acts or decisions of prosecuting authorities concerning operational-search activities. A judge examining the lawfulness of prosecuting authorities’ actions or decisions can quash them if he or she finds them to be unlawful (Article 451). The decision of a judge on the lawfulness of prosecuting authorities’ actions or decisions can be disputed before an appellate court in accordance with the procedure established in Articles 452-453 of the CCrP. A chamber of an appellate court, composed of three judges, examines this kind of appeal within three days of it being received, in a hearing held in camera (Articles 453.1 and 453.2). A person who has lodged a complaint has a right to participate in the relevant hearing, but if parties who have been notified of the time and place of the hearing fail to attend it, then this does not prevent the court from examining the case (Article 453.3). The decision of the appellate court shall be sent to the parties within three days of being delivered, and cannot be appealed against (Articles 453.8 and 453.10).