The case originated in an application (no. 26902/13) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Mr Boriss Klopcovs (“the applicant”), on 11 April 2013.
The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Līce.
On 18 December 2013 the Government were given notice of the complaint concerning the length of the proceedings and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
Written observations were received from the Government and a just satisfaction claim was received from the applicant.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in Riga.
In 2005 the applicant was detained in the Riga Central Prison pending trial. Throughout the months of June, July and August 2005 the Riga Central Prison administration controlled and stopped the applicant’s correspondence addressed to private persons and institutions.
On 14 and 25 September 2005 the applicant complained to the Prisons Administration about the actions of the Riga Central Prison administration, controlling and stopping his correspondence, and the reasons for these actions.
On 11 October and 24 October 2005 the Prisons Administration rejected the applicant’s complaints. On 4 October and 16 December 2005 the Ministry of Justice found the actions of the Riga Central Prison administration, and the answers given by the Prisons Administration, lawful.
On 22 September 2006 the applicant brought proceedings against the Ministry of Justice before the administrative courts. Subsequently the Prisons Administration joined the proceedings.
On 21 October 2008 the Administrative District Court found the actions of the Riga Central Prison administration unlawful. However, it rejected the applicant’s claim for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages of 5,406 Latvian lats (LVL) (approximately 7,692 euros (EUR)).
On 3 December 2009 the Administrative Regional Court quashed the first-instance court’s decision and remitted the case to the first-instance court.
On 27 April 2010 the first-instance court again found that the Riga Central Prison administration’s actions had been unlawful and rejected the applicant’s claim for damages. The applicant appealed against that judgment as regarded the claim for damages; however, the court did not accept his appeal as it was lodged after the expiry of the time-limit. Nevertheless, the opposing parties’ appeals were accepted and appellate proceedings were initiated.
On 15 February 2012 the Administrative Regional Court found that the Riga Central Prison administration’s actions had been unlawful in so far as the applicant had not been informed about the reasons for stopping his letters and also that one of the letters had been stopped unlawfully. The remainder of the applicant’s claims were dismissed.
On 26 October 2012, in a final decision, the Senate of the Supreme Court, upheld the judgment of the Administrative Regional Court and dismissed the cassation complaints of the Prisons Administration and the applicant who disagreed with the conclusions of the appellate court
According to the case materials, none of the ten hearings were postponed due to the applicant’s unjustified absence. Nevertheless, it appears that after the hearing of 22 February 2008 the applicant did not return 77 pages of case documents to the file. On 23 May 2008 the applicant explained to the Administrative District Court that he considered that the documents were given for his personal use and was not aware that they had to be returned. The Administrative District Court was able to reobtain them from another case-file in September 2008. Apparently at least one hearing was adjourned due to this. The applicant also initiated several ancillary proceedings challenging various procedural decisions adopted by the first-instance and appellate courts.