The case originated in an application (no. 18130/04) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Russian nationals, Mr Ivan Eduardovich Trufanov, Mr Georgiy Yuriyevich Sedov and Mr Sergey Vitaliyevich Posokhov, (“the applicants”), on 13 April 2004.
The applicants were represented by Mr A.V. Kiryanov and Mrs E.V. Kiriyanova, lawyers practising in Taganrog. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants claimed that the national courts’ refusal to award them compensation for allegedly unlawful prosecution violated the principle of the presumption of innocence under Article 6 § 2 of the Convention and their right to compensation for wrongful conviction under Article 3 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention.
On 16 September 2008 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1961, 1963 and 1966 respectively and live in the town of Taganrog.
On 2 July 2001 the Neklinovskiy District Court of the Rostov Region found the applicants guilty of various offences but declared that they need not serve their respective sentences because the case was time-barred. On 2 October 2001 the Rostov Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal.
On 31 January 2002 the Presidium of the Rostov Regional Court quashed by way of supervisory review the decisions of 2 July and 2 October 2001 and discontinued criminal proceedings against the applicants. It found that the courts had not been in a position to decide on the applicants’ guilt because the whole case had been time-barred.
The applicants sued the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation for, among other things, compensation in respect of nonpecuniary damage in connection with their prosecution.
In its judgment of 1 March 2005 the Taganrog Town Court of the Rostov Region rejected their claims. It reasoned as follows:
“... The court finds that, since the applicants’ guilt of the commission of the abovementioned crimes was established, the use of the measure of restraint was justified. This being so, the court has no reason to grant the applicants’ claims for compensation in respect of the non-pecuniary damage resulting from their unlawful detention and the obligation not to leave their usual place of residence. ...”
On 11 May 2005 the  upheld the judgment of 1 March 2005 on appeal. It stated that:
“ ... The first instance court, in reaching its decision refusing to grant the applicants’ claims for compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage, correctly assumed that the decision of the Presidium of the Rostov Regional Court dated 31 January 2002 cleared them of liability on non-exonerating grounds. In the court’s view, since the applicants’ guilt of the commission of the above-mentioned crimes was established, the application of the measure of restraint during the investigation was justified.
The court’s conclusion is a correct one, made following the examination and proper assessment of the legally relevant circumstances of the case. ...”