The case originated in an application (no. 36492/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Artur Bujniţa (“the applicant”) on 30 July 2002.
The applicant was represented before the Court by Mr Vitalie Iordachi from “Lawyers for Human Rights”, a non-governmental organisation based in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Vitalie Pârlog.
The applicant alleged that his right to a fair hearing was breached as a result of the quashing of his acquittal on a rape charge.
On 22 March 2005 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government under Rule 54 § 2 (b) of the Rules of Court. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits and on the claims for just satisfaction under Article 41 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Chişinău.
On 26 June 2001 the applicant was acquitted of rape by the Râşcani District Court. The District Court examined the parties’ statements, witnesses’ declarations and medical reports. It found, in particular, that the applicant had not had sexual intercourse with the victim without the latter’s consent, since on numerous occasions the victim could have refused intercourse with the applicant and could have alerted a police patrol which had stopped them on the way to the applicant’s apartment. The victim could also have alerted the applicant’s flatmates, who had been in the apartment during the alleged rape, as well as other persons. The District Court also found that the medical reports did not provide a clear answer to the question as to whether the applicant had had intercourse with the victim.
The prosecutor and the victim appealed. Their appeals merely stated that the verdict of the Râşcani District Court was unlawful and unreasoned.
On 14 August 2001 the  upheld their appeal, quashed the judgment of the Râşcani District Court and found the applicant guilty of rape. The  found that the victim’s statements, the witnesses’ declarations and the medical reports indicated that there had been forced intercourse with the victim. It found that the victim had been depressed and forcibly taken to the applicant’s apartment. The court sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment. However, the  applied an amnesty law of 10 August 2001 and relieved the applicant from the obligation to serve his sentence. The applicant lodged an appeal in cassation.
By a final judgment of 30 October 2001, relying on section 335/5 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP) in force at the time (see paragraph 13 below), the Court of Appeal upheld the applicant’s appeal in cassation and quashed the judgment of the . The Court of Appeal found that the Regional Court had not objectively assessed the evidence and had taken into consideration only the victim’s statements, which appeared to be contradictory and in conflict with other evidence and the circumstances of the case. It also concluded that the victim’s statements that she had been forcibly brought to the applicant’s apartment were contradicted by the witnesses’ declarations. The Court of Appeal concluded that the Râşcani District Court had objectively assessed the evidence and reached the conclusion that the applicant was innocent. It also stated that any doubts should be interpreted in favour of the accused. The Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the Râşcani District Court of 26 June 2001.
On 20 December 2001 the Deputy Prosecutor General lodged with the Supreme Court of Justice a request for annulment of the judgments of the Râşcani District Court and the Court of Appeal. He argued that the Râşcani District Court and the Court of Appeal had unlawfully assessed the evidence and asked the Supreme Court to uphold the judgment of the Chişinău Regional Court of 14 August 2001.
On 26 February 2002 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the Deputy Prosecutor General’s request for annulment, quashed the above-mentioned judgments and upheld the judgment of the Chişinău Regional Court of 14 August 2001. The Supreme Court gave the same reasons for finding the applicant guilty of committing the rape as the  had used in its judgment of 14 August 2001.
The following are relevant extracts from the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1961 repealed on 12 June 2003.
Section 335/5 Judgment of the cassation instance
When ruling on an appeal in cassation, the cassation instance shall provide one of the following judgments:
...
2)  it shall uphold the appeal in cassation and quash the appealed judgment and:
a)  maintain the judgment of the first-instance court, if the appeal had been wrongly upheld.
Section 369/1 Request for annulment
Section 369/2 Grounds for a request for annulment of a judgment
Section 369/3 Time-limits for lodging a request for annulment
Section 369/4 Lodging and withdrawal of a request for annulment of a judgment
Section 369/5 Examination and resolution of a request for annulment
The following are relevant extracts from the Code of Criminal Procedure of 12 June 2003.
Section 452 Request for annulment
Section 453 Grounds for a request for annulment of a judgment