The case originated in an application (no. 21998/14) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Slovak nationals, Ms Alena Lispuchová and Mr Peter Lispuch (“the applicants”), on 24 February 2014.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Uhaľ, a lawyer practising in Zvolen. The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the quashing of a final and binding judgment in their favour was contrary to their rights under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 10 May 2017 notice of that complaint was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants, who are former spouses, were born in 1965 and 1951 and live in Pezinok and Búca respectively.
On 17 March 2006 Ms Lispuchová brought an action against two individuals. The action was later amended so as ultimately to be directed by both of the applicants against three other individuals who were represented by a lawyer throughout the proceedings. The aim of the action was to obtain a declaratory ruling (určovacia žaloba) to the effect that an indeterminate contractual instrument (nepomenovaná zmluva) dated 12 April 2002 was void and did not constitute a directly enforceable title.
Under Article 80 (c) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Law no. 99/1963 Coll., as applicable at the relevant time - “the CCP”), the type of declaratory ruling sought could only be made if a claimant could show that he or she had a “pressing legal interest” in obtaining it.
The instrument in question had been concluded by Mr Lispuch and two of the defendants in the settlement of differences related to certain shareholders’ rights and it included a commitment by Mr Lispuch to pay a sum in the equivalent of more than three million euros.
In parallel to the applicants’ action, a separate set of proceedings was being conducted against Mr Lispuch on the basis of that instrument under the provisions of the Enforcement Code (Law no. 233/1995 Coll., as amended), seeking to enforce his commitment to pay.
The applicants’ action was granted at first instance on 7 May 2010 with regard to two of the defendants and dismissed with regard to the remaining one. One of the two unsuccessful defendants appealed, contesting the findings of fact and law by the first-instance court and arguing that its judgment lacked adequate reasoning. His appeal was dismissed on 9 December 2010. The courts’ reasoning may be summarised as follows.
The courts noted that in order to settle their differences in respect of the shareholders’ rights, the parties had engaged a third party to act as an arbiter and that this was followed by the instrument of 12 April 2002. However, the courts found that there had been no valid arbitration clause; that it had not been established that any arbitration proceedings had actually taken place; and that, accordingly, there could not have been any arbitral award or an enforceable settlement reached in arbitration proceedings. The instrument of 12 April 2002 was accordingly an ordinary private-law contractual instrument. On account of its vagueness it was void and could not be enforced. The applicants’ pressing legal interest in obtaining a declaratory ruling to that effect lay in the fact that they could use such a ruling as a defence in the enforcement proceedings.
As an ordinary appeal (odvolanie) was unavailable, the matter became resolved under a final and binding judgment on 24 February 2011. In consequence, the enforcement proceedings were discontinued.
Nevertheless, one of the losing defendants asked the Prosecutor General to exercise his discretionary power to challenge the judgments of 7 May and 9 December 2010 by way of an extraordinary appeal on points of law (mimoriadne dovolanie) to the Supreme Court. In his application, the defendant contested the lower courts’ findings of fact and law and argued that their judgments lacked adequate reasoning.
On 19 April 2012 the Prosecutor General agreed to the application and lodged an appeal. He noted that the contested instrument had been enforced in a separate set of proceedings and argued that any challenges to it had therefore to be made and examined exclusively within the framework of those proceedings. Moreover, in such circumstances, the applicants could not have had any pressing legal interest in obtaining the declaratory ruling made.
In her observations in reply, the applicant, Ms Lispuchová, argued that since the instrument of 12 April 2002 qualified neither as an arbitral award nor as a settlement reached in arbitration proceedings, it was an ordinary private-law instrument and as such challengeable as any other in the ordinary courts.
On 26 February 2013 the Supreme Court allowed the extraordinary appeal by quashing the relevant part of the contested judgments and remitting the matter to the first-instance court for re-examination. It observed that the enforcement of the instrument of 12 April 2002 was based on the premise that, in its legal effect, it amounted to an arbitral award. The validity of such awards was to be challenged by means of a special action under the Arbitration Act (Law no. 218/1996 Coll., as amended) and not, as in the applicants’ case, by a general action aimed at obtaining a declaratory ruling. In addition, the Supreme Court concurred with the Prosecutor General that any challenges to the enforceability of the instrument had to be made and examined within the framework of the enforcement proceedings and not as part of a general action for a declaratory ruling.
On 11 June 2013 the applicants challenged the Supreme Court’s decision by way of a complaint under Article 127 of the Constitution. They alleged, inter alia, that there had been a violation of their right to a fair hearing under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention on the grounds that the quashing of the final and binding judgment in their favour had been arbitrary and contrary to the principles of legal certainty and equality of arms. Among other arguments, they pointed out that the Supreme Court’s judgment had been delivered after the defendants had already had an opportunity to assert their rights before two levels of jurisdiction, but that after that judgment there was no further right of appeal available to the applicants.
On 10 September 2013 the Constitutional Court dismissed the complaint as manifestly ill-founded. Citing extensively from the Supreme Court’s reasoning, it found no arbitrariness that raised issues of constitutional importance. In particular, it observed that the defendants had had no standing to challenge the lower courts’ judgments by way of an ordinary appeal on points of law and held that extraordinary remedies available to parties against final and binding decisions, the availability of which was limited to defined instances and subject to strict time-limits, were not, as such, incompatible with the principle of legal certainty.
The Constitutional Court’s decision was served on the applicants on 21 November 2013 and was not amenable to appeal.
Following the quashing of their judgments by the Supreme Court, it became incumbent on the lower courts to determine the applicants’ action anew, which they accordingly did in line with the Supreme Court’s position by dismissing the action at first instance and then an appeal on 11 November 2014 and 17 December 2015 respectively.
A subsequent appeal on points of law lodged by the applicants was declared inadmissible on 22 March 2017 and the applicants challenged that decision by way of a complaint to the Constitutional Court. The Court has not been informed of its outcome.
Meanwhile, a creditor under the instrument of 12 April 2002 applied anew for its judicial enforcement against the applicant, Mr Lispuch, and courts at two levels of jurisdiction (on 22 August 2016 at first instance and on 27 July 2017 on appeal) found the application for enforcement inadmissible on the grounds that the claim had become statute-barred. The creditor then challenged those decisions by way of an appeal on points of law of the outcome of which the Court has not been informed.
The relevant domestic law and practice and European texts have been summarised in the Court’s judgment in, inter alia, the case of DRAFT - OVA a.s. v. Slovakia (no. 72493/10, §§ 39-56 and 58-61, 9 June 2015).