The case originated in two applications (nos. 31833/06 and 37538/06) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”), lodged on 28 July 2006 and 13 September 2006 respectively. The first applicant, Cıngıllı Holding A.Ş., is a company registered in Turkey and located in Istanbul. It was represented before the Court by Mr H. Özcan, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The second applicant, Ms Sema Cıngıllıoğlu, a Turkish national and one of the main shareholders of the applicant company, was born in 1951 and lives in Istanbul. She was represented before the Court by Mr G. Ayan, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Government were represented by their Agent.
On 30 August 2011 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicants were the main shareholders of Demirbank, established in 1953. In 1999 Demirbank was ranked the fifth largest private bank in Turkey, with 193 branches and 3,885 employees.
By a decision dated 6 December 2000 (no. 123), the Banking Regulation and Supervision Board (Bankalar Düzenleme ve Denetleme Kurulu – hereinafter referred to as “the Board”) decided to transfer the management and control of Demirbank to the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund (Tassarruf Mevduat Sigorta Fonu – hereinafter “the Fund”), pursuant to section 14 (3) of the Banking Activities Act (Law no. 4389). In its decision, the Board held that the assets of Demirbank were insufficient to cover its liabilities and that the continuation of its activities would threaten the security and stability of the financial system. Accordingly, Demirbank’s management and control, and the privileges of its shareholders except for dividends, were transferred to the Fund. The Fund also confiscated all properties belonging to Demirbank.
On 2 February 2001, the applicant company brought administrative proceedings against the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency (Bankalar Düzenleme ve Denetleme Kurumu – hereinafter referred to as “the Agency”) before the Ankara Administrative Court, seeking the annulment of the decision of 6 December 2000 regarding the transfer of Demirbank to the Fund.
The Ankara Administrative Court found that it lacked jurisdiction and transferred the case to the Supreme Administrative Court.
In its submissions before the Supreme Administrative Court, the applicant company claimed that its property rights had been violated. It also raised a plea of unconstitutionality under section 14 of the Banking Activities Act. The applicant company further stated that prior to November 2000, Demirbank had never encountered major financial problems. It was pointed out that pursuant to section 14 (2) of the Act, a bank with financial difficulties should first be given a warning to strengthen its financial structure and be allowed time to take specific measures. However, no such warning had been given in the instant case. Secondly, the Board had not claimed that Demirbank’s financial situation was so weak that it could not be strengthened even if specific measures were taken. Lastly, the applicant company stated that following the transfer of the bank to the Fund, a General Assembly composed of the Fund’s officials had exonerated the former managers of Demirbank, holding that they had not been at fault in the incident leading to the bank’s transfer.
After examining the file, on 3 June 2003 the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the case. It held that the takeover of the bank by the Fund had been in accordance with section 14 (3) of the Banking Activities Act. The applicant company lodged an appeal.
On 18 December 2003 the Joint Administrative Chambers of the Supreme Administrative Court decided to quash the decision of 3 June 2003. In its judgment, the court held that prior to ordering the transfer of Demirbank to the Fund, the Board should have carried out an objective evaluation of the bank’s financial situation. The court also concluded that the Board should first have ordered Demirbank to take specific measures in accordance with section 14 (2) of the Banking Activities Act before applying section 14 (3) of the Act.
On 29 April 2004 a request for rectification lodged by the Agency was refused.
The case was remitted to the Supreme Administrative Court, which delivered its decision on 5 November 2004, upholding the decision of the Joint Administrative Chambers of the Supreme Administrative Court. In its decision the Supreme Administrative Court held that:
“... Demirbank did not have any serious financial problems until the economic crisis in November 2000. The amount of the bank’s risky credit in Government Bonds for Domestic Borrowing aimed at securing Treasury debt was not too high compared to its total credit, its asset quality was high due to its five affiliate banks abroad, and furthermore, the major shareholders had not targeted the resources of the bank. Although Demirbank had been able to resolve its liquidity problem and it had fulfilled all obligations towards individual and corporate clients using its own assets, it was decided that it fell within the scope of section 14 of the Banking Activities Law. It is therefore understood that the administrative act pertaining to the taking over of Demirbank by the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund based on paragraphs (b) and (d) of section 14 of the Banking Activities Act, without investigating any further possible options or specific measures to enable the Bank to establish a balance of liquidity, was unlawful.
...
In the light of the foregoing, the Banking Regulation and Supervision Board’s decision of 6 December 2000 ordering the takeover of Demirbank by the Fund is unanimously annulled.”
A further appeal and a request for rectification lodged by the Agency were rejected on 14 April 2005 and 15 December 2005 respectively. The final decision was served on the applicant company’s representative on 13 March 2006.
In the meantime, while the proceedings against the Agency were still pending, on 20 September 2001 the Fund entered into an agreement with the HSBC bank, and sold Demirbank to the latter for 350,000,000 US Dollars.
On 20 September 2001 the second applicant brought administrative proceedings against the Fund in the Ankara Administrative Court, seeking the annulment of the agreement to sell Demirbank to HSBC.
Given that the transfer of Demirbank to the Fund had been found to be unlawful by the Joint Administrative Chambers of the Supreme Administrative Court, on 21 April 2004 the Ankara Administrative Court annulled the agreement entered into by the Fund and HSBC on 20 September 2001. In its decision the Ankara Administrative Court held that:
“... It can be seen that, given the shareholding structure of Demirbank before the transfer, 72,55 % was owned by Cıngıllı Holding A.Ş., that the claimant who owned shares in this company was a shareholder of the aforementioned bank, that all shares of Demirbank were taken over by the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund pursuant to section 14 of the Law no. 4389, that the claim requesting the annulment of the Banking Regulation and Supervision Board’s decision dated 6 December 2000 regarding this taking over was dismissed by a judgment on 3 June 2003 delivered by the Supreme Administrative Court, and that this judgment was subsequently quashed by the judgment of 18 December 2003 of the Joint Administrative Chambers of Supreme Administrative Court.
In its judgment, the Joint Chambers of the Supreme Administrative Court held that the taking over of Demirbank by the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund based on Section 14 paragraphs (b) to (d) of the Banking Activities Act was unlawful and it accordingly declared the act as null and void. It was decided that the decision regarding the taking over of the bank had been adopted without investigating the possible options to enable the bank to establish a balance of liquidity and taking the relevant precautions, given that it would have been possible for the bank to continue its banking activities since it did not have any serious financial problems until the financial crisis of November 2000, the amount of the bank’s risky credit in Government Bonds for Domestic Borrowing aimed at securing Treasury debt was not too high compared to its total credit, its asset quality was high compared to the five affiliate banks based abroad, the majority shareholders had not targeted the resources of the bank, the bank had been included within the scope of section 14 of Law no. 4389 to enable it to the resolve its liquidity problem and it had fulfilled all obligations towards individual and corporate clients using its own assets.
It is therefore understood that, pursuant to the annulment of the decision pertaining the taking over of Demirbank by the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund by the Joint Chambers of the Supreme Administrative Court, the subsequent sale of Demirbank to HSBC Bank has also become unlawful and the decision that is the subject of these proceedings is therefore unlawful. This act is therefore declared null and void.”
An appeal and a request for rectification lodged by the Fund were rejected on 3 June 2005 and 24 February 2006 respectively.
On 11 May 2006 the second applicant requested the Agency to comply with the Supreme Administrative Court’s judgments and to enforce them. Relying on the restitutio in integrum principle, she requested that Demirbank be returned to its previous owners.
On 10 July 2006 the Agency informed the second applicant that it would be impossible to enforce the judgments as, following its sale to HSBC, Demirbank had been struck off the commercial register.
Section 14 of the Banking Activities Act (Law no. 4389) reads:
“1.  Without prejudice to the Agency’s right to institute legal proceedings against liable persons, if the results of supervision reveal any transactions that are contrary to this Act or to decisions taken and legislation introduced under this Act or to the principles and customary practices of banking, and that could jeopardise the secure operation of the bank in question, the Agency shall warn the bank to correct the transactions in question within a period of time specified by it and to take such measures as are necessary to ensure that similar transactions are not allowed in the future. The bank must, within the periods specified, take the measures required by the Agency and notify it of the consequences of the actions it has taken. In the event that the required measures are not taken or that transactions jeopardising the secure operation of the bank are repeated, the Board shall be authorised, depending on the nature and significance of the transactions in question, to take and implement all such measures as are necessary for the secure operation of the bank and for the protection of depositors, including but not limited to the following:
(a)  to appoint new members to the Board by dismissing or replacing all or some of the members of the Board of Directors or by increasing the number of seats thereon;
(b)  to restrict the operations of the bank in such a manner as to cover its whole organisation or only those of its relevant branches or its relations with correspondent banks,
(c)  to increase the deposit insurance premium payable by the bank or to require provisions at the rate of up to one hundred percent for deposits it accepts.
The remuneration of any member of the Board of Directors to be appointed to the bank pursuant to the present section shall be determined by the Board and paid from the Fund.
(a)  If the Agency, at its sole discretion, determines that the assets of a bank are insufficient, or are about to become insufficient, to cover its liabilities in terms of maturity or if the bank does not adhere to regulations governing liquidities, the Agency may instruct the bank to put in place a plan of action approved by the Agency to remedy the failure and may also, for the purpose of strengthening the liquidities, grant an appropriate period of time to the bank and require it:
and to take such other measures as may be deemed appropriate.
(b)  If the Agency, at its sole discretion, determines that a bank is about to fail or that it is failing to meet the minimum level of capital required to be maintained by the bank pursuant to the applicable regulations, the Agency may instruct the bank to put in place a capital restoration plan approved by the Agency to resolve the situation, and require the bank to increase its capital or to obtain funds that qualify as capital. The Agency may also, for the purpose of strengthening the capital, require it:
and to take such other measures as may be deemed to be appropriate.
If the Agency at its sole discretion determines that
(a)  a bank has not taken the measures in part or in whole stated in subsection (2) above, the financial structure of the bank cannot be strengthened even though the measures have been taken in part or in whole, or the financial structure has become so weak that it could not be strengthened even if those measures were taken, or
(b)  a bank cannot honour its liabilities as they fall due, or
(c)  the value of the liabilities of the bank exceeds the value of the assets, in accordance with the valuation standards determined by the Board for the implementation of this section, or
(d)  the continuation of the bank’s activities would threaten the rights of depositors and the security and stability of the financial system,
the Board may transfer the management and control and the privileges of shareholders, except dividends, of the bank to the Fund or revoke the licence of the bank to perform banking operations and/or to accept deposits, with an affirmative vote of at least five Board members.”
Article 138 § 4 of the Turkish Constitution provides:
“The bodies of executive and legislative power and the authorities must comply with court decisions; they cannot in any circumstances modify court decisions or defer the enforcement thereof.”
Article 28 § 2 of the Code of Administrative Procedure reads:
“Decisions and judgments in administrative law actions concerning a specific amount shall be enforced ... in accordance with the provisions of the ordinary law.”
Under section 82(1) of the Enforcement and Bankruptcy Act (Law no. 2004), State property cannot be seized.