The case originated in an application (no. 27576/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Valentinas Aleksa
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Gubavičius, a lawyer practising in . The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
On 18 March 2008 the Court decided to give notice to the Government of the applicant’s complaints under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention. It also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in .
On 17 November 1992 the Kaunas City Board restored the applicant’s property rights to part of a building in . In particular, it restored the applicant’s property rights to 1/12 of the uninhabited part of the building (hereafter “the disputed premises”). The property restitution decision specified that the property rights to the disputed premises would be restored in accordance with the procedure and terms fixed by the Government.
On 15 October 1993 the  deputy mayor and the applicant signed a statement of transfer acceptance (priėmimo-perdavimo aktas), by which the disputed premises were transferred to the applicant.
By a decision of 21 March 1994, the  mayor declared the statement of transfer acceptance unlawful and consequently null and void. By a decision of 31 May 1994, the Kaunas City Board supplemented the decision of 17 November 1992 with a clause which specified the form in which the property rights were to be restored It was decided to pay compensation for the disputed premises, at that time occupied by a pharmacy, after the Government had determined the means and the procedure by which compensation was to be paid.
By a decision of 14 June 1994, the Kaunas City Board transferred the disputed premises from the balance sheet of one State-run company to the balance sheet of the State-run company of  area pharmacies. Subsequently, by a decision of the Kaunas City Board of 14 June 1996 the disputed premises were transferred into the private ownership of the closed-stock company Šlamučio vaistinė.
On 3 June 1994 the applicant brought a civil claim (“the first civil case”), challenging the local authorities’ decisions of 21 March 1994 and 31 May 1994. It was dismissed as unsubstantiated by the Kaunas City District Court on 4 July 1994.
On 22 August 1994 the Supreme Court quashed the lower court’s decision and remitted the case for a fresh examination. The Supreme Court noted that the lower court had not examined all the relevant circumstances. In particular, it had not taken account of the fact that, at the time of the adoption of the impugned decisions, the applicant had already been recognised as the owner of the entire building. The Supreme Court observed that only a court and not a local authority could have annulled the applicant’s ownership rights.
On 7 October 1994 the Kaunas City District Court decided to suspend the civil proceedings further to a request by the applicant, on account of the illness of one of his relatives, V.A., who was also a plaintiff in that case. The court ordered the applicant to inform it when his relative’s state of health would allow her to participate in the proceedings.
On 3 October 1994 the State-run company of Kaunas area pharmacies brought a civil claim, seeking the partial annulment of the Kaunas City Board’s decision of 17 November 1992 (hereinafter “the second civil case”).
On 8 January 1996 the applicant and other plaintiffs brought a new civil claim (hereinafter “the third civil claim”), challenging the Kaunas City Board’s decision of 14 June 1994.
On 1 July 1999 the Kaunas City District Court of its own motion resumed the civil proceedings in the first civil case.
On 2 September 1999 the Kaunas City District Court decided to join all three cases and examine them together.
On 9 September 1999 the Kaunas City District Court granted the applicant’s claim. It declared the local authority’s decisions of 21 March 1994 and 31 May 1994 null and void, restoring the applicant’s title to the premises occupied by the pharmacy.
On 28 February 2000 the  upheld that decision.
On 12 September 2000 the Supreme Court quashed the lower courts’ decisions and returned the case to the Kaunas City District Court for an examination de novo. The Supreme Court considered that the lower courts had again failed to assess all the relevant circumstances – even those to which attention had been drawn in its decision of 22 August 1994 – and that they had erred in law.
On 18 February 2004 the Kaunas City District Court dismissed the applicant’s claim. The court observed that the law had not provided for restitution in kind of immovable property if it had been occupied by public-interest institutions, such as a pharmacy. The court further interpreted the decision of 17 November 1992, noting that it could not have been read as guaranteeing restitution in kind of the entire building, but only of the unoccupied part. The court annulled the ambiguous phrasing of the decision, leaving it to the local authorities to determine how to remedy the situation, either by pecuniary compensation or by the transfer of an equivalent property.
On 23 September 2004 the  upheld the decision of the first-instance court.
On 26 January 2005 the Supreme Court dismissed a cassation appeal by the applicant.
On 25 May 2005 certain parties to the case, including the applicant, submitted a request to the Kaunas City District Court to interpret its decision of 18 February 2004. Their request was dismissed
On 3 April 2006 the applicant instituted civil proceedings challenging the initial proportions of his and other interested parties’ property rights, as fixed by the decision of 17 November 1992. In a final decision of 5 September 2007, the Kaunas City District Court noted that, although the applicant had been duly informed about the hearing, he or his lawyer had failed to appear, thus failing to contribute to the speedy resolution of the proceedings and showing no interest in their outcome. The applicant’s claim was left unexamined.
On 11 December 2008 the head of the  issued an order to pay the applicant pecuniary compensation for the disputed premises. The compensation was to be paid in three instalments from 2008 to 2010 and for that purpose, in a letter of 15 December 2008, the  requested the applicant to indicate the details of his bank account. The applicant refused to accept the municipality’s letter.
By the above-mentioned decision of 17 November 1992, the Kaunas City Board restored the applicant’s property rights to 1/12 of the plot of land adjacent to the disputed premises and measuring 2,097 sq. m. Pursuant to that decision, 1/12 of a plot of land measuring 1,288 sq. m was to be returned to him in kind and for the remaining part, equivalent to 1/12 of 809 sq. m, compensation was to be paid.
On 12 November 1996 the  adopted a detailed territorial-planning decision which specified that the actual existing size of the plot of land which was to be returned in kind was 950 sq. m and not 1,288 sq. m.
On 8 April 2002 the applicant submitted a claim to the , requesting it to oblige the Registers Centre to record the applicant as the owner of 1/12 of the plot of land of
On 4 March 2005 the  dismissed the applicant’s claims. The court noted that the decision of 17 November 1992 did not specify the exact location of the particular plot of land to which the applicant’s and other interested persons’ property rights were restored, since at the time of the decision no territorial planning had been carried out and the plot of land had not been measured or marked in any particular place. It followed from the nature of the decision that it merely established that property rights to a plot of land had been restored, without specifying the particular location of that plot. Consequently, the decision of 17 November 1992 did not give the applicant the right to register his title to that plot in the State Land Registry.
The court also noted that the decision of 12 November 1996 had established that the plot of land of 1,288 sq. m did not exist, its real size being 950 sq. m. No evidence had been submitted to the court which could question that finding. Since the decision of 17 November 1992 was valid, the issue of compensation for the difference in size of the plots
On 21 June 2005 the  upheld the lower court’s decision. The court emphasised that, in accordance with domestic law, a plot of land in respect of which property rights were restored had to be delimited in a territorial plan. The decision of 17 November 1992 on the restoration of the applicant’s property rights to the plot of land at issue lacked any characterisation allowing it to be specifically identified (cartographically or by any other form of delimitation) as an item of immovable property. Moreover, data of that kind had not even existed at the time of the ’s decision. It followed that the Kaunas City Board had not established the applicant’s entitlement to a particular plot of land, but only his right to obtain restitution in kind of 1/12 of a plot of land measuring 1,288 sq. m.
On 22 January 2006 a cadastral survey was carried out, which fixed the dimensions of the plot of land adjacent to the disputed premises at 1,038 sq. m. The applicant took part in the process and accepted the results of the survey as regards the area of the land in question. On 9 May 2007, on the basis of the cadastral survey, the Kaunas County Governor adopted a decision on the basis of which the plot of land adjacent to the disputed premises was registered in the State Land Registry. On 2 April 2008 the Kaunas County Governor issued an order establishing the parts of the plot of land to be assigned to the applicant.
On 4 June 2008 the applicant requested the  to discontinue the case regarding his claim of 8 April 2002.
By a decision of 13 October 2008, the head of the Kaunas Regional Administration restored the applicant’s property rights to a plot of land of 44 sq. m, adjacent to the disputed premises. The decision specified that the applicant was entitled to compensation for the remaining 131 sq. m.
In a letter of 11 December 2008 the local authorities requested the applicant to state his preference as regards compensation for the remaining 131 sq. m.
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning the domestic remedies with regard to length of proceedings complaints have been summarised in the judgment Četvertakas and Others v. Lithuania
The Law on the procedure and conditions for restoration of ownership rights to existing real property (Įstatymas dėl piliečių nuosavybės teisių į išlikusį nekilnojamąjį turtą atstatymo tvarkos ir sąlygų), enacted on 18 June 1991 and amended on numerous occasions, provided for two forms of restitution – the return of the property in kind or compensation for it, if its physical return was not possible. Article 12 of the Law provided that the State was to buy out the land which was situated within the limits of a town and on which an infrastructure necessary for public needs had been built. Pursuant to Article 14 of the Law, if a house had been converted into non-residential premises which had been given to a medical institution or used for medical purposes, those premises were to be bought out by the State. The local authorities were competent to decide on the method of compensation.
On 27 May 1994 the  examined the issue of the compatibility of the Constitution with the domestic laws on the restoration of property rights. In its decision the  held, inter alia, that possessions which had been nationalised by the Soviet authorities since 1940 should be treated as “property under the de facto control of the State”. The  stated:
“The rights of a former owner to particular property have not been restored until the property is returned or appropriate compensation is afforded. The law does not itself provide any rights while it is not applied to a concrete person in respect of a specific property. In such a situation the legal effect of a decision by a competent authority to return the property or to provide compensation is such that only from that moment does the former owner obtain property rights to a specific property.”
The  also held that fair compensation for property which could not be returned in kind was compatible with the principle of the protection of property.
On 20 June 1995 the Constitutional Court affirmed that the choice by Parliament of the partial reparation principle was influenced by the difficult political and social conditions, in that “new generations had grown, new proprietary and other socio-economic relations had been formed during the 50 years of occupation, which could not be ignored in deciding the question of restitution of property”.
The Law on the restoration of citizens’ ownership rights to existing real property (Piliečių nuosavybės teisių į išlikusį nekilnojamąjį turtą atkūrimo įstatymas), which was enacted on 1 July 1997 and which repealed the Law on the procedure and conditions for the restoration of ownership rights to existing real property, at the material time read as follows:
Article 8 Conditions and procedures for restoration of ownership rights to residential houses, portions thereof and flats
“1. Ownership rights to residential houses, portions thereof and flats shall be restored to persons specified in Article 2 of this Law by returning them in kind, except for residential houses, portions thereof and flats which are subject to a State buyout pursuant to Article 15 of this Law...”
Article 15 Residential houses, portions thereof and flats bought out by the State
“Residential houses, portions thereof and flats shall be bought out by the State from the citizens specified in Article 2 of this Law, who shall be afforded compensation in accordance with Article 16 of this Law, provided that such residential houses, portions thereof or flats:
(1) have been converted into premises unfit for human occupancy and used for educational, health care protection, cultural or scientific purposes, or by communal care residences. The list of such premises shall be approved by the Government...”
Article 16 Compensation to citizens for real property bought out by the State
“1. The State shall compensate citizens for existing real property which is bought out by the State, as well as for real property which existed prior to 1 August 1991, but subsequently ceased to exist as a result of decisions adopted by the State or local authorities.
When the State compensates citizens for real property which, in accordance with this Law, is not given back in kind, the principle of equal value shall be applied to both the property that is not returned and other property which is transferred instead of it as compensation for the property bought out by the State. ...
Compensation for buildings used for economic and commercial purposes, residential houses, portions thereof and flats which are not returned pursuant to this Law shall be established in accordance with the methods approved by the Government. ...”
Article 2 of the Land Act (Žemės įstatymas), enacted
The Land Reform Act (Žemės reformos įstatymas), enacted on 25 July 1991, provided:
Article 6: Privatisation of land
“2. In  the implementation  of land  reform,  land  shall  be acquired either by  restoring  the  right  to  ownership,  or  by purchasing the land. ...”
Article 22: Delimitation of plots of land and distribution of documentation on land ownership
“On the basis of the  land-use plans produced in connection with the land reform, the State  Institute of Land-Use Management  shall mark  the boundaries of plots of land and shall prepare documentation attesting to land ownership or land-usage rights.”
Article 3 of the Territorial Planning Act, enacted on 12 December 1995, provides that one of the objectives of territorial planning is to reconcile the interests of natural and legal entities with the interests of the public, municipalities and the State regarding the conditions for the use of a particular territory and plots of land. Pursuant to Article 18 of the Act, detailed plans are drawn up which impose restrictions on possible activities on the plot of land in question. The requirements relating to any construction, territorial development and the purpose of land use are determined, and land and other real property may be expropriated for public needs. These detailed plans may entitle natural and legal persons to develop activities on the plot of land in question.
Articles 2 and 3 of the Immovable Property Cadastre Act, which was enacted on 27 June 2000 and is applicable when denoting items of immovable property, provide that an item of immovable property must be registered in the form of a written text, figures, graphical elements (dots and lines) as well as information expressed by cartographical methods, defining the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the immovable property.
On 15 November 1991 the Government of the  adopted Resolution No. 470 on the implementation of the Law on the procedure and conditions for restoration of ownership rights to existing real property. Article 9 of the Resolution provided that property rights to land were to be formally established in accordance with the appropriate territorial plan (Nuosavybės teisė  į žemę įforminama pagal atitinkamos teritorijos žemėtvarkos projektą).
The Code of Civil Procedure, in force since 1 January 2003, provides that a judge may withdraw from a hearing on his or her own initiative, or the parties to the procedure may request the judge’s removal, when there are circumstances raising doubts as to that person’s impartiality (Article 68). Article 366 § 1 (8) of the Code provides that civil proceedings may be reopened if an unlawfully constituted court heard the case.