The case originated in an application (no. 1377/04) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Andrey Fedorovich Pakshayev (“the applicant”), on 9 December 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Postnikov, a lawyer practising in Tyumen. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been denied legal assistance at the initial stage of the criminal proceedings against him.
On 22 October 2007 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in the Tyumen region.
On 2 May 1997 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of murder. He was given a written note explaining that he could not be obliged to give evidence against himself, his spouse or close relative and that he was entitled to legal assistance from the moment that the arrest record or the detention order was read out to him. He signed the explanatory note and asked for legal assistance.
At 6.30 p.m. on the same day the applicant was questioned. He was not assisted by a lawyer. According to the applicant, he was threatened that if he did not confess the investigator would order his cellmates to rape him. The applicant confessed to the murder.
At 8.20 p.m. on the same day the arrest record was read out to him.
On 3 May 1997 the applicant was brought to the scene of the crime where he repeated his confession and gave details of the murder. He was not assisted by a lawyer.
On 8 May 1997 the applicant was provided with a lawyer.
At the trial the applicant retracted his confession. He admitted that he had been at the victim’s house on the evening of the murder. However, he denied killing her.
On 15 January 2001 the Kondinskiy District Court of the Khanty-Mansiyskiy Region convicted the applicant of murder and sentenced him to ten years’ imprisonment. It relied on the applicant’s confession statement of 2 May 1997, testimony by several police officers that the confession had been made by the applicant without any pressure and statements by witness Kh. that he had seen the applicant in the victim’s house several hours before the murder. The court also relied on the autopsy of the victim describing the injuries and establishing the cause of death.
On 18 October 2006 the Khanty-Mansiskiy Regional Court upheld the conviction on appeal. It found, in particular, that the District Court’s reliance on the applicant’s confession statement had been lawful. The applicant had been questioned and had confessed before the arrest record had been read out to him. He had not therefore been entitled to legal assistance during that questioning.
The Russian Constitution provides that an arrested or detained person or a person accused of a criminal offence has a right to legal assistance from the moment of his or her arrest, placement in custody or when charges are brought (Article 48 § 2).
The RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure of 27 October 1960 (in force up to 1 July 2002, hereafter “the old CCrP”) provided that a suspect or an accused was entitled to legal assistance from the moment that charges were brought or, if a suspect was arrested or detained before the bringing of charges, from the moment that the arrest record or the detention order was read out to him (Article 47 § 1). The investigator, the prosecutor or the court had to provide the suspect or the accused with legal assistance upon his request (Article 48).
In a ruling of 27 June 2000 the Constitutional Court declared Article 47 § 1 of the old CCrP unconstitutional. It found that by providing for the right to legal assistance from the moment that the arrest record or the detention order was read out to the suspect, rather than from the moment of arrest as guaranteed by Article 48 of the Constitution, Article 47 § 1 of the old CCrP made the exercise of the right to legal assistance dependent on the discretion of the prosecuting authorities.
Article 413 of the 2001 Code of Criminal Procedure (hereafter “the CCrP”) provides that criminal proceedings may be reopened if the European Court of Human Rights has found a violation of the Convention.