The case was referred to the Court by the Government of the Republic of Cyprus (“the Government”) on 7 May 1997, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 28054/95) against Cyprus lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under Article 25 by a Cypriot national, Mr Michael Mavronichis, on 10 July 1995.
The Government’s application referred to Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby Cyprus recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46). The object of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.

2.  In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 35 § 3 (d) of Rules of Court B, the applicant designated Mr C. Clerides as the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 31).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr A.N. Loizou, the elected judge of Cypriot nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)). On 3 July 1997, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr F. Matscher, Mr L.-E. Pettiti, Mr R. Macdonald, Mr A. Spielmann, Mr N. Valticos, Mr J. Casadevall and Mr P. van Dijk (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 5). Subsequently Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court, replaced Mr Ryssdal, and Mrs E. Palm replaced Mr Macdonald, both of whom were unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 21 § 6, second sub-paragraph).
As President of the Chamber at the time (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, Mr A. Markides, the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission, Mr I. Cabral Barreto, on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 39 § 1 and 40). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the applicant’s memorial on 5 December 1997 and the Government’s memorial on 12 December 1997, the President having decided on 1 December 1997 to accede to the Government’s request for an extension of the time-limit for the submission of their memorial.
On 1 December 1997 the then President decided to grant legal aid to the applicant (Rule 4 of the Addendum to the Rules of Court).
Having regard to the opinions expressed by the applicant, the Government and the Delegate of the Commission and having satisfied itself that the condition for derogation from its usual procedure had been met (Rules 27 and 40), the Chamber decided to dispense with a hearing in the case and Mr Ryssdal gave the applicant’s representative and the Government leave to file observations on the content of the each other’s memorials.
The Agent of the Government and the representative of the applicant filed with the registry, on 5 and 7 January 1998 respectively, supplementary observations on the latter’s claim for just satisfaction. By letter dated 21 January 1998 the Delegate of the Commission informed the Registrar that he did not consider it necessary to submit comments on the parties’ memorials and supplementary observations.
The applicant, an accountant by profession, was born in 1949 and lives in Nicosia.
The applicant, who was self-employed at the time, applied for the post of Head of Accounts with the Industrial Training Authority, a public body created by law. There was only one other candidate, a certain Mr I.
On 2 November 1981 the Industrial Training Authority appointed Mr I. although the applicant had better qualifications. The Authority had taken the view that the applicant was in fact over-qualified for the post in question and that the post would not have offered him sufficient job satisfaction. The applicant filed a recourse action before the Supreme Court against the decision to appoint Mr I.
Mr I. resigned in October 1982 and the post of Head of Accounts was abolished in November 1983.
On 6 June 1984 the Supreme Court, ruling on a preliminary objection by the Industrial Training Authority, found that although the post had been abolished, the applicant’s recourse had not become devoid of interest. The court took the view that, if it were to find that the applicant had been wrongfully denied the post, he could be considered to have suffered as a result a detriment for the purposes of Article 146 § 6 of the Constitution (see paragraph 21 below). On 22 February 1986 the Supreme Court declared the decision of the Industrial Training Authority null and void on the ground that the latter had disregarded without justification the applicant’s higher qualifications.
On 13 April 1987 the applicant filed before the District Court of Nicosia a civil action against the Industrial Training Authority claiming damages under Article 146 § 6 of the Constitution (see paragraph 21 below). The Industrial Training Authority filed its statement of defence on 8 October 1987.

14.  On 18 April 1988 the action was fixed by the District Court for mention on 16 May 1988. On that date both parties requested the court to fix a date for hearing the case and it was listed for 8 November 1988. On 8 November 1988 the court, of its own motion, adjourned the hearing until 20 April 1989 when, again of its own motion, it adjourned the hearing until 27 October 1989. On 26 October 1989 the defendant applied for an adjournment. The applicant did not object and the hearing was adjourned until 7 February 1990.
On 7 February 1990 the District Court began the examination of the case. However, as the examination was not concluded on that date, the court adjourned the proceedings until 7 March 1990, on which date the applicant’s advocate requested an adjournment. As the defendant did not object the court scheduled the hearing for 5 April 1990. The examination of the case recommenced on that date. However, since the examination was not concluded the court adjourned the case until 10 May 1990, when it again adjourned it of its own motion until 5 June 1990. On 5 June 1990 the hearing of the case was completed and the court reserved its judgment.
On 30 November 1990 the District Court delivered a judgment in which it awarded the applicant the sum of 2,128 Cypriot pounds (CYP).
On 8 January 1991 the applicant appealed to the Supreme Court against the amount awarded. The Industrial Training Authority filed a cross-appeal claiming that the action should have been dismissed.
On 12 August 1994 the applicant complained in writing to the registrar of the Supreme Court about the delays in the proceedings.
On 15 March 1995 a hearing was held in the case. The parties agreed that the cross-appeal should be heard first since, if it were allowed, this would dispose of all the issues pending before the court.
On 20 June 1995 the Supreme Court considered that its decision of 22 February 1986 declaring the appointment of Mr I. null and void (see paragraph 12 above) had not created an obligation for the Industrial Training Authority to appoint the applicant and, as a result, the applicant was not an aggrieved person for the purposes of Article 146 § 6 of the Constitution (see paragraph 21 below). The subsequent abolition of the post could not give rise to a right to compensation. The Industrial Training Authority was in principle under an obligation to review the question of who should be appointed to the post in the light of the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court. However, in deciding whether it should do so, the Authority was entitled to take into account the subsequent abolition of the post, which was lawful.

In the light of the above, the Supreme Court allowed the cross-appeal and dismissed the applicant’s action.
The Constitution of Cyprus provides as follows:
Article 146
“1.  The Supreme Constitutional Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate finally on a recourse made to it on a complaint that a decision, an act or omission of any organ, authority or person, exercising any executive or administrative authority is contrary to any of the provisions of this Constitution or of any law or is made in excess or in abuse of powers vested in such organ or authority or person.
…
Upon such recourse the Court may, by its decision –
(a)  confirm, either in whole or in part, such decision or act or omission; or
(b)  declare, either in whole or in part, such decision or act to be null and void and of no effect whatsoever; or
(c)  declare that such omission, either in whole or in part, ought not to have been made and that whatever has been omitted should have been performed.
…
Any person aggrieved by any decision or act declared to be void under paragraph 4 of this Article or by any omission declared thereunder that it ought not to have been made shall be entitled, if his claim is not met to his satisfaction by the organ, authority or person concerned, to institute legal proceedings in a court for the recovery of damages or for being granted other remedy and to recover just and equitable damages to be assessed by the court or to be granted such other just and equitable remedy as such court is empowered to grant.”
Article 172
“The Republic shall be liable for any wrongful act or omission causing damage committed in the exercise or purported exercise of the duties of officers or authorities of the Republic.
A law shall regulate such liability.”

22.  In its judgment in the case of Attorney-General of the Republic v. Markoullides and Another ((1966) 1 Cyprus Law Reports 243), the Supreme Constitutional Court confirmed its earlier case-law that a person aggrieved by an administrative act must first secure its annulment before being entitled to sue for damages under the provisions of Article 146 § 6 of the Constitution. Furthermore, a plaintiff aggrieved by an act declared void under the provisions of Article 146 § 4 must institute his compensation proceedings in accordance with Article 146 § 6 and not pursuant to the provisions of Article 172 of the Constitution.
In the same judgment the Supreme Constitutional Court held that the amount of compensation to be awarded to a public employee who was wrongly dismissed was to be assessed not on the basis of the principles applicable in the law of master and servant but on the basis of what is “just and equitable” in the circumstances having regard to the culpability of the administration and the claimant. The court stated:
“Damages in a case such as the present one have to be ‘just and equitable damages’, as laid down in paragraph 6 of Article 146, and in interpreting such expression, we find great assistance in the course adopted by the French Council of State in the case of Deberles (7 April 1933). It was held there, in a case of similar nature to the present one, that in assessing damages in relation to a decision which has been declared to be void the respective importance of the culpability of the Administration and of the claimant must be taken into account.”
In his application to the Commission on 10 July 1995 (no. 28054/95) Mr Mavronichis, relying on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, complained that his claim for compensation had not been heard within a reasonable time. He also invoked Article 13 in support of his complaint that he was not awarded compensation despite the fact that he had obtained a judgment that his rights had been violated through not being appointed to a public-sector post which was subsequently abolished.
The Commission (First Chamber) declared the application admissible on 26 June 1996 in respect of the complaint under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and dismissed the remainder of the application. In its report of 15 January 1997 (Article 31), it expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been a violation of Article 6 § 1. The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
The applicant in his memorial requested the Court to find that the facts of the case disclosed a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and to award him just satisfaction under Article 50.
The Government for their part requested the Court in their memorial to find that Article 6 § 1 was not applicable in the case at issue. In the alternative, they submitted that that provision had not been violated.