The case originated in six applications (see Annex) against the Italian Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by six Italian nationals (“the applicants”) in 2008 (see Annex for details).
The applicants were represented by Ms Elisabetta Fatuzzo, a lawyer practising in Bergamo, Italy. The Italian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Spatafora, and their Co-Agent, Ms Paola Accardo.
The applicants alleged that legislative intervention, namely the enactment of Law no. 296/2006, whilst proceedings were pending, had denied them their right to a fair trial under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 29 August 2012 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The circumstances of the case are analogous to those described in Maggio and Others v. Italy (nos. 46286/09, 52851/08, 53727/08, 54486/08 and 56001/08, 31 May 2011).
In 1995, by means of the Dini reform, Italy changed its pension system from a retributive one, which applied the remuneration-based (“retributivo”) method of calculation, to a contributory one, where the amount received in pension was dependent on the contributions paid.
Mr Cataldo, who had transferred to Italy the contributions he had paid in Switzerland, requested the INPS to establish his pension in accordance with the 1962 Italo-Swiss Convention on Social Security (see Relevant Domestic Law and Practice below) on the basis of the contributions paid in Switzerland for work he had performed there between 1956 and 1994. As a basis for the calculation of his pension (in respect of the average remuneration of the last ten years), the INPS employed a theoretical remuneration (“retribuzione teorica”) instead of the real remuneration (“retribuzione effettiva”). The former resulted in a readjustment on the basis of the existing ratio between the contributions applied in Switzerland (8%) and in Italy (32.7%), which meant that the calculation had as its basis a pseudo-salary which amounted to approximately a quarter of the salary actually received by the applicant and therefore led to a reduction in the pension itself.
Consequently, in 2006 Mr Cataldo instituted judicial proceedings, contending that this was contrary to the spirit of the Italo-Swiss Convention.
Various individuals in the same position had done the same and had been successful, the domestic courts having determined that persons having worked in Switzerland and who had subsequently transferred their contributions to Italy should benefit from the remuneration-based pension calculations, on the basis of the wages earned in Switzerland, irrespective of the fact that the transferred contributions had been paid at a much lower Swiss rate.
Pending the proceedings, Law no. 296/2006 (see Relevant Domestic Law and Practice below) entered into force on 1 January 2007.
By a judgment of the Lecco Tribunal (Labour and Welfare Section) of 27 February 2008, filed in the relevant registry on 6 May 2008, the court rejected Mr Cataldo’s claim in view of the entry into force of Law no. 296/2006.
Mr Cataldo did not appeal, deeming it to be futile given that the impugned law had been considered legitimate by the Constitutional Court in its judgment of 23 May 2008, no. 172 (see Relevant Domestic Law and Practice below), which other courts were then bound to uphold.
Mr Maggioni, who had transferred to Italy the contributions he had paid in Switzerland, requested the INPS to establish his pension in accordance with the 1962 Italo-Swiss Convention on Social Security on the basis of the contributions paid in Switzerland for work he had performed there between 1965 and 2000. As a basis for the calculation of his pension (in respect of the average remuneration of the last ten years), the INPS employed a theoretical remuneration (“retribuzione teorica”) instead of the real remuneration (“retribuzione effettiva”). The former resulted in a readjustment on the basis of the existing ratio between the contributions applied in Switzerland (8%) and in Italy (32.7%), which meant that the calculation had as its basis a pseudo-salary which amounted to approximately a quarter of the salary actually received by the applicant and therefore led to a reduction in the pension itself.
Consequently, in 2006 Mr Maggioni instituted judicial proceedings.
By a judgment of the Brescia Tribunal (Labour Section) of 26 June 2006, Mr Maggioni’s claim was upheld on the basis of the relevant Court of Cassation case-law at the time.
The INPS appealed.
By a judgment of 1 March 2007, filed in the relevant registry on 19 May 2007, the Milan Court of Appeal reversed the first-instance judgment in view of the entry into force of Law no. 296/2006. This judgment became final on 19 May 2008 given that Mr Maggioni did not appeal to the Court of Cassation, deeming it to be futile in the circumstances of the case.
Mr Ribulotta, who had transferred to Italy the contributions he had paid in Switzerland, requested the INPS to establish his pension in accordance with the 1962 Italo-Swiss Convention on Social Security on the basis of the contributions paid in Switzerland for work he had performed there between 1955 and 1991. As a basis for the calculation of his pension (in respect of the average remuneration of the last ten years), the INPS employed a theoretical remuneration (“retribuzione teorica”) instead of the real remuneration (“retribuzione effettiva”). The former resulted in a readjustment on the basis of the existing ratio between the contributions applied in Switzerland (8%) and in Italy (32.7%), which meant that the calculation had as its basis a pseudo-salary which amounted to approximately a quarter of the salary actually received by the applicant and therefore led to a reduction in the pension itself.
Consequently, in 2003 Mr Ribulotta instituted judicial proceedings.
By a judgment of the Varese Tribunal (Labour and Welfare Section) of 21 February 2006, Mr Ribulotta’s claim was upheld on the basis of the relevant Court of Cassation case-law at the time.
The INPS appealed.
By a judgment of 16 May 2008, filed in the relevant registry on 5 June 2008, the Milan Court of Appeal reversed the first-instance judgment in view of the entry into force of Law no. 296/2006.
Mr Ribulotta did not appeal to the Court of Cassation, deeming it to be futile in the circumstances of the case.
Mr Marinaro, who had transferred to Italy the contributions he had paid in Switzerland, requested the INPS to establish his pension in accordance with the 1962 Italo-Swiss Convention on Social Security on the basis of the contributions paid in Switzerland for work he had performed there between 1965 and 1994. As a basis for the calculation of his pension (in respect of the average remuneration of the last ten years), the INPS employed a theoretical remuneration (“retribuzione teorica”) instead of the real remuneration (“retribuzione effettiva”). The former resulted in a readjustment on the basis of the existing ratio between the contributions applied in Switzerland (8%) and in Italy (32.7%), which meant that the calculation had as its basis a pseudo-salary which amounted to approximately a quarter of the salary actually received by the applicant and therefore led to a reduction in the pension itself.
Consequently, in 2006 Mr Marinaro instituted judicial proceedings.
By a judgment of the Como Tribunal (Labour and Welfare Section) of 21 February 2006, Mr Marinaro’s claim was dismissed as being out of time.
Mr Marinaro appealed.
By a judgment of 7 July 2008, filed in the relevant registry on 17 July 2008, the Milan Court of Appeal reformed the first-instance judgment, considering that the applicant’s claims for the dues relating to the three years before he lodged his application could not be considered time-barred. However, it rejected the merits of the claim in view of the entry into force of Law no. 296/2006.
Mr Marinaro did not appeal to the Court of Cassation, deeming it to futile in the circumstances of the case.
Mr Centamore, who had transferred to Italy the contributions he had paid in Switzerland, requested the INPS to establish his pension in accordance with the 1962 Italo-Swiss Convention on Social Security on the basis of the contributions paid in Switzerland for work he had performed there between 1969 and 2000. As a basis for the calculation of his pension (in respect of the average remuneration of the last ten years), the INPS employed a theoretical remuneration (“retribuzione teorica”) instead of the real remuneration (“retribuzione effettiva”). The former resulted in a readjustment on the basis of the existing ratio between the contributions applied in Switzerland (8%) and in Italy (32.7%), which meant that the calculation had as its basis a pseudo-salary which amounted to approximately a quarter of the salary actually received by the applicant and therefore led to a reduction in the pension itself.
Consequently, in 2006 Mr Centamore instituted judicial proceedings.
By a judgment of the Busto Arsizio Tribunal (Labour and Welfare Section) of 9 June 2008, Mr Centamore’s claim was rejected in view of the entry into force of Law no. 296/2006.
Mr Centamore did not appeal, deeming it futile in the circumstances of the case.
Mr Maccarinelli, who had transferred to Italy the contributions he had paid in Switzerland, requested the INPS to establish his pension in accordance with the 1962 Italo-Swiss Convention on Social Security on the basis of the contributions paid in Switzerland for work he had performed there between 1960 and 2000. As a basis for the calculation of his pension (in respect of the average remuneration of the last ten years), the INPS employed a theoretical remuneration (“retribuzione teorica”) instead of the real remuneration (“retribuzione effettiva”). The former resulted in a readjustment on the basis of the existing ratio between the contributions applied in Switzerland (8%) and in Italy (32.7%), which meant that the calculation had as its basis a pseudo-salary which amounted to approximately a quarter of the salary actually received by the applicant and therefore led to a reduction in the pension itself.
Consequently, in 2006 Mr Maccarinelli instituted judicial proceedings.
By a judgment of the Bresce Tribunal (Labour and Welfare Section) of 20 June 2008, filed in the relevant registry on 23 June 2008,
Mr Maccarinelli did not appeal, deeming it futile in the circumstances of the case.
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning the case is to be found in in Maggio and Others v. Italy (nos. 46286/09, 52851/08, 53727/08, 54486/08 and 56001/08, §§ 27-35, 31 May 2011).
The matter came again before the Italian Constitutional Court following the European Court of Human Right’s judgment in Maggio and Others v. Italy (nos. 46286/09, 52851/08, 53727/08, 54486/08 and 56001/08, 31 May 2011), which had found, in circumstances such as those of the present case, that by enacting Law no. 296/2006 the Italian State had infringed the applicants’ rights under Article 6 § 1 by intervening in a decisive manner to ensure that the outcome of proceedings to which it was a party were favourable to it. The Constitutional Court had therefore to examine the compatibility of Law no. 296/2006 with the relevant legal framework and it found that it was in fact compatible.
The Constitutional Court recalled that Presidential Decree no. 488 of 27 April 1968 introduced a new system of pension calculation, namely a remuneration-based one (metodo retributivo). A constant jurisprudence had been established holding that Italian persons, who had worked in Switzerland and then transferred their contribution into the Italian system, would also benefit from the remuneration-based calculation, irrespective of the fact that they had paid lower contributions than those payable in Italy. Subsequently, the legislator enacted Law no. 296/2006, the constitutionality of which was confirmed by the Constitutional Court in 2008, since the law had been an authentic interpretation of the original law and was therefore reasonable, and from then onwards jurisprudence shifted accordingly.
The Constitutional Court referred to the findings in Maggio, but considered that it was for it to assess the matter; the ECHR had acknowledged that it was possible to intervene in pending proceedings in so far as there existed compelling general interest reasons, and in the Constitutional Court’s view, it was the role of the Contracting States to identify those compelling general interest reasons and intervene legislatively to ensure they are resolved.
The jurisprudence of the Constitutional Court provided that when comparing the national and Convention protection mechanisms, it was the protection of the guarantees that must prevail, taking account, however, of other constitutionally protected interests. The principle of the margin of appreciation established by the Court itself was of particular relevance, and had to be taken into account by the Constitutional Court to ensure a uniform system of coherent laws.
While the Constitutional Court was in principle bound by the Maggio judgment (the principles on which it was based being also constitutionally recognised principles), the Constitutional Court had to lend itself to a balancing exercise. It considered that other opposing interests, which were also constitutionally protected and which related to the matter at issue, prevailed in the circumstances of the case. It followed that there existed compelling general interest reasons justifying a retroactive application of the law. Indeed, the effects of the new law were such as to avoid a welfare system which privileged some and was advantageous to others, guaranteeing the respect for the principles of equality and solidarity, which because of their founding nature, occupied a privileged position when weighed against other constitutional rights. The impugned law was inspired by the principles of equality and proportionality and took into account the fact that contributions paid in Switzerland were four times lower than those paid in Italy. It thus applied a direct recalculation which allowed pensions to be dispensed in proportion to the contributions paid, thus levelling out any inequalities and rendering the welfare system more sustainable for the benefit of all those making use of it. Indeed, even the ECHR had upheld such reasoning in the Maggio case in relation to the complaint under Article 1 of Protocol No., although it had not found such a reason to be sufficient to avoid a violation of Article 6. However, unlike the Court which is bound to examine complaints separately, the Constitutional Court had to take a global approach and evaluate a case on the basis of all the relevant constitutional guarantees. The claim of unconstitutionality was therefore unfounded. Indeed, to conclude otherwise would not only have consequences for the pension system but would also go against the spirit of the Court’s judgment in Maggio, which had rejected the applicant’s claims for their pension according to the previous calculation.