The case originated in two applications against the United Kingdom lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”). The first applicant, Mr Jonathan Moore, was born in 1973 and is resident in Scotland and the second applicant, Mr Garrick Gordon, was born in 1953 and is resident in Cornwall. Both applicants are British nationals and were represented before the Court by Mr Gilbert Blades, a solicitor practising in Lincoln. The applications were introduced on 10 June and 7 August 1997 and were registered on 16 June and 18 August 1997 under file nos. 36529/97 and 37393/97, respectively.
The applicants complained, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, that they were denied a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law. The first applicant also submitted that he was denied a voice in the choice of venue for his court-martial.
On 20 May 1998 the Commission (First Chamber) decided to give notice of the applications to the respondent Government and invited them to submit their observations on their admissibility and merits.
The Government, represented by Mr Martin Eaton, Agent, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, responded by letter dated 21 August 1998, stating that the Government did not have any observations to make on the admissibility of the applications in light of the judgment of this Court in the Findlay v. the United Kingdom case (25 February 1997, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1997-I, no. 30).
Following the entry into force of Protocol No. 11 to the Convention on 1 November 1998 and in accordance with the provisions of Article 5 § 2 thereof, the applications fell to be examined by the Court.
In accordance with Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court, the President of the Court, Mr L. Wildhaber, assigned the cases to the Third Section. The Chamber constituted within the Section included Sir Nicolas Bratza, the judge elected in respect of the United Kingdom (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 26 § 1(a) of the Rule of Court) and Mr J.-P. Costa, the President of the Chamber (Rules 12 and 26§ 1(a)). The other members designated by the latter to complete the Chamber were Mr L. Loucaides, Mr P. Kūris, Mr W. Fuhrmann, Mrs H.S. Greve and Mr K. Traja (Rule 26 § 1 (b)).
On 2 March 1999 the Chamber decided to join the cases and not to hold a hearing on the merits. The Chamber also declared the applications admissible2.
At the time of the events in question, both applicants were serving in the Royal Air Force and were tried by district courts-martial convened pursuant to the Air Force Act 1955 (“the 1955 Act”).
Mr Moore was found guilty of common assault contrary to the Criminal Justice Act 1988 and he was fined £400, although the 1988 Act provides for a maximum sentence of six months’ imprisonment (see paragraph 16 below). His subsequent petitions and appeals, as far as the single judge of the Courts-Martial Appeal Court, were unsuccessful.
Mr Gordon was found guilty of two charges of disgraceful conduct of an indecent kind (in the nature of indecent exposure, contrary to section 66 of the 1955 Act) and he was sentenced to a reduction in rank, although section 66 provides for a maximum sentence of two years’ imprisonment (see paragraph 16 below). His subsequent petitions and appeals, as far as the full Courts-Martial Appeal Court, were unsuccessful.
The relevant provisions of the Air Force Act 1955 are set out in the judgment of the Court in the Coyne case (the Coyne v. the United Kingdom judgment of 24 September 1997, Reports 1997-V, pp. 1848-52, §§ 20-44).
Central to the system under the 1955 Act was the role of the “convening officer”. This officer (who had to be of a specified rank and in command of a body of the regular forces or of the command within which the person to be tried was serving) assumed responsibility for every case to be tried by court-martial. He or she had the final decision on the nature and detail of the charges to be brought and the type of court-martial required, and was responsible for convening the court-martial.
The convening officer would draw up a convening order, which would specify, inter alia, the date, place and time of the trial, the name of the president and the details of the other members, all of whom he could appoint. Failing the appointment of a judge advocate by the Judge Advocate General’s Office, the convening officer could appoint one. He also appointed, or directed a commanding officer to appoint, the prosecuting officer.
Prior to the hearing, the convening officer was responsible for sending an abstract of the evidence to the prosecuting officer and to the judge advocate, and could indicate the passages which might be inadmissible. He procured the attendance at trial of all witnesses to be called for the prosecution. When charges were withdrawn, the convening officer’s consent was normally obtained, although it was not necessary in all cases, and a plea to a lesser charge could not be accepted from the accused without it. He had also to ensure that the accused had a proper opportunity to prepare his defence, legal representation if required and the opportunity to contact the defence witnesses, and was responsible for ordering the attendance at the hearing of all witnesses “reasonably requested” by the defence.
The convening officer could dissolve the court-martial either before or during the trial, when required in the interests of the administration of justice. In addition, he could comment on the proceedings of a court-martial. Those remarks would not form part of the record of the proceedings and would normally be communicated in a separate minute to the members of the court, although in an exceptional case, where a more public instruction was required in the interests of discipline, they could be made known in the orders of the command.
The convening officer usually acted as confirming officer also. A court-martial’s findings were not effective until confirmed by the confirming officer, who was empowered to withhold confirmation or substitute, postpone or remit in whole or in part any sentence.
Since the applicants’ trials, the law has been amended by the Armed Forces Act 1996 (see the above-cited Findlay v. the United Kingdom judgment, at p. 276, §§ 52-57).
The Criminal Justice Act 1988 provides for a penalty of up to six months’ imprisonment, a fine or both for the offence of common assault. The maximum penalty for disgraceful conduct of an indecent kind is two years’ imprisonment (section 66 of the 1955 Act).