The case originated in an application (no. 1861/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Mikhaylovich Petrov (“the applicant”), on 15 November 2004.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained about the quashing of the judgment in his favour by way of supervisory review and alleged a violation of his property rights.
On 29 May 2006 the Court communicated the application to the Respondent Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant, Mr Sergey Mikhaylovich Petrov was born in 1955 and lives in . He is a retired military officer.
In 2001 he brought proceedings against the Military Service Commission of Moscow (Военный комиссариат г. Москвы, hereinafter the “Commission”) for recalculation of his pension as from 1990 to take account of the fact that he served in the extreme north of Russia which made him eligible for a higher pension.
On 30 April 2002 the Tverskoy District Court of Moscow granted the applicant's claim, adjusted his pension by a coefficient 1.5 and awarded him 84,915.42 Russian roubles (RUR) in arrears.
The Commission did not lodge an ordinary appeal against the judgment and it became binding and enforceable on 10 May 2002.
On 3 November 2003 the Commission filed an application for supervisory review, claiming that the civil-law provisions on which the court based its judgment were not relevant to the applicant.
On 18 May 2004 the applicant was informed about the initiation of the supervisory-review procedure.
On 20 May 2004 the Presidium of the Moscow City Court held a supervisory-review hearing. It held that the first-instance court had erroneously applied the substantive law. On that ground it quashed the judgment of 30 April 2002 and remitted the matter for a fresh examination. Before the announcement of the judgment the applicant was asked to wait outside the courtroom. At the same time the respondent remained there. The decision of the court was announced to the applicant by the bailiff. The applicant received a copy of the final decision on 13 August 2004.
The new hearing was scheduled for 16 September 2004. The applicant could not attend the hearing, and on 9 September 2004 asked the court to postpone it.
On 24 October 2004 the applicant received a letter from the court, which enclosed a copy of the decision of the Tverskoy District Court of 6 October 2004 by which the applicant's action was left without consideration for his failure to appear twice before the court. The applicant claims that the court did not inform him about the new date of the hearing. The applicant filed an appeal, but, since the time-limit for an appeal was up, the court ignored his petition.
Article 362. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions by appeal courts
“1.  The grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions by appeal courts are:
...
(4)  violation or incorrect application of substantive or procedural legal provisions.”
Article 376. Right to apply to a court exercising supervisory review
“1.  Judicial decisions that have become legally binding, with the exception for judicial decisions by the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, may be appealed against... to a court exercising supervisory review, by parties to the case and by other persons whose rights or legal interests have been adversely affected by these judicial decisions.
Judicial decisions may be appealed against to a court exercising supervisory review within one year after they became legally binding...”
Article 381. Examination of an application for supervisory review
“2. Having examined an application for supervisory review, the judge issues a decision on –
(1)  obtaining the case file if there exist doubts as to the lawfulness of the judicial decision...
If a decision to obtain the file has been made, the judge may suspend enforcement of the judicial decision until the supervisory-review proceedings have been completed...”
Article 384. Decision on remitting the case for examination on the merits 
by a supervisory-review court
“1.  A judicial decision on remitting the case for examination on the merits by a supervisory-review court must contain:
(7)  a reasoned description of the grounds for remitting the case for examination on the merits...”
Article 387. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions 
by way of supervisory review
“Judicial decisions of lower courts may be quashed or altered by way of supervisory review on the grounds of substantial violations of substantive or procedural legal provisions.”
Article 390. Competence of the supervisory-review court
“1.  Having examined the case by way of supervisory review, the court may...
(2)  quash the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance in whole or in part and remit the matter for a fresh examination;...
(5)  quash or alter the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance and issue a new judicial decision, without remitting the matter for a fresh examination, if substantive legal provisions have been erroneously applied or interpreted.”
“22.  ...The [one-year] time-limit for lodging an application for supervisory review of judicial decisions that became legally binding before 1 February 2003, shall run from 1 February 2003.”
Case-law review of civil cases in the second quarter of 2004 by the Supreme Court (Resolution of 6 October 2004)
“The Committee of Ministers, under the terms of Article 46, paragraph 2, of the Convention...
Welcoming the reforms of the supervisory review (“nadzor”) procedure introduced by the new Code of Civil Procedure entered into force on 1 February 2003;
Noting with satisfaction, in particular, that some of the problems at the basis of the violations found in these cases have thus been remedied...
Expressing, however, particular concern at the fact that at the regional level it is often the same court which acts consecutively as a cassation and “nadzor” instance in the same case and stressing that the court should be enabled to rectify all shortcomings of lower courts' judgments in a single set of proceedings so that subsequent recourse to “nadzor” becomes truly exceptional, if necessary at all;
Stressing that a binding and enforceable judgment should be only altered in exceptional circumstances, while under the current “nadzor” procedure such a judgment may be quashed for any material or procedural violation;
Emphasising that in an efficient judicial system, errors and shortcomings in court decisions should primarily be addressed through ordinary appeal and/or cassation proceedings before the judgment becomes binding and enforceable, thus avoiding the subsequent risk of frustrating parties' right to rely on binding judicial decisions;
Considering therefore that restricting the supervisory review of binding and enforceable judgments to exceptional circumstances must go hand-in-hand with improvement of the court structure and of the quality of justice, so as to limit the need for correcting judicial errors currently achieved through the “nadzor” procedure...
CALLS UPON the Russian authorities to give priority to the reform of civil procedure with a view to ensuring full respect for the principle of legal certainty established in the Convention, as interpreted by the Court's judgments;
ENCOURAGES the authorities to ensure through this reform that judicial errors are corrected in the course of the ordinary appeal and/or cassation proceedings before judgments become final...
ENCOURAGES the authorities, pending the adoption of this comprehensive reform, to consider adoption of interim measures limiting as far as possible the risk of new violations of the Convention of the same kind, and in particular:
-	continue to restrict progressively the use of the “nadzor” procedure, in particular through stricter time-limits for nadzor applications and limitation of permissible grounds for this procedure so as to encompass only the most serious violations of the law...
-	to limit as much as possible the number of successive applications for supervisory review that may be lodged in the same case;
-	to discourage frivolous and abusive applications for supervisory review which amount to a further disguised appeal motivated by a disagreement with the assessment made by the lower courts within their competences and in accordance with the law;
-	to adopt measures inducing the parties adequately to use, as much as possible, the presently available cassation appeal to ensure rectification of judicial errors before judgments become final and enforceable...”