The case originated in an application (no. 20797/07) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Ms Nazlı Dırama (“the applicant”), on 1 May 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr H. Genç a lawyer practising in Aksaray. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 20 June 2017 the application was communicated to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Muğla.
On an unspecified date the applicant brought an enforcement order through a bailiff’s office against her former husband, G.F., to collect alimony in arrears and accrued interest.
On 9 March 2006 G.F. objected to that order by bringing a case against the applicant before the Datça Enforcement Court. He requested that the court declare the enforcement order null and void on the grounds that he had made the payments in question in full.
In the first hearing G.F.’s representative requested the court to take out an expert report to determine whether the payments he had made corresponded to the alleged debt. The court adjourned its examination on the question whether an expert report would be sought to a hearing to be held on 10 May 2006.
In that hearing, the applicant’s representative left it to the court’s discretion for an expert to be appointed concerning the determination of the amounts that were already paid. The court therefore ruled for an expert to be appointed and scheduled another hearing for 7 June 2006.
In the meantime, but before the hearing of 7 June 2006, the applicant’s representative requested that he be excused from that hearing since he had another scheduled court hearing elsewhere.
The court held the hearing as scheduled but noted that the applicant’s representative was excused. In that hearing, the court noted that the expert report had been submitted in the case-file and read its contents out in the presence of G.F.’s legal representative. The latter asked the court to rule in accordance with the findings in the expert report, which had concluded that all the relevant alimony payments had been made. The court scheduled a hearing for 21 June 2006 holding that the absent party be notified.
On 21 June 2006, in its final hearing, the court ruled against the applicant on the basis of the expert report in question. Neither the applicant nor her representative was present at that hearing. There is no indication in the transcript of the hearing that suggests that the court examined whether the applicant’s representative had been notified in due time.
On 31 July 2006 the applicant’s representative lodged an appeal before the Court of Cassation, arguing that the notice for the court hearing of 21 June 2006 had been served on him only on 26 June 2006, resulting in him and her client missing the opportunity to participate in the hearing and submit their observations on the findings of the expert report. He explained in that connection that the expert’s calculations had been erroneous and did not correspond to the bank transfer receipts in the case-file.
On 5 December 2006 the Court of Cassation upheld the decision of 21 June 2006 without responding to the applicant’s arguments.
The applicant’s rectification request against that decision was rejected on 13 March 2007.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure (Law no. 1086), which was in force at the time of the events, provided as follows:
“Save for the exceptions provided by law, the judge may not rule on the case unless both parties are duly invited to submit their observations.”
“The judge may ask further questions to the expert for the purpose of clarifying incomplete or ambiguous information in the report. The parties may request the same one week from the communication of the report to them.