The case originated in an application (no. 23532/14) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Ms Dalia Regina Dainelienė (“the applicant”), on 18 March 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Mikulskas, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė-Širmenė.
On 13 September 2017 the complaint under Article 6 § 1 concerning the independence and impartiality of the Supreme Court was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1944 and lives in Vilnius.
On 17 April 2009 the applicant was officially notified that she was suspected of having organised the embezzlement of property of high value. On 7 May 2009 the applicant was charged with the relevant offences. She denied her guilt.
On 22 July 2011 the Vilnius Regional Court held that the legal classification of the charges against the applicant was incorrect, because the total value of the allegedly embezzled property was not high. The court reclassified the charges on the basis of a less serious offence, held that the prosecution had become time-barred and discontinued the proceedings.
The prosecutor appealed. On 27 October 2011 the Court of Appeal quashed the decision and remitted the case to the Vilnius Regional Court.
After re-examining the case, on 10 June 2013 the Vilnius Regional Court found the applicant guilty of the charges against her. She was given a fine of 12,000 Lithuanian litai (LTL) (approximately 3,475 euros (EUR)). She was also ordered to pay some of the damages claimed by a company, amounting to LTL 2,800 (approximately EUR 810).
The applicant lodged an appeal, but on 18 October 2013 the Court of Appeal dismissed it and upheld the lower court’s judgment in its entirety.
On 7 January 2014 the applicant submitted an appeal on points of law to the Supreme Court. On 17 February 2014 a selection panel of three judges refused to examine the appeal, on the basis that it did not comply with Article 368 § 2 and Article 369 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter “the CCP”) (see paragraphs 15 and 16 below). The chair of the selection panel, Judge V.G., was the father of M.G., who had been the prosecutor in the case against the applicant before the first-instance and the appellate courts.
The Supreme Court consists of two divisions: Civil and Criminal. The Criminal Division has sixteen judges in it.
In accordance with Article 57 § 1 of the CCP, the following persons can ask for somebody to be removed from a case: a suspect, an accused, a convicted person, an acquitted person, a prosecutor, a victim, a private individual making an accusation, a civil claimant, a civil defendant, or representatives of any of the persons listed above. In accordance with Article 57 § 2 of the CCP, it is possible to ask for a pre-trial officer, a prosecutor, a pre-trial judge, a judge, a secretary, a translator, an expert or a specialist to be removed from a case.
In accordance with Article 58 § 1 (1) of the CCP, a judge cannot participate in proceedings if he or she is a close family member or relative of a prosecutor in those proceedings.
In accordance with Article 59 § 1 of the CCP, a judge must withdraw if the grounds listed in Article 58 of the CCP pertain to a case.
Article 368 § 2 of the CCP provides that an appeal on points of law must give the name of the court to which it has been submitted and specify the decision which is being appealed against. It must contain legal arguments demonstrating the existence of the grounds for cassation provided for in Article 369 of the CCP (see paragraph 16 below), include the appellant’s request, and be signed by him or her.
Article 369 § 1 of the CCP provides that final court judgments and decisions are examined in cassation proceedings if criminal law has been applied incorrectly or if there have been grave breaches of the CCP. Article 369 § 2 states that an incorrect application of criminal law means that the general provisions of the Criminal Code have not been applied correctly or there has been an incorrect legal classification of criminal charges. Article 369 § 3 states that grave breaches of the CCP are breaches of the requirements set out in the CCP which have restricted the rights of the accused or impeded a court from thoroughly and impartially examining a case and issuing a fair judgment or decision.
In accordance with Article 370 § 1 of the CCP, an appeal on points of law can be lodged within three months of the date a judgment or decision of a lower court becomes final. In accordance with Article 370 § 2 of the CCP, the time-limit can be renewed if there are important reasons for doing so.
Article 372 § 2 of the CCP provides that when an appeal on points of law has been submitted and it conforms to the formal requirements set out in the CCP, the President of the Supreme Court or the Chair of the Criminal Cases Division of the Supreme Court composes a panel of three judges to whom the appeal and the case file is transferred. Article 372 § 3 provides that the panel of three judges decides whether to accept the appeal for examination. It is admitted if at least one judge on the panel votes in favour. A judge who sits on that panel is not precluded from deciding the merits of the appeal in cassation proceedings. Article 372 § 5 of the CCP provides that the question of whether to accept an appeal on points of law for examination is decided in a written decision which is final and not open to appeal. Reasons must be provided for any decision refusing to examine an appeal.
Article 3741 § 1 of the CCP provides that when an appeal on points of law has been accepted for examination and it has been decided that it should be examined in a written procedure, the parties to the proceedings are informed, inter alia, of the date of the examination, the composition of the chamber and their right to request the removal of judges. The CCP does not contain any provisions on parties’ rights to be informed about the composition of the initial panel of three judges and/or to request their removal.