The case originated in an application (no. 61112/12) against the Kingdom of Spain lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Spanish national, Mr Jorge Gómez Olmeda (“the applicant”), on 11 September 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr J.J. Bravo Iglesias, a lawyer practising in Plasencia. The Spanish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr F.A. Sanz Gandasegui and Mr R.A. León Clavero, State Attorneys.
The applicant alleged that his conviction for false accusation of a crime on appeal without being able to defend himself in open court amounted to a violation of his right to a fair hearing under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 19 March 2013 the application was communicated to the Government. The Government and the applicant filed written observations.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Plasencia.
On 3 January 2011 following a trial, the Plasencia criminal judge (juez de lo penal) no. 1 sentenced the applicant to six months’ imprisonment for serious disobedience to public authority (desobediencia grave a la autoridad). The applicant was acquitted of other charges against him, namely false accusation of a crime (calumnias), defamation (injurias) and concealment (encubrimiento).
.  The judge established that the applicant was the webmaster of an Internet forum on which defamatory messages against the complainants in the proceedings had been published, and that he had deliberately disregarded the request made to him by a police officer within the framework of the criminal investigation not to alter the messages in question. In fact, the applicant had proceeded to have the forum webpage removed altogether, despite the police officer’s request to leave it unchanged. As regards the charges for defamation and false accusation of a crime, the judge held that there were reasonable doubts as to whether the applicant had been aware of the messages in question before his police interview and that he should therefore be acquitted in that regard. It was also alleged that he had protected the individuals who had made the defamatory statements; however, the judge considered that he could not be found guilty of concealment as it had not been proved that he had been aware at the time of his police interview that it had been possible for him to have access to the Internet Protocol (IP) numbers of the participants on the forum.
.  Both the prosecution and defence appealed against the judgment before the Cáceres Audiencia Provincial. The applicant did not request a hearing, nor did the Audiencia Provincial order one. Instead, the court watched a video-recording of the trial.
.  On 16 May 2011 the Audiencia Provincial upheld the applicant’s conviction for serious disobedience to public authority and, unlike the first-instance judge, found him guilty of continuous and false accusation of a crime (delito continuado de calumnias). His punishment was a daily fine of 15 euros (EUR) for a period of eighteen months. He was also required to pay damages. In finding the applicant guilty, the appellate court stated that it had relied on the facts established by the first-instance judge and on the testimony given by the complainants, the applicant and the witnesses in the earlier trial. The court stated:
“Fourth. The facts declared proved in the first-instance judgment constitute continuous and false accusation of a crime and defamation regulated and punished by section 205 and seq. of the Criminal Code in relation to section 74 of the same Code for which the defendant Jorge Gómez Olmeda should be declared guilty as a principal pursuant to sections 28 and 30 of the Code with the mitigating factor of undue delays pursuant to section 21 paragraph six of the Code.
...
It is undisputed that documentary evidence does not require judicial immediacy for its assessment because it is written down and can be read and interpreted in the light of the circumstances of the case, which had been perfectly outlined in the complainants’ brief and proved in the hearing, both with respect to what was written on the forum and the people against whom those expressions were directed. Those expressions imputed the commission of crimes to the complainants (sexual assault, sexual slavery of a person) and were detrimental to their fame and reputation to the extent that it is obvious that the imputations were serious in themselves and related to public understanding, which is an open-ended concept of which interpretation depends on the particular facts of the case. It is worth remembering that we are speaking here of a small town where everybody knows each other, where everybody runs into each other, where everybody attends the same places, where everyday life is routine and there is little room for novelties, where anything breaking the monotony is something which attracts public attention, where the genealogy of every inhabitant is known to the rest. For these reasons we find the applicant guilty of the crime of continuous and false accusation of a crime ...which he had been acquitted of at first instance.
The applicant states that he was the administrator of the forum; that he did not log onto it very often; that he lacked computer skills and that he had removed some phrases and messages which in his view might be considered insulting for the purposes of the case now before us. We disagree with the accused when he states that he was unaware of what was written on the forum, the argument on which the first-instance judge relied to acquit him of false accusation of a crime and defamation. And we disagree for the following two reasons. Firstly, because it was part of his duties as the administrator of the forum to be aware of what was written on it, to the extent that he was its ‘censor’, so to speak, on account of the fact that he had created it; and secondly, because it is untrue that he was unaware of what was written on it, since he had removed some phrases and messages which were insulting to the complainants, thus proving that he had read what was written on the forum in question and demonstrating that he had regarded what was written there as insulting to a specific individual or individuals, which led him to the decision to remove what he regarded as defamatory or insulting.”
.  The applicant applied to the Audiencia Provincial to have the previous proceedings before it declared void. His application was dismissed on 29 September 2011 on the grounds that no legal provision had been infringed and none of his rights had been breached in those proceedings.
.  The applicant lodged an amparo appeal with the Constitutional Court. He cited Article 24 of the Constitution (right to a fair hearing), complaining that the Audiencia Provincial had convicted him on appeal without giving him the opportunity to plead his case in open court.
.  By a decision served on 13 March 2012 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s amparo appeal inadmissible as it had no special constitutional significance.
The relevant provision of the Spanish Constitution reads as follows:
“1.  Everyone has the right to obtain the effective protection of judges and the courts in the exercise of his or her legitimate rights and interests, and in no event may he or she go undefended.
Likewise, everyone has the right of access to the ordinary courts as predetermined by law; to the defence and assistance of a lawyer; to be informed of the charges brought against him or her; to a public hearing without undue delays and with full guarantees; to the use of evidence appropriate to his or her defence; not to make self-incriminating statements; not to declare himself or herself guilty; and to be presumed innocent.”
.  The relevant provisions of the Spanish Criminal Code read as follows:
The following are mitigating circumstances:
...
Extraordinary or undue delay of the proceedings, as long as this is not due to the accused, where such delay is disproportionate to the complexity of the cause.
“Principals are those who perpetrate the act themselves, alone, jointly, or by means of another used to aid and abet.
The following shall also be deemed principals:
	(a) Whoever directly induces another or others to commit a crime;
	(b) Whoever co-operates in the commission thereof by an act without which a crime could not have been committed.”
“1.  In the case of both serious and minor offences committed by the use of media or mechanical means of dissemination, neither accomplices nor those who have personally and actually facilitated the commission of such offences shall be held criminally liable.
The principals to whom section 28 refers shall be held criminally liable in a series of stages, in an exclusive and subsidiary fashion, in the following order:
(1)  Those who actually wrote the text or produced the symbol in question and those inducing the commission of those acts.
(2)  The directors of the publication or broadcast through which the material has been disseminated.
(3)  The directors of the publishing, issuing or broadcasting company.
(4)  The directors of the recording, production or printing company.
...”
(...) whoever perpetrates multiple acts or omissions in the execution of a preconceived plan or by taking advantage of an identical occasion and where these acts or omissions offend one or several subjects and infringe the same criminal provision or provisions that are equal to or of a similar nature, shall be punished as the principal of a continued serious or minor offence (...).
...
What is set forth in the previous sections does not include offences against eminently personal property, except offences against honour and sexual freedom and indemnity that affect the same victim. In these cases, criminal continuity shall be determined, or otherwise, by the nature of the fact and the provision infringed.
“False accusation of a crime means accusing someone of committing a criminal offence while being aware that the accusation is false or with reckless disregard for the truth.”
“Acts or expressions which undermine another’s dignity by attacking his or her reputation or self-esteem shall constitute insults.
Only insults which, by virtue of their nature, effects and context are generally acknowledged to be serious shall constitute an offence ...”
“Defamatory statements and insults shall be regarded as made public when they are circulated by printing, broadcasting or by any other media having a similar effect.”
The relevant provision of the Spanish Criminal Procedural Law in force at the time the appeal proceedings took place reads as follows:
“1. If the ratification or submissions brief include a request for the production of evidence or for the watching or hearing of the evidence recorded, the court shall rule on its admission within three days and shall, if appropriate, order the court clerk to set a date for the hearing. A hearing can also be held, ex officio or at a party’s request, where the court deems it necessary to reach a sound decision.”
.  The Constitutional Court has had the opportunity to rule on whether, where a defendant has been acquitted by the first-instance court of committing an offence but has been subsequently convicted on appeal, the viewing by the appellate court of a video-recording of the hearing at first instance satisfies the requirements of Article 24 of the Constitution. In its judgment no. 120/2009 of 18 May 2009 it stated that:
“6.  ... we must now examine the issue which singularises the instant amparo appeal, namely whether the guarantees of immediacy and adversarial procedure have been duly safeguarded or not by the appellate court’s viewing of the video-recording of the hearing held before the first-instance judge.
...
In this connection, an examination of the aforementioned case law of the European Court of Human Rights makes it clear that in cases where the requirements to which this case-law refers are fulfilled, it is necessary for the appellate court to conduct a ‘direct and personal’ examination of the accused and of the statements given by him or her in person, at a new hearing in the presence of other interested persons or complainants.
...
... The Audiencia Provincial considered [in the instant case] that after having watched the video-recording of the criminal trial, it was entitled to conduct a new assessment of the oral evidence produced at that hearing. The appellate court found that the judge of the lower court had made a mistake in the assessment of that evidence and accordingly it proceeded to establish a new account of the facts which led to the conviction of those who had been initially acquitted.
However, the truth is that that court was not entitled to assess that oral evidence  which concerned the credibility of the witnesses – in a different way from the first-instance judge insofar as it had not held a public hearing at which the witnesses at the hearing at first instance had been heard in person and directly by the court and there were no legal grounds precluding the appearance of those witnesses before the court. Accordingly, as the appellate court did not comply with that requirement, it violated the appellant’s right to a fair hearing under Article 24 § 2 of the Spanish Constitution.”
.  The Constitutional Court reached similar conclusions in their subsequent judgments no. 2/2010 of 11 January 2010, no. 30/2010 of 17 May 2010 and no. 105/2014 of 23 June 2014.