The case originated in an application (no. 28353/06) against Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Motion Pictures Guarantors Ltd, a company based in  (“the applicant”), on 13 July 2006.
The applicant was represented before the Court by Mr P. Samardžija, Mr S. Popović, Ms K. Kostić and Ms L. Tomasović, all lawyers practising in . The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr S. Carić.
The applicant complained that it had been denied a fair and public hearing in the proceedings concerning its request for procedural reinstatement.
On 30 March 2009 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was also decided that the merits of the application would be examined together with its admissibility.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 27 February 1995 the applicant filed a civil claim with the  (Trgovinski sud) in , seeking payment of 34,975 Euros by its former business partners.
Following three remittals, the  scheduled the next hearing for 13 September 2005 at 11 a.m.
On the morning in question, the applicant's lawyer was on unrelated business at the Third Municipal Court (Treći opštinski sud) in . The applicant maintains that at 10.30 a.m. his lawyer took a taxi in order to reach the  as soon as possible. Some 700 meters before its destination, however, the taxi broke down and the applicant's lawyer had to continue on foot. He ultimately arrived in court at 11.04 p.m., just in time to see the judge finish the dictation of the minutes in the applicant's case to his secretary. One of the lawyers acting on behalf of the respondents was also present.
On an unspecified date thereafter the applicant received the Commercial Court's decision (rešenje) dated 13 September 2005, wherein it was stated that neither party had duly appeared before the court, which is why the proceedings had to be terminated (see paragraph 18 below).
On 19 September 2005 the applicant requested procedural reinstatement, i.e. restoration of proceedings to status quo ante (see paragraph 16 below). It explained why its lawyer had been late and proposed that the taxi driver, as well as the respondents' counsel, be heard.
On 26 September 2005, in the absence of an oral hearing, the  rejected the applicant's request (doneo rešenje kojim se odbija predlog), stating that procedural reinstatement could only be granted in a case of force majeure. Moreover, the applicant's lawyer should have acted with greater diligence and left the Third Municipal Court fifteen minutes earlier, which would even have allowed him, after the taxi broke down, to reach the Commercial Court on foot in time for the scheduled hearing.
On 3 October 2005 and 7 November 2005 the applicant appealed against the 's decisions of 13 September 2005 and 26 September 2005, respectively.
On 19 December 2005 the High Commercial Court (Viši trgovinski sud), in the absence of an oral hearing, rejected both appeals. In so doing, it upheld the reasoning of the Commercial Court, added that the applicant had not provided relevant evidence to the effect that the taxi had indeed broken down, and noted that, in any event, “a vehicle defect could not be proved by means of witness testimony” but rather by documentary evidence such as repair receipts.
The applicant received this decision on 26 January 2006.
On 23 April 2009, in response to the Agent's request, Beotaxi, an association of taxi drivers, explained that, given the usual traffic congestion and the location, a replacement taxi would not have been a viable option for the applicant's lawyer. In any event, the  was some 700 metres away, which is why it would have taken their client some 5-7 minutes on foot to reach his destination.
Article 111 provides, inter alia, that a party who has suffered adverse procedural consequences as a result of a failure to appear at a scheduled hearing shall have the right to file a request for procedural reinstatement, which, if accepted by the trial court as “justified” (kad postoje opravdani razlozi), shall lead to the restoration of proceedings to the status quo ante.
Article 115 §§ 3 and 4 provides that the court shall rule in respect of this request in the absence of an oral hearing, unless one is needed for the “adequate establishment of facts”.
Article 296 § 2 provides that, should both parties unjustifiably fail to appear at the main hearing, the plaintiff's “claim shall be deemed to have been withdrawn” and the proceedings shall be terminated.
Articles 385 § 1 and 388 provide that a party whose request for procedural reinstatement has been rejected shall have the right to file an appeal to a higher court, but shall not be entitled to an oral hearing before it.
Articles 360-363, 373 and 388 provide that the appeals court shall have the competence to examine both legal and factual issues and, in so doing, uphold the impugned judgment, overturn or quash it, and order that the matter be re-examined at first instance.
Article 422.10 provides that a case may be re-opened if the European Court of Human Rights has in the meantime rendered a judgment in respect of  concerning the same or a similar legal issue.
On 27 December 1999 the High Commercial Court in Belgrade held that a usual traffic jam cannot be reason enough to accept the request for procedural reinstatement in a situation where the plaintiff's lawyer had failed to appear at a scheduled hearing (Pž. 6786/99).
On 3 September 2002 the same court held that a procedural reinstatement request should be granted in a case where the plaintiff's lawyer, having taken into account the usual traffic and left his office in time, had arrived late at a scheduled hearing since his car had broken down (see Pž. 4191/02).