The case originated in an application (no. 38654/97) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Jerzy Goral (“the applicant”), on 22 July 1997.
The applicant was represented by Mr W. Myśliborski, a lawyer practising in Warsaw. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Drzewicki.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the facts of his case disclosed violations of Article 5 §§ 1 and 3, Article 6 § 1 and Article 8.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
On 1 November 2001 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Third Section (Rule 52 § 1).
By a decision of 7 November 2002, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant was born in 1944 and lives in Lublin, Poland.
On 23 May 1996 the applicant was taken into custody by the police. On 24 May 1996 the Lublin District Prosecutor (Prokurator Rejonowy) charged the applicant with hiding a stolen car and possession of a counterfeit banknote and remanded him in custody. The District Prosecutor considered that there existed a danger of pressure being brought to bear on witnesses. Moreover, he referred to a significant danger to society of the criminal acts allegedly committed by the applicant.
The applicant appealed against the District Prosecutor's decision but on 18 June 1996 the Lublin Regional Court (Sąd Wojewódzki) dismissed his appeal. The court considered that the reasons given for the applicant's detention had not ceased to exist.
On 14 August 1996 the Lublin Regional Court extended the applicant's detention until 23 November 1996. It pointed out that the investigation had not been completed and that there was a risk that if released the applicant would obstruct the criminal proceedings against him. The applicant appealed against this decision but on 12 September 1996 the Lublin Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) dismissed his appeal.
On 14 October 1996 the Lublin Regional Prosecutor decided to take evidence from an anonymous witness. The applicant did not appeal against this decision.
In November 1996 the prosecution dropped the charge of possession of a counterfeit banknote.
On 22 November 1996 the Lublin Regional Prosecutor filed with the Lublin Regional Court a bill of indictment against the applicant.
On 16 December 1996 the applicant applied for bail but on 17 December 1996 the Lublin Regional Court dismissed his application. It considered that the applicant's two adult children could help his wife, who was ill. Moreover, the evidence gave rise to reasonable suspicion that the applicant had committed the criminal offence with which he was charged. The court referred to Articles 209 and 218 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The applicant appealed against this decision but on 15 January 1997 the Lublin Court of Appeal dismissed his appeal. The appellate court referred to Articles 209 and 217 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. It considered that the prison term to which the applicant could be sentenced justified his detention. The court also pointed out that the recent medical examinations of the applicant's wife had shown that she did not need the help of third persons.
On 24 March 1997 the applicant applied to the Lublin Regional Court for release from detention. He submitted that his wife was ill and required his help.
On 25 March 1997 the Regional Court dismissed the applicant's application. It considered that the evidence gave rise to a reasonable suspicion that the applicant had committed the criminal offence with which he was charged. In addition, the applicant's wife did not require hospitalisation and could be helped by other members of her family.
On 28 August 1997 the first hearing took place before the Lublin Regional Court.
On 26 September 1997 the Lublin Regional Court examined an anonymous witness.
Subsequently, hearings took place on 1 October and 5 November 1997.
During the hearing held on 20 November 1997 the Regional Court released the applicant from detention.
On 18 December 1997 and 7 January 1998 the trial court held hearings.
On 9 January 1998 the Lublin Regional Court convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to one year and five months' imprisonment and a fine. The applicant appealed his conviction.
On 26 May 1998 the first hearing took place before the Lublin Court of Appeal.
During the hearing held on 20 August 1998 the appellate court decided to refer a question on a point of law to the Supreme Court (Sąd Najwyższy). The question concerned the legal qualification of the criminal offence with which the applicant was charged.
On 18 November 1998 the Supreme Court adopted a resolution on the question submitted by the Lublin Court of Appeal.
The next hearing before the Lublin Court of Appeal took place on 10 December 1998. The court quashed the applicant's conviction and remitted the case to the trial court.
In the course of 1999 the Lublin Regional Court held hearings on 26 March, 29 April, 2 June, 6 and 9 September, and 8 October.
On 24 and 29 September, 5 and 26 October 1999, and also 5 April and 10 May 2000, the anonymous witness failed to appear before the court.
The first hearing in 2000 was held on 8 August. On 18 September 2000 the applicant informed the court that he was ill.
The next hearing took place on 4 October 2000. The Regional Court decided to consider the charges against the applicant in separate proceedings.
On 17 October 2000 the Regional Court stayed the criminal proceedings against the applicant because he was in a hospital and could not attend hearings.
On 19 December 2000 the court examined the anonymous witness.
On 4 January 2001 the court received information that the applicant was released from the hospital. On 13 March 2001 it resumed the proceedings.
Subsequently hearing were held on 7 May, 6 June, 5 July and 20 September 2001.
On 20 September 2001 the court fined several witnesses who had failed to attend hearings.
During the hearing held on 5 December 2001 before the Lublin Regional Court the applicant requested that his case be transmitted to another court as he considered that the Lublin Regional Court was a party to the proceedings before the European Court of Human Rights concerning his application. On 15 January 2002 his request was rejected.
On 23 April, 15 May, 20 June and 19 July 2002 the Regional Court held hearings.
On 23 July 2002 the Lublin Regional Court convicted the applicant of receiving stolen cars and sentenced him to two years' imprisonment and a fine.
On 19 August 2002 the applicant appealed his conviction. On 26 November 2002 the Lublin Court of Appeal dismissed his appeal.
On 13 October 1997 the applicant mailed a letter to the European Commission of Human Rights. He handed a sealed envelope containing the letter to the prison authorities. The authorities submitted it to the Lublin Regional Court where the letter was opened and read.
On 20 October 1997 the court returned the letter to the applicant.
Subsequently, he did not send the letter through the prison service but instead mailed it through third persons. The letter was received by the European Commission of Human Rights on 4 November 1997.
At the material time, the Code of Criminal Procedure 1969 listed as preventive measures, inter alia, detention on remand, bail and police supervision. Article 209 of the Code, which set out general grounds justifying the imposition of preventive measures, provided as follows:
“Preventive measures may be imposed in order to secure the proper course of proceedings if the evidence against the accused sufficiently justifies the opinion that he has committed a criminal offence.”
Furthermore, the Code of Criminal Procedure allowed authorities a margin of discretion as to whether to continue the enforcement of preventive measures. Detention on remand was regarded as the most severe preventive measure. Article 213 § 1 of the Code provided as follows:
“A preventive measure shall be immediately quashed or changed if the grounds therefor have ceased to exist or if new circumstances have arisen, which justify quashing a given measure or replacing it with one that is either more or less severe.”
Article 225 of the Code provided:
“Detention on remand shall be imposed only when it is mandatory; this measure shall not be imposed if bail or police supervision, or both of these measures, are considered adequate.”
Article 217 §§ 1 and 2 of the Code provided:
“§  1. Detention on remand may be imposed if:
there is a reasonable risk that an accused will abscond or go into hiding, in particular when his identity cannot be established or he has no permanent domicile, or
there is a reasonable risk that he will attempt to induce witnesses to give false testimony or to obstruct the proper course of proceedings by any other unlawful means.
§  2. If an accused has been charged with a serious offence or an intentional offence [for the commission of which he may be] liable to a sentence of a statutory maximum of at least eight years' imprisonment, or if a court of first instance has sentenced him to at least three years' imprisonment, the need to continue detention in order to secure the proper conduct of proceedings may be based upon the likelihood that a heavy penalty will be imposed.”
Article 218 provided:
“If there are no special reasons to the contrary, detention on remand should be quashed, in particular, when:
it may seriously jeopardise the life or health of the accused; or
it would entail hardship for the accused or his family.”
Until 4 August 1996, when the Code of Criminal Procedure was amended, Polish law did not set out any statutory time-limits concerning detention on remand in court proceedings but only in respect of the investigative stage.
Article 222 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as applicable after 4 August 1996, provided:
“The whole period of detention on remand until the date on which the court of first instance gives judgment may not exceed one year and six months in cases concerning ordinary offences. In cases concerning serious offences this period may not exceed two years.”
On 6 February 1997 the Supreme Court adopted a resolution (no. I KZP 35/96) in which it construed the amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure 1969, which had entered into force on 4 August 1996. The Supreme Court replied in the affirmative to the question whether, after the lodging of a bill of indictment, the trial court was obliged to take a decision prolonging detention on remand which had meanwhile exceeded the period fixed (or further prolonged) at the investigation stage. The relevant parts of the resolution read as follows:
“Under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure which applied before [4 August 1996, when] the amendment of 29 June 1995 took effect, an obligation to determine the period of detention imposed by a prosecutor at the investigation stage was laid down in Article 211 § 2. However, it did not emerge explicitly from Article 222 §§ 1 and 2 (1) of the Code that, at the investigation stage, a prosecutor or the court competent to deal with the case had each time to determine the point until which detention should last. It was deemed to be obvious that, when prolonging detention at the investigation stage, both the prosecutor and the court competent to deal with the case had to determine the time until which detention was to last under a given decision. It was therefore assumed that the obligation to determine the period of detention arose if a decision on that matter was given before the expiry of the maximum statutory terms applicable at a given stage of the proceedings.
Comparing the old legislation with the present one leads [this Court] to the conclusion that the legislator, when amending the Code in June 1995, simply extended [the scope of] the rules applicable to continuing and prolonging detention on remand – which had previously applied only at the investigation stage – to the phase of court proceedings.
Before the amendment, the legislation was based on the precept that a suspect should not be detained indefinitely as long as his case was not being dealt with by an independent court. Now, the starting-point is that a suspect (and an accused) should not be detained indefinitely as long as a first-instance judgment is not rendered.
Under the previous legislation there was no need to determine the period of detention after a bill of indictment had been lodged with the court because at this point proceedings reached the phase in which there was no statutory time-limit [on this measure]. For this reason, the court concerned had no interest in [knowing] until when detention had been prolonged under the last decision[;] detention could continue because 'detention of limited duration' had become 'detention of unlimited duration'. There was therefore only a need to ascertain whether there were grounds for continuing detention under Article 213 of the Code.”
In its further resolution (no. I KZP 23/97) of 2 September 1997, the Supreme Court confirmed that:
“If the case, in which detention on remand had been ordered, has been referred to a court with a bill of indictment and the period of detention which had previously been fixed expires, the court has a duty to consider whether detention needs to be continued and to give an appropriate decision on this matter.”
Referring to the resolution of 6 February 1997, it also stressed that:
“ ... the ratio legis of the amendments to criminal legislation is based on the precept that a suspect (accused) should in no case be detained indefinitely until the firstinstance judgment is rendered in his case ...
It should be noted that, from the point of view of procedural safeguards for an accused, what is material is not how long his detention at the investigation stage has lasted and how long it has lasted at the stage of the court proceedings, but the total period of his detention and whether his detention and its length are subject to review. If there is such a review at the investigation stage (Article 222 §§ 1 and 2), there is no reason why there should not be one at the stage of the court proceedings ...”.
Article 89 § 2 of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences 1969, which was in force until 1 September 1998, provided, in so far as relevant, as follows:
 “(...) [the detainee's] correspondence shall be censored by [the organ at whose disposal he remains], unless the organ decides otherwise.”
Rule 33 of the Rules on Detention on Remand 1989, as amended on 29 December 1995, provides, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“(1)  A detainee has a right to correspond.
(2)  Detainee's correspondence shall be censored by the organ at whose disposal he remains (...).
(3)  Correspondence with the Ombudsman and international institutions for the protection of human rights, which act on the basis of international agreements ratified by the Republic of Poland, is mailed through the intermediary of [that] organ (...).”