The case concerns the recovery of State-owned property from a private person under the laws on purchase in good faith.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Sochi. She was represented by Mr M. Ioffe, a lawyer practising in Riga.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 1977, Southern Cultures, a State horticultural enterprise, dug an irrigation pond on Golubaya Street in Sochi. A bathhouse and a portable cabin were erected on the pond’s banks. The property was built on land which belonged to the State and was managed (хозяйственное ведение) by the enterprise.
The enterprise was indebted to K. for the maintenance of the pond. Litigation ensued, and in April 2003 the enterprise signed over the pond, the bathhouse, and the cabin to K. in partial settlement. K. registered the agreement with the Property Registration Authority (ЕГРП) and was issued with the title deeds (свидетельство о государственной регистрации права, literally “certificate of State registration of title”).
In November 2003 K. sold the property to M.
On 8 December 2003 M. registered his acquisition with the Registration Authority and was issued with the title deeds.
On 27 May 2004 the Presidium of the Krasnodar Regional Court set aside the settlement agreement between the enterprise and K.
On 28 May 2004 M. sold the property to the applicant. He proved his title with the deeds issued by the Registration Authority.
On 18 June 2004 the applicant registered her acquisition with the Registration Authority and was issued with the title deeds. She enclosed the property with four rows of barbed wire and put it to undisclosed personal use.
On 29 August 2004 K. was awarded a sum against the enterprise in payment of the debt.
In 2012 the State Property Agency (Агентство по управлению государственным имуществом) sought to reclaim the property from the applicant, alleging that the enterprise had failed to seek authorisation before signing the property over.
On 20 July 2012 the district court dismissed the action as timebarred.
On 4 October 2012 the Krasnodar Regional Court reversed that decision and found against the applicant. The court found that the land on which the property was situated belonged to the State, that it had been designated for construction in preparation for the Olympics, and that the property could be recovered from the applicant under Articles 301 and 302 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 24 below) because the State had not agreed to the original transfer of the title. The court annulled the applicant’s title deeds and ordered her to return the property to the State.
On 23 November 2012 the Regional Court refused the applicant leave to lodge a cassation appeal.
On 8 August 2013 the Supreme Court refused the applicant leave to lodge a cassation appeal. The court considered that the applicant was not a goodfaith acquirer because, had she exercised due care and diligence, she would have known that the property had been the subject of litigation and that the enterprise had lost possession of it against its will.
In 2011, in related proceedings, the applicant sought an injunction against the State Property Agency to delineate on the cadastral map the plot of land on which her property was situated and to place it at her disposal.
On 5 October 2011 the Adler District Court granted the injunction.
On 17 November 2011 the Krasnodar Regional Court upheld that decision.
The Agency lodged a cassation appeal.
According to the Government, on 10 April 2012 the Regional Court notified both the applicant and her representative by post and telegraph that on 18 April 2012 it would hear the appeal.
According to the applicant’s representative, on 17 April 2012 he telephoned the court and learned of the hearing. Later the same day he faxed a letter to the court in which he stated that he and the applicant wished to attend but were unable to do so because they had not been notified of the hearing and did not know the contents of the appeal, and thus could not respond to it. He asked the court to send to him copies of the documents and to allow them time to prepare their response. The representative added that he could not attend the hearing on 18 April 2012 because of prior engagements in foreign courts.
On 18 April 2012 the Presidium of the Krasnodar Regional Court heard the Agency’s cassation appeal. The hearing was attended by the respondent (the Agency) and two third-party respondents (the public Committee for the Preparation of the 2014 Winter Olympics and a private company which held a contract for construction on the disputed land). The Presidium noted that all the parties had been duly notified of the date and place of the hearing. The Presidium allowed the Agency’s appeal, reversed the earlier decisions and rejected the applicant’s claim. It held, in substance, that the disputed land belonged to the State and had been destined for use as a bird reserve and a 500-room five-star hotel which would accommodate representatives of the International Olympic Committee.
Articles 301 and 302 of the Civil Code 1994 provide as follows:
Article 301: Recovery of property from wrongful possession by another
“The owner may recover his property from wrongful possession by another.”
Article 302: Recovery of property from a good-faith acquirer
“1.  If property was acquired for value from a person who had no right to transfer it, and if the acquirer did not and could not have known this (a good-faith acquirer), the owner may recover the property from the acquirer if the property had been lost by him or his trustee, if it had been stolen from them, or if it had otherwise left their possession against their will....”
The relevant part of Article 385 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure 2002 provides as follows:
“Parties shall be notified of the time and place of the examination of a cassation appeal ... but their non-appearance shall not be an obstacle to such an examination.”
Section 2 of Federal Law no. 122-FZ of 21 July 1997 on State registration of rights to immovable property and related transactions, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
Concept of State registration of rights to immovable property
and related transactions
“1.  The State registration of rights to immovable property and related transactions ... is a legal act by which the State recognises and confirms the existence, restriction (encumbrance), transfer or termination of rights to immovable property. ...
The State registration serves as the sole proof of the existence of a registered right. The registered right to immovable property may be contested only in court.”