The case originated in an application (no.73759/14) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ms Slagana Taseva Petrovska.
The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov.
On 11 October 2016 the complaint concerning adversarial trial before the Higher Administrative Court was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant is a professor of law at a private university in Skopje. She holds a doctoral degree in the field of criminal law.
On 14 January 2010 the applicant lodged a request with the Ministry of Justice (“the Ministry”) in order to be recognised as having the same status as a person who had passed the BAR examination (изедначување со правата на лицата кои положиле правосуден испит). As she did not obtain a decision, she lodged two further requests, on 24 November 2011 and 6 February 2012.
On 11 April 2012 the Ministry rejected her request, holding that she did not meet the relevant criteria to obtain such recognition. In particular, the Ministry found that although she was a professor of law at a university, she did not hold a bachelor’s degree in law (дипломиран правник на правен факултет). The Ministry further found that the bachelor’s degree which she had obtained had been awarded by the Faculty of Security and Social Defence (Факултет за безбедност и општествена самозаштита), and not by a faculty of law, as required.
On 10 May 2012 the applicant brought an action with the Administrative Court (Управен суд), challenging the refusal. She argued that as a university professor at a faculty of law she met the relevant criteria.
On 30 May 2013 the Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s action. It held that regardless of her current status, she did not meet the criteria to obtain the desired recognition under domestic law. In particular, it established that the applicant did not hold a bachelor’s degree in law, which was a condition for the recognition she sought.
On 23 September 2013 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Higher Administrative Court (Виш управен суд). She argued that she met the relevant criteria and that the lower court had failed to properly interpret the procedural and substantive law in the case.
On an unspecified date, the Ministry submitted observations to the Higher Administrative Court concerning the applicant’s case. The Ministry stated in the observations that the right to obtain recognition as having the same status as a person who had passed the BAR examination was dependent on having a bachelor’s degree issued by a faculty of law. The applicant did not possess such a degree and had therefore failed to meet the criteria under domestic law. Those observations were not communicated to the applicant.
On 30 January 2014 the Higher Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal, reiterating in full the reasons provided by the Administrative Court. It restated that the recognition sought by the applicant was dependent on her having a bachelor’s degree issued by a faculty of law, a condition which she had failed to meet.
The decision was served on the applicant on 19 May 2014.
Under sections 1 and 25 of the Act on the BAR examination (Закон за правосудниот испит, Official Gazette No. 10/2010) holding a bachelor’s degree in law is a condition necessary to obtain recognition as someone having passed the BAR examination. The right to seek recognition is available for the persons described in section 24 of the old Act on the BAR examination (Official Gazette Nos. 26/80 and 7/88 of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia).
Section 24 of the Act on the BAR examination (Закон за правосудниот испит, Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia Nos. 26/80 and 7/88) provides an exhaustive list of categories of individuals for whom the right to seek recognition as someone who had passed the BAR examination is available.
According to section 7-a of the Administrative Disputes Act (Закон за управните спорови, Official Gazette No. 62/2006, as applicable at the time) the Civil Proceedings Act will have subsidiary application to administrative disputes.
According to section 5 of the Civil Proceedings Act (Закон за парничната постапка (пречистен текст), Official Gazette No. 7/2011), the courts are obliged to give every party the opportunity to familiarise themselves with and comment on the requests and submissions of the other party in the proceedings.