The case originated in an application (no. 46673/06) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Stanislav Semenovich Kravchenko (“the applicant”), on 7 November 2006.
The applicant, who was granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Sanzhara, a lawyer practising in Dniprodzerzhynsk. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented most recently by their Acting Agent, Ms O. Davydchuk, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained, in particular, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that the proceedings in his case had been unfair and too long.
On 9 November 2010 the applicant’s complaints under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention of a lack of access to a court and of the excessive length of the proceedings were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1939 and lives in Dnipro.
.  He was formerly a shareholder in two private companies, O. and L., which were liquidated on the basis of decisions by other shareholders. Accordingly, the local authorities struck the companies out of the list of legal entities. The applicant instituted several sets of court proceedings in that regard.
On 21 April 2003 the applicant instituted proceedings in the Zhovtnevyy District Court of Dnipro (“the District Court”) against the local council and three private persons, challenging the company’s liquidation, claiming back his shares and seeking compensation. The applicant made changes to his claims on a number of occasions.
In the course of the proceedings, about twenty of the approximately fifty hearings were adjourned at the request of one or more of the parties, or owing to their failure to appear. Between July 2005 and February 2007 no hearings were held pending the outcome of appeals in cassation against a procedural decision by one or other of the defendant parties. Between May 2007 and July 2008 courts at three levels of jurisdiction examined the question of whether the case should be considered within the framework of civil or commercial proceedings. Eventually, it was decided that the case should be examined under the rules of civil procedure and examination on the merits resumed in August 2008.
Overall, the proceedings lasted for over seven years and eight months, the final decision being taken by the Supreme Court on 29 December 2010. That court upheld decisions of the District Court of 30 June 2010 and of the Dnipro Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) of 16 September 2010 rejecting the applicant’s claims as unsubstantiated. The courts found that there had been no violation of the applicant’s rights as a shareholder of O.
In January 2005 the applicant brought a civil claim with the District Court against the local council and a number of private persons, challenging the liquidation of company L. and the authorities’ decisions in that regard. He also sought the restoration of the company as a legal entity, recovery of his shareholding and an order to declare the minutes of the shareholders’ general assembly invalid.
On 2 June 2006, the court decided, in the applicant’s presence, to leave his claim without examination, finding that it concerned essentially the same issue as one which it had examined in proceedings concerning the applicant’s administrative claim (see paragraph 15 and 16 below).
On 7 June 2006 the applicant lodged a statement of intent with the Court of Appeal to appeal against the decision of 2 June 2006. On 16 June 2006 he lodged an appeal, stating, inter alia, that that decision had been incorrect, as his administrative claim had concerned only a part of the issues raised in the civil claim.
On 25 July 2006 the Court of Appeal left the applicant’s appeal without examination, finding that the statement of intent to appeal had been lodged outside the five-day time-limit envisaged by Article 294 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of 2004 (see paragraph 20 below). According to the appeal decision, the time-limit in question had started to run from the date of the pronouncement of the contested decision.
On 9 October 2006 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal in cassation, finding no fault on the part of the lower courts.
In November 2005 the applicant brought an administrative claim in the District Court against the head of the local council, seeking the annulment of the decision striking L. out of the list of legal entities.
On 17 April 2006 the court, having examined the case pursuant to the Code of Administrative Justice of 2005, rejected the applicant’s claim as unsubstantiated, finding that the contested decision had been lawful. The court further noted that the applicant had made allegations of the unlawfulness of the shareholders’ decision to liquidate the company, which could not be examined in the framework of administrative proceedings. It also noted that the applicant’s claim had been brought out of time, though it did not consider it necessary to reject it on that ground.
On 20 September 2006 the Court of Appeal upheld the decision of 17 April 2006.
On 28 October 2008 the Higher Administrative Court quashed the decisions of the lower courts and terminated the proceedings. It found that the claim should not have been examined within the framework of administrative proceedings, as it essentially concerned a property dispute. The Higher Administrative Court noted that the applicant’s claim could be heard under the Code of Civil Procedure of 2004.
Article 257 and 261 of the Code provide that the time-limit for lodging a civil claim is three years and that the calculation of that time-limit starts from the day a person learns, or could have learned, of a breach of his or her rights. According to Article 265 § 1, if a court leaves a claim without examination, the time-limit does not stop running.
The relevant extracts from the Code of Civil Procedure of 2004, as worded at the material time, read as follows:
“1.  The time-limits during which procedural acts are to be performed shall be set by law, and if they have not been set by law [the time-limits shall be] set by the court.”
“1.  A procedural time-limit shall start running the day after the corresponding calendar date (відповідної календарної дати) or [the date of] the event [to which the time-limit is linked].”
“...
The last day of the time-limit shall run until [midnight] ...
The time-limit shall not be considered to be missed if the claim, complaint, other documents or materials, or money have been submitted to the post office or transferred by other means of communication before its expiry.”
“1.  A court shall renew or extend the time-limit ... at the request of a party ... if it has been missed for justifiable reasons.
The question of renewing or extending an expired time-limit shall be decided by the court ... to which a document or evidence was due to be submitted. The persons taking part in the proceedings shall be informed of the place and time of consideration of that question. The presence of those persons is not compulsory.
A document or other evidence concerning which the request [for renewal or extension of the time-limit] has been lodged may be submitted together with the request ...”
“1.  A court shall leave a claim without examination, if:
...
(4)  a dispute between the same parties, concerning the same subject-matter and based on the same grounds is being examined by another court;
...
A claimant shall have the right to lodge the claim again, if the ground(s) for leaving that claim without examination have ceased to exist.”
“...
[A] statement of intent to lodge an appeal against a decision of a first-instance court may be lodged within five days of the day on which the decision was pronounced ...
A statement of intent or an appeal submitted after the expiry of the time-limit shall be left without examination unless the court of appeal finds valid reasons to renew the time-limit upon a request by the appellant ...”
Decisions published in Ukraine’s domestic case-law database (Єдиний державний реєстр судових рішень) demonstrate that at the material time the courts’ practice concerning the calculation of time-limits on appeal under the Code of Civil Procedure of 2004 was not uniform. For instance, in its decision of 13 July 2006, rejecting an appeal in a civil case (no. 22-4456/2006) as lodged out of time, the Zaporizhzhya Court of Appeal held that, as the contested decision of the first-instance court had been delivered on 26 May 2006, the last day for lodging a statement of intent to appeal had been 31 May 2006. In another civil case (no. 22ц- 628) the Chernivtsi Court of Appeal took a similar approach in its decision of 27 July 2006, holding that the time-limit for lodging a statement of intent to appeal against the first-instance decision of 6 July 2006 had expired on 11 July 2006. However, in its decision of 14 July 2006, which also concerned a civil case (no. 22-2324), the Lugansk Court of Appeal held that the last day for lodging a statement of intent to appeal against the first-instance court’s decision of 5 June 2006 had been 9 June 2006.
The relevant part of the Resolution reads as follows:
“In order to ensure the uniform and correct application of the Code of Civil Procedure [of 2004] by the courts when examining cases on appeal, the Plenary Supreme Court resolves to provide the courts with the following explanations:
...
When calculating the time-limits for lodging an appeal against a judgment or a decision of the first-instance court, provided for in Article 294 of the [Code of Civil Procedure of 2004], the rule contained in Article 69 of the [Code] ... shall be taken into account and the requirements of Article 70 of the [Code] shall be complied with. For decisions adopted in camera, those time-limits shall be calculated from the day of their adoption.
...”