The case originated in an application (no. 41582/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Greek national, Mr Panagiotis Stamatis (“the applicant”), on 1st August 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr Ch. Chrysanthakis, a lawyer practising in . The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent's delegate, Mr K. Georghiadis, Senior Adviser at the State Legal Council.
On 1st September 2009 the President of the First Section decided to communicate the complaint concerning the length of the proceedings to the Government and, in due course, the admissibility and merits of the case to be considered together according to Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, as it was in force at the time. In accordance with Protocol no. 14, the application was allocated to a Committee of three Judges.
The applicant is a retired military officer and lives in .
On 31 January 2003 he lodged a recourse with the Athens Administrative Court of Appeal seeking the annulment of a presidential decree dated 26 November 2002, according to which compulsory retirement was ordered, because he had been found to be incapable of working, due to health problems. The applicant also challenged the legality of the medical opinion given by the members of the military committee who had evaluated his physical abilities.
On 10 February 2006 the Administrative Court of Appeal dismissed his recourse. First, the court held that the applicant's allegations regarding the legality of the medical opinion given by the members of the military committee had to be rejected as inadmissible because, under the national legislation, the applicant had to exhaust a preliminary administrative procedure before having recourse to a court. Moreover, the court found that the decree in question was well reasoned (judgment no. 214/2006).
On 14 July 2006 the applicant lodged an appeal with the .
On 3 April 2008 the  upheld the findings of the Administrative Court of Appeal. In particular it found that the appellate court had rightly declared inadmissible a part of the applicant's allegations on the ground that he had not used the preliminary administrative remedy. Further, it was pointed out that the medical opinions in question had been brought to the applicant's notice in good time so that he could lodge an application with the responsible administrative authority. Finally, the court ruled that the Court of Appeal had adequately reasoned its findings concerning the legality of the abovementioned presidential decree (judgment no. 1148/2008). The judgment was finalised on 12 June 2008.