The case originated in an application (no. 30680/09) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Tamaz Kartsivadze (“the applicant”), on 3 March 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms T. Nakashidze, Mr Z. Khatiashvili and Mr G. Gagoshidze, lawyers practising in Tbilisi. The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, most recently Mr B. Dzamashvili of the Ministry of Justice.
On 6 July 2016 notice of the complaint under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (d) of the Convention concerning the applicant’s inability to have a witness against him examined was given to the Government. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1963. When lodging his application he was detained in Tbilisi.
On the late evening of 12 September 1992 there was a scuffle between the applicant and D.M. in the latter’s flat in Batumi. During the incident a gun was fired several times, following which the two left the flat, together with D.M.’s father, G.M.
Shortly after midnight, on 13 September 1992, G.M. was shot dead and his son D.M. sustained severe multiple gunshot wounds near Batumi.
On 13 September 1992 the Khelvachauri district prosecutor’s office opened a criminal investigation into the incidents. On the same date two spent cartridge cases and a bullet were recovered from D.M.’s flat and one spent cartridge case, from the murder scene. The deceased’s body was returned to the family for burial; no post-mortem examination was carried out, in accordance with the family’s wishes.
On 25 September 1992 the Khelvachauri district prosecutor’s office pressed initial charges against the applicant. He was accused of the offences of murder, attempted murder, violation of public order and the unlawful acquisition, possession and carrying of firearms. The applicant went on the run, remaining at large until he was arrested in Russia in May 2006 with a view to his extradition to Georgia.
On 30 September 1992 a ballistic expert issued an opinion regarding the cartridge cases and the bullet recovered from D.M.’s flat and the murder scene. According to the expert report, the cartridge cases recovered from the two separate crime scenes were of the same calibre and “might have been discharged/it may not be ruled out [that the cases] were discharged from the same firearm.”
On 15 September 1992 the investigator granted D.M. the procedural status of victim and summoned him for questioning on 15 and 22 September and 2 November 1992. D.M. refused to give any statement to the police on any of those occasions.
After the applicant’s arrest, on 11 March and 12 May 2006, also on 22 April 2007, a police investigator interviewed D.M. The applicant’s defence was not notified of these interviews or given an opportunity to participate. Each of D.M.’s depositions concerned the incidents of 1213 September 1992 and each new statement added further details regarding the incidents. In sum, D.M. stated as follows during his interviews with police:
On the late evening of 12 September 1992 the applicant visited D.M. in his flat. Upon the applicant’s arrival an argument erupted between D.M. and the applicant, during which the latter fired two shots. Then the applicant took D.M. and G.M. to a nearby village to see a mutual friend. The latter, they hoped, would help them to resolve the conflict. While the applicant was driving, the tension escalated. Then the applicant suddenly stopped the car and fired at D.M. and at G.M. The latter passed out soon after the shooting and regained consciousness when he was in hospital.
On 2 April 2008 the investigation was completed and the applicant was indicted for trial before the Khelvachauri District Court on charges of (i) unlawful acquisition, possession and carrying of firearms, (ii) violation of public order, (iii) murder, and (iv) attempted aggravated murder. The first two charges concerned the incident that had occurred in D.M.’s flat on 12 September 1992 (see paragraph 5 above), and the other two charges concerned the alleged murder and attempted murder that had occurred near Batumi shortly after midnight on 13 September 1992 (see paragraph 6 above).
The applicant pleaded guilty to the charge of violation of public order and not guilty to the remaining charges. He testified that D.M. had extorted money from one of his friends and that he had visited him in order to tell him to stop extorting money. As he had entered D.M.’s flat the latter had taken a gun and fired several shots. Then D.M. had punched him. After D.M.’s father, G.M., had come home, D.M., G.M. and the applicant had agreed to resolve their dispute with the help of A.Ch., according to the applicant, a local organisedcrime leader. The applicant had picked G.M. and D.M. up from their home in his car so they could all go and see A.Ch. Then they had been joined by A.Ch. in the applicant’s car; A.Ch. had then had an argument with D.M., during which he had shot D.M. in the legs. The applicant had removed D.M. from the car. Then he had heard another shot being fired in the car. He did not remember exactly if G.M. had stepped out of the car or had fallen out. A.Ch. had told the applicant not to drive the car for three days and that he would during that time “settle the incident.”
The next day A.Ch.’s brother had told the applicant that D.M. was in hospital and that G.M. had died and that he (the applicant) had to confess to having committed the crime, as A.Ch. was ill and could not take responsibility for the crime. He had learned from A.Ch. that G.M. had been killed with his own gun and that D.M. had been wounded with A.Ch.’s gun.
In response to a summons that he received to the start of the first trial hearing (which was scheduled for 6 July 2007), on 2 July 2007 D.M. submitted a written statement to the court requesting that the trial be conducted in his absence, as he intended to leave the country for medical treatment on 4 July 2007. At the hearing of 6 July 2007 the court, having taken note of D.M.’s statement, ordered that measures be taken to secure his presence at the next hearing.
At the hearing of 17 July 2007, D.M.’s representative presented a letter from the National Border Agency stating that D.M. had left Georgia for Turkey on 15 July 2007. D.M.’s mother, M.Ts., clarified to the court that D.M. had left the country to undergo medical treatment in Turkey, where he would stay for two or three months.
The defence lodged an application with the court, requesting it to adjourn the hearing and order that D.M. be compelled to appear before the court, pursuant to Article 176 of the Criminal Code of Procedure (“CCP”). The applicant argued that admitting as evidence D.M.’s pre-trial statements without giving him (that is to say the applicant) the opportunity to examine the witness would compromise his defence rights. He added that D.M.’s evidence was crucial for the prosecution case, given the fact that he was the only direct witness to the alleged murder and attempted murder. The court dismissed the defence’s application and ordered that the records of D.M.’s interviews by the police be read out. The trial records do not contain the reasons for that decision.
D.M.’s mother and his wife testified that late on the evening of 12 September 1992 the applicant had visited their family. Upon arrival he had demanded to see D.M. After the latter had come out of his room an argument had erupted between the two during which the applicant had punched D.M. Then the applicant had fired several shots with his pistol. Soon thereafter G.M. had arrived; then G.M., D.M. and the applicant had left. Both witnesses stated that they had been notified after midnight on 13 September 1992 of the killing of G.M. and the wounding of D.M. D.M.’s sister, who was also interviewed in-court, confirmed seeing the applicant armed. She also confirmed that the applicant forced her father and brother to leave the apartment together with him.
Two neighbours of D.M. testified that they had heard shooting and noise from D.M.’s flat during the late evening of 12 September 1992. Soon thereafter they had seen G.M., D.M. and a person unknown to them leaving the flat.
Three other witnesses stated that D.M. had been extorting money from them and that they had asked the applicant to help them. They affirmed that this was the reason for the conflict between the applicant and D.M.
E.K., the applicant’s father, stated that on 13 September 1992 he had been told that his son had accidentally killed G.M. When he had met his son after that, the latter had stated that there had been a scuffle and a gun was accidentally shot. E.K. mentioned nothing in his testimony about the applicant having attempted to murder D.M. According to the relevant part of the hearing transcript, while E.K. was testifying, the applicant intervened. The court recorded the following exchange between the two:
The applicant: “Did I say that I had killed him or did I say that I was trying to make him drop the gun?”
K.: “You said that the killing had happened accidentally during the scuffle.”
The prosecution also presented (i) crime scene examination records that documented the recovery of the spent cartridge cases and the bullet from D.M.’s flat and the murder scene, respectively (see paragraph 7 above) and (ii) the report on the ballistic examination of the spent cartridge cases and the bullet found at the two crime scenes (see paragraph 9 above). The prosecution asserted that those items constituted circumstantial evidence suggesting that it was the applicant who had discharged the firearm at the two different crime scenes, as according to the forensic evidence the cartridge cases found at the two different crime scenes “might have been discharged from the same firearm”.
The prosecution also submitted another forensic report, confirming that the injuries sustained by D.M. during the incident had been lifethreatening.
On 25 July 2007 the Khelvachauri District Court (“the trial court”) convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to fifteen years in prison. The court held that the incriminating evidence presented by the prosecution and examined by the trial court was consistent and sufficiently proved the applicant’s guilt. The court held that the crime scene examination records and the report on the subsequent ballistic examination of the recovered items confirmed that the cartridge cases and bullet found at D.M.’s flat and the bullets taken out of G.M.’s body had been discharged from the same firearm (see paragraph 22 above). As multiple witnesses had confirmed that it was the applicant who had discharged a firearm in D.M.’s flat (see paragraphs 18 and 19 above), the court reached the assumption that the murder and the attempted murder had been also committed by the applicant. In reaching this conclusion it also relied on the pre-trial statements of D.M. The court also inferred from the above-mentioned intervention by the applicant in E.K.’s examination by the trial court that the applicant had admitted killing G.M. accidentally (see paragraph 21 above).
The applicant appealed against his conviction to the Kutaisi Court of Appeal. He reiterated the pleadings that he had made before the firstinstance court and requested that D.M. be questioned in court. He claimed that the only direct witness to the murder and attempted murder was D.M, who had given several contradictory statements during the pre-trial phase of the investigation; hence, the applicant should have been allowed to cross-examine him in court.
The appeal court summoned D.M. to three consecutive hearings, held on 17 and 31 October and 14 November 2007. D.M. failed to respond to any of the summonses. At the hearing of 17 October 2007 the prosecution stated that according to the information that they had received, D.M. was abroad again. They submitted no new evidence in support of that statement. The applicant insisted on taking measures to bring the witness before the court. At the hearing of 14 November 2007, he submitted that the witness had been seen in his home town of Batumi days before the hearing and that the prosecution was simply pretending that he was abroad.
On 14 November 2007 the appeal court dismissed an application lodged by the defence for an adjournment of the hearing and the taking of additional measures to bring the absent witness to court. The court held that the National Border Agency’s records of 17 July 2007 (see paragraph 16 above), as presented to the trial court, gave sufficient grounds to conclude that D.M. was abroad; hence, it was not in a position to take any further measures aimed at securing the witness’s attendance.
On 28 November 2007 the Kutaisi Court of Appeal upheld the applicant’s conviction. In its judgment the court held that it substantially subscribed to the findings of the trial court but had reservations as to the accuracy of the ballistics expert’s opinion that had been cited by the trial court (see paragraphs 9 and 22 above). According to the appeal court, the expert had in fact submitted that “he did not rule out” the possibility that the cartridge cases had been discharged from the same firearm; however, he had not made a definitive finding in that respect. The appeal court furthermore noted that the cartridge cases had not been taken from the deceased’s body (as had been stated in the first-instance judgment) but from the murder scene. The court further held that the statements given by D.M. were credible and consistent with other evidence. The appeal court made no observation regarding any possible effects on the course of the trial of the applicant’s inability to cross-examine D.M. Nor did the appeal court mention the trial court’s inference that the applicant had admitted during E.K.’s examination to having accidentally killed G.M. and the fact that the trial court had adduced that admission as incriminating evidence. The appeal court relied on E.K.’s testimony to the extent that it refuted the applicant’s account of events.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court. He argued, inter alia, that the admission of untested witness statements made by D.M. as evidence had rendered his trial unfair.
By a judgment of 30 September 2008 the Supreme Court fully upheld the applicant’s conviction. The court, holding that the applicant’s trial had overall been fair, gave no separate ruling as to the issue raised by the absence of D.M. from the trial and appeal proceedings.
The following provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1998 (“the CCP”), as in force at the material time, are relevant.
Article 44 § 57 of the CCP provided that a victim or witness wishing to excuse himself from court on medical grounds was required to present to that court a medical certificate specifically stating that the state of his or her health prevented him from appearing before the court.
Under Article 173 of the CCP, a victim was obliged to appear before the court dealing with the case in question upon being summoned by that court.  A victim or witness could be compelled to appear before such a court if he or she had failed – without acceptable justification – to comply with an earlier summons.
Under Article 176 of the CCP, a court order concerning the compulsory appearance of a victim was to be enforced by the police.
Under Article 207 § 2 of the CCP, a victim of (or any other participant in) proceedings was to be fined by the court in question if he failed – without any acceptable justification – to appear before it upon being summoned. Imposing a fine did not absolve the victim or witness from the obligation to appear in the event that he or she was summoned again.
Article 469 § 1 of the CCP provided that if a victim or witness who had been summoned failed to appear, the court in question, having heard the opinions of the parties, should decide whether to continue or adjourn the trial proceedings. The proceedings could be continued if that person’s failure to appear did not prejudice the thorough, complete and objective examination of the circumstances of the case.
Under Article 481 § 1 of the CCP, it was permissible to read out during a trial victim or witness statements given during the relevant pre-trial investigation if the victim or witness in question had died, was abroad or was absent from the court hearing for reasons that ruled out the possibility of his appearing in court. Such a statement could also be admitted as evidence if the victim or witnesses requested that the court do so. However, the statement of an absent witness could not constitute the sole evidence cited in respect of a conviction.
Under Article 247 § 1 (a) of the CCP, a court was empowered to request international legal assistance, including in respect of the hearing of witnesses.
Under Article 305 § 6 of the CCP, upon the request of a party or parties to the proceedings in question, a court was empowered to hear a witness via audio/video link from another court.
Mutual assistance in criminal matters between Georgia and Turkey was governed at the material time (and is still governed) by the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters of 20 April 1959 (“the 1959 Convention”).  Under Article 1 § 1 of the 1959 Convention, the Contracting Parties undertake to afford each other “the widest measure of mutual assistance” in criminal matters.
Under Article 3 §§ 1 and 2 of the 1959 Convention, one Member State can request the judicial authorities of another Member State to take evidence from witnesses on their behalf.
Under Article 7 § 1 of the 1959 Convention, the serving of summonses may also be requested as a form of assistance.