The case originated in an application (no. 27341/05) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vladimir Nikolayevich Tverdokhlebov (“the applicant”), on 29 June 2005.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Yuriy Zaytsev.
On 15 October 2008 the Court decided to communicate the complaint concerning the length of the civil proceedings to the Ukrainian Government. It also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 3).
On 21 October 2008 the Government of the  were asked whether they intended to intervene in the proceedings as a third party (Article 36 § 1 and Rule 44).
On 17 December 2008 the Government of the  informed the Court that they did not wish to exercise their right to intervene in the proceedings as a third party.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lived in Gukovo. In December 2007 the applicant died and his sister, Mrs Irina Nikolayevna Kulikova, indicated that she wished to pursue the case.
On 13 February 1997 the applicant was apprehended at the Chervonopartizanskyy border crossing point on suspicion of drug trafficking. On the same date the applicant's car, which he had been driving at the time, was seized together with his belongings, documents and money which were in it. The customs officers refused to compile an inventory of objects seized from the applicant. Subsequently, the Customs Service transferred the car to a private company called Forum for storage.
On 26 June 1997 the  sentenced the applicant to five years' imprisonment for drug trafficking and confiscated all of his property.
On 8 October 1997 the  modified that judgment, sentencing the applicant to five years' imprisonment, suspended, without confiscation.
On 5 November 1997 the applicant approached Forum to ask for the return of his car. When the car was returned, the applicant noted that it had been seriously damaged and lacked several parts, the documents and belongings had been torn up and his money had disappeared. According to the company, the Customs Service had transferred the car in that condition on 20 February 1997.
On 4 January 1998 the applicant instituted proceedings in the  against the Sverdlovsk Customs Service seeking compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage and stating that the defendant had failed to comply with its obligation to keep his property undamaged and without loss.
On 26 March 1998 the court partially allowed the applicant's claims and awarded him part of the compensation claimed.
On 28 May 1998 the  quashed that judgment and remitted the case for fresh consideration to the same court.
On 9 November 1998 the  rejected the applicant's claims as unsubstantiated.
On 19 February 1999 the prosecutor's office initiated criminal proceedings against two customs officers, Mr V. and Mr C., following a request from the applicant in which he alleged that these persons were responsible for the damage to his car and belongings.
On 15 September 1999 the Presidium of the  quashed the judgment of 9 November 1998 at the request of the prosecutor's office and remitted the case for fresh consideration to the first-instance court.
On 16 February 2000 the  suspended the civil proceedings pending the outcome of the criminal proceedings against Mr V. and Mr C.
The criminal investigation in the criminal case against Mr V. and Mr C. is still pending.
On an unspecified date following the applicant's death, his mother, Mrs Nasima Mullakhmetovna Tverdokhlebova, and daughter, Ms Mariya Vladimirovna Tverdokhlebova, joined the civil proceedings as the applicant's successors. They are represented before the domestic court by Mrs Irina Vladimirovna Kulikova, the applicant's sister.
According to Mrs Kulikova, in May 2009 the hearings in the civil case in question resumed and the case is currently pending before the first instance court.