The case originated in an application (no. 8088/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Artak Gabrielyan (“the applicant”), on 3 February 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Muller, Mr T. Otty, Mr K. Yildiz and Ms L. Claridge, lawyers of the Kurdish Human Rights Project (KHRP) based in London, and Mr T. Ter-Yesayan and Mr E. Babayan, lawyers practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 10 September 2008 the President of the Third Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1938 and lives in .
In February and March 2003 a presidential election was held in Armenia, during which the applicant was involved as an authorised election assistant (վստահված անձ) for the candidate representing the People’s Party of  (PPA), who was the main opposition candidate in the election. Following his defeat by the incumbent President, the PPA candidate challenged the election results in the Constitutional Court, which on 16 April 2003 recommended that a referendum of confidence in the re-elected President be held in  within a year.
As the April 2004 one-year deadline approached, the opposition stepped up its campaign to challenge the legitimacy of the re-elected President. At the end of March 2004 two main opposition groups – the Justice Alliance, consisting of nine parties, including the PPA and the National Unity Party – announced their intention to start a series of demonstrations demanding the resignation of the re-elected President.
The applicant alleges that from February 2003 until his arrest in April 2004 he was repeatedly harassed because of his political activity. In particular, the police frequently called him to the police station without any reasons and demanded that he stop his political activities and support for the opposition.
On 30 March 2004 criminal proceedings no. 62201704 were instituted under Article 301 and 318 § 2 of the Criminal Code (CC) against representatives of the Justice Alliance on account of making calls for a violent overthrow of the government and change of the Armenian constitutional order and of publicly insulting government representatives.
On 8 April 2004 the applicant was handing out leaflets to people at a marketplace in , inciting them to attend a demonstration to be held in the capital on 9 April 2004. The leaflets had the following content:
“Fellow countrymen
It is not possible any more to continue this way.
On 9 April at 4 p.m. in  we will start our struggle which aims to establish a lawful government in . The future of our homeland depends on the participation of each of us.
National Unity Party					Justice Alliance”
The applicant was stopped by two police officers, G.D. and G.A., who demanded that he accompany them to a police station. It appears that this happened at around 1 p.m.
According to the applicant, they arrived at the police station at around 1.30 p.m. At the police station he was placed in a waiting room with a glass wall next to the corridor, where he spent about ten hours. During this period he noticed several people behind the glass wall pointing at him as if to identify him. He had no access to a lawyer during this period.
It appears that at some point the applicant was transferred to a prosecutor’s office where from 8.55 to 9.05 p.m. and from 9.30 to 10.05 p.m. two confrontations were held between him and two witnesses, M.M. and N.S., respectively, who worked at the marketplace. The relevant records stated at the outset that there had been substantial contradictions between the statements of these witnesses and the applicant, who at this stage was also involved as a witness.
Witness M.M. stated during the confrontation that earlier that day, at around 2 p.m., he had noticed the applicant handing out leaflets and saying something to people at the marketplace. Then the applicant had approached him and given him a leaflet, saying that “the day after it would be the end of the government and the government would be changed and that they would put an end to the government and sort them out”.
stated that the applicant had approached him at around 1 p.m. and given him a leaflet, saying that he should “come to the demonstration where they would crush and overcome”, after which the applicant left.
The applicant denied having handed out any leaflets or made any such statements.
At 10.30 p.m. an arrest record was drawn up which noted that eye-witnesses had stated that the applicant had handed out leaflets and made calls for a violent overthrow of the government. The applicant again denied these allegations.
On the same date the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan granted the investigator’s motion to have the applicant’s flat searched. This decision stated that there were sufficient grounds to believe that written calls, leaflets, plans and projects to overthrow the government and change the constitutional order violently and to insult representatives of the government publicly, as well as firearms, ammunition and other objects and documents relevant to the case, could be found in the applicant’s flat.
On 9 April 2004 the investigator invited a legal aid lawyer, H.I., to represent the applicant’s interests. According to the relevant record, the applicant agreed that his interests be represented by lawyer H.I.
On the same date from 10.30 to 11.10 a.m. the applicant’s flat was searched in the presence of two attesting witnesses but no items were found.
From 1.05 to 2.25 p.m. the applicant was questioned as a suspect in the presence of lawyer H.I. The applicant again denied all the allegations.
On 10 April 2004 the applicant was formally charged within the scope of criminal proceedings no. 62201704 under Article 301 of the CC. This decision stated:
“...[the applicant], having received from [the district office] of the National Unity Party leaflets concerning the demonstration to be held on 9 April 2004 at 4 p.m. on Freedom Square with the aim of “establishing a lawful government in Armenia”, distributed these leaflets to citizens and made calls to overthrow the government and change the constitutional order violently.
On 8 April 2004 at around 1 p.m. [the applicant] was caught by police officers while he was handing out the leaflets and a total of 24 leaflets were confiscated from him.
Thus, [the applicant] has made calls to overthrow the government and change the constitutional order violently, namely he has committed an offence envisaged under Article 301 of the [CC].”
The applicant and his lawyer signed this decision which, inter alia, stated that the nature of the charge had been explained to the applicant. The applicant once again gave his consent to be represented by lawyer H.I. He was then questioned as an accused in the presence of his lawyer. The applicant submitted that the nature of the charge was clear to him but denied having distributed leaflets or made any calls at the marketplace.
On the same date the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan granted the investigator’s motion, dated 6 April 2004, to have the applicant detained.
On 21 April 2004 a confrontation was held between the applicant and another witness, V.Z., who apparently also worked at the marketplace. He identified the applicant as the person who had approached him on 8 April 2004, handed him a leaflet and told him to attend a demonstration on the following day during which a struggle to change the government would begin and that the authorities were unlawful and had to be changed. The applicant again denied having distributed leaflets or made any calls and submitted that witness V.Z. had been forced by the police to make false submissions. This confrontation was held in the presence of lawyer H.I.
On 6 May 2004 another confrontation was held between the applicant and arresting police officer G.D. who submitted that on 8 April 2004 at around 12 noon, having noticed that the applicant was distributing leaflets at the marketplace, they had approached him and asked to have a look at the leaflets. Having read what the leaflets said, they asked the applicant to come with them to the police station for clarification. The applicant denied these allegations. This confrontation was held in the presence of lawyer H.I.
On 7 May 2004 another confrontation was held between the applicant and the second arresting police officer, G.A., who made submissions similar to those made by police officer G.D. The applicant submitted in reply that police officer G.A.’s statement was true and that he had not told the entire truth in his previous submissions. The applicant admitted that he had distributed the leaflets at the marketplace but denied having said anything or made any calls for a violent overthrow of the government. He submitted that he regretted his actions and requested to be released from detention. This confrontation was held in the presence of lawyer H.I.
On the same day the applicant was again questioned as an accused in the presence of lawyer H.I., during which he made similar submissions and pleaded partly guilty.
Later that day lawyer H.I. filed a motion with the General Prosecutor’s Office, seeking to have the applicant released from detention. He submitted that the applicant was known to be of good character, had a permanent place of residence, was a pensioner and would not abscond or obstruct the proceedings if freed. Furthermore, he had no criminal record, had pleaded guilty and regretted his actions.
It appears that on unspecified dates two other witnesses, O.V. and S.K., were also questioned in connection with the applicant’s case. Witness O.V. stated that a tall person had been distributing leaflets at the marketplace on 8 April 2004. When handing him a leaflet, he said that a struggle aimed at establishing a lawful government in  would begin at the demonstration of 9 April 2004. He further incited everybody to participate in the struggle, topple the government and make a coup. Witness S.K. stated that a tall elderly person had handed him a leaflet at the marketplace on 8 April 2004 and incited him to join the struggle, eliminate the current government, topple them by force and establish a new order.
The applicant alleged, which the Government did not dispute, that throughout the entire investigation his lawyer had never met or spoken with him in private, while in detention, to provide legal advice. Furthermore, the lawyer even failed to satisfy his request to be provided with a copy of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On an unspecified date the applicant’s case was brought before the Avan and Nor Nork District Court of Yerevan which started its examination on 31 May 2004. The applicant submitted before the District Court that he wished to be represented by lawyer H.I.
The examining judge noted at the outset that the witnesses had been duly notified but had failed to appear and inquired about the opinion of the parties. The prosecutor submitted that they had to be compelled to appear. The lawyer made a similar submission on the ground that it was impossible to examine the case without the witnesses. The judge agreed and adjourned the hearing until 2 June 2004.
At the hearing of 2 June 2004 four witnesses appeared, witnesses N.S. and M.M. and police officers G.D. and G.A..
admitted that he was seeing the applicant for the second time, the first time being on 8 April 2004 at the prosecutor’s office. He further submitted that about a month before he was at work at the marketplace when somebody had approached and given him a leaflet, adding that “tomorrow at 1 p.m. there would be a demonstration on ”. The person handing out the leaflets was tall and had grey hair. He gave the leaflet and said “come at this hour, we will crush, shatter and conquer”.  submitted that he had understood from these statements that the demonstrators wanted to change the government. In reply to the applicant’s lawyer’s questions, witness N.S. submitted that he was not familiar with that person and he could not say for sure if it was the applicant who had given the leaflet and made the statements. He was sure though that he had seen the applicant at the prosecutor’s office.  explained that he had stated at the prosecutor’s office that he had not seen who was distributing the leaflets, to which they replied that it had been the applicant. In reply to the judge’s question as to why he had stated unequivocally during the investigation that it was the applicant who had distributed the leaflets and made the above statements, witness N.S. submitted that he had said so because he had been told at the prosecutor’s office that it was the applicant who was distributing leaflets in the area of the marketplace. He further submitted that he could not remember who it was, but people around him said that it was the applicant, so he said the same.
Witness M.M. submitted that at some point in May he was at the marketplace when the applicant, who was distributing leaflets, approached him and invited him to a demonstration in order to “turn over” the government. The applicant then left. Witness M.M. further confirmed his pre-trial statement and asked to rely on it. He also confirmed that the person distributing the leaflets, like the applicant, had grey hair and a white shirt and was tall.
Police officer G.D. submitted that he was on duty at the marketplace with police officer G.A. where they noticed a person who was handing out leaflets. They approached him and brought to the police station, where he was identified as the applicant. They could not hear what he was saying to the vendors. In reply to the applicant’s lawyer’s questions, police officer G.D. said that he personally did not hear any calls from the applicant. Nor did any of the vendors tell him that the applicant had made calls.
Police officer G.A. made similar submissions.
The examining judge then announced that he had received an official letter from the police stating that witness S.K. had not been found at his place of residence, that witness O.V. was absent from his place of residence and lived elsewhere, and that the court’s decision ordering the appearance of these witnesses, in its part concerning witness V.Z., had not been executed for reasons not communicated to the court. The prosecutor requested that the pre-trial statements of these witnesses be read out. The applicant and his lawyer consented, after which the statements were read out.
The applicant was then examined, during which he admitted that he had distributed leaflets but denied having made any calls for a violent overthrow of the government.
Thereafter the trial entered its final stage of pleadings. The prosecutor made a speech, followed by the applicant’s lawyer and the applicant himself. The lawyer, in particular, made the following speech: “I find that the defendant must be acquitted”.
On the same date the District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and imposed a one year suspended sentence, ordering at the same time the applicant’s release from detention under a written undertaking not to leave his place of residence. The District Court found, in particular, that:
“On 8 April 2004 [the applicant] received leaflets from the Avan and Nor Nork district office of National Unity Party concerning a rally to be held on 9 April 2004 at 4 p.m. on Freedom Square, distributed them to persons working and involved in trade in the area of the seventh market situated in [Nork] and made public calls inciting to a violent overthrow of the government and the constitutional order. In particular, when handing out leaflets to [N.S., M.M., V.Z., O.V. and S.K.], he incited them to participate in the rally telling them ‘You must come by all means, we will crush, overcome, put an end to the government and sort them out, we will make a coup, we will violently overthrow the current government and establish a new order’”
In support of its findings the District Court relied on the statements of witnesses N.S., M.M., V.Z., O.V. and S.K. As regards, in particular, the statements made by witness N.S. in court, the District Court dismissed them as unreliable and admitted his statements made during the confrontation of 8 April 2004. The District Court justified this decision by the fact that the statements made by witness N.S. during the confrontation had been unequivocal. Thus, according to the entirety of the witness statements relied on by the District Court, the applicant had made the following calls while handing out the leaflets and inciting people to attend the demonstration: “we will crush and overcome” (witness N.S.), “the government will be changed and we will put an end to the government and sort them out” (witness M.M.), “a struggle will start at the demonstration aimed at changing the government and establishing a lawful one”, “the current government will be overthrown and a new one will be established”, “the current government is unlawful and has to be changed” (witness V.Z.), “the government has to be overthrown and a coup has to be made” (witness O.V.) and “the current government has to be eliminated and violently overthrown and a new order has to be established” (witness S.K.).
On 14 June 2004 the applicant lodged an appeal, which he apparently drafted himself. In his appeal the applicant submitted that during the investigation he had pleaded guilty only to distributing leaflets, which in any event was not an offence, but he had never made any calls for a violent overthrow of the government. He was not a member of any political party, had never participated in demonstrations or had links with the parties organising them. The applicant further complained about the fact that the statements made by witnesses N.S. and M.M. in court, which were favourable for him, had been considered unreliable, while other witnesses, being ashamed of their false statements, had failed to appear in court. He argued that the statements of those witnesses who had not been examined in court should not have served as a basis for his conviction. The applicant lastly stated that the arresting police officers had not heard him make any calls. Thus, he had been convicted on the basis of statements of two or three witnesses who had seen him for the first time at the prosecutor’s office.
On 29 June 2004 the proceedings commenced before the Criminal and Military Court of Appeal. The applicant submitted before the Court of Appeal that he wished to be represented by lawyer H.I. and pleaded not guilty. Lawyer H.I. also claimed that the applicant was not guilty and asked the court to acquit him.
At the hearing of 30 June 2004, following the applicant’s examination, the presiding judge announced that it was necessary to summon and examine witnesses O.V., V.Z. and S.K. He further stated that he had telephoned all three witnesses on the previous day. O.V.’s wife replied that about a month before he had gone to  for work and his whereabouts were unknown. V.Z.’s wife replied that he had gone to another region for work and that she had no further information about him. S.K.’s relatives replied that he had left  for work. The Court of Appeal decided, taking into account that the attendance of the above witnesses was indispensable, that they be compelled to appear. This task was assigned to the local police department. The hearing was adjourned until 6 July 2004.
At the hearing of 6 July 2004 the presiding judge announced that, according to the police, the witnesses were absent from their places of residence. The police had promised to provide further information in writing. In reply to the presiding judge’s question, the parties did not object to proceeding with the hearing and requested that measures be taken to ensure the attendance of the witnesses at the next hearing.
At the hearing of 7 July 2004 the presiding judge informed the parties that an official letter had been received from the police informing that witnesses O.V., V.Z. and S.K. were absent from their places of residence. While reading out that letter, the presiding judge noticed that the police had visited the wrong address as far as witness V.Z. was concerned. The prosecutor then requested that their statements be read out. Lawyer H.I. submitted that the witnesses in question had made defamatory statements against the applicant during the investigation which lacked credibility and it was therefore necessary to bring them to court with the help of the police. The applicant joined his lawyer’s request and asked that the witnesses in question appear in court and also present their identity documents. The Court of Appeal decided that, since a wrong address had been indicated in the decision ordering V.Z.’s appearance in court, it was necessary to inform the police of the correct address. As regards witnesses O.V. and S.K., the former was in , while the latter was out of town. This was also confirmed by the telephone calls made by the presiding judge. The Court of Appeal found that, in such circumstances, there were no reasons to doubt the veracity of the police information and announced that it would read out and examine the pre-trial statements of those witnesses. The statements would then be analysed in the deliberation room and an assessment would be made as to their credibility, since the evidence examined in court was sufficient to allow such an assessment. The Court of Appeal then proceeded to read out the statements in question. The applicant submitted that their statements did not concern him since there had been many tall, grey-haired men at the marketplace. The investigating authority had never arranged his identification by those witnesses and their statements were therefore false.
At the hearing of 12 July 2004 the presiding judge announced that an official letter had been received from the police, according to which witness V.Z. indeed resided at the correct address but nobody answered the door during their visit. The presiding judge announced that, not being satisfied by the information contained in the police letter, he personally called V.Z.’s home and became convinced that nobody was there because nobody answered the telephone. The prosecutor requested that the statement of witness V.Z. be read out in court, while both the applicant and his lawyer submitted that the statement of witness V.Z. lacked credibility and requested that it be disregarded. The court then proceeded to read out the statement.
At the same hearing the applicant filed a motion with the Court of Appeal dispensing with the services of lawyer H.I. He submitted that the lawyer had not taken any steps to defend his interests and to prove his innocence. The lawyer had never come to visit him in detention despite the requests he had made to the administration of the detention facility. Furthermore the lawyer, without his knowledge, had filed a motion on 7 May 2004 seeking his release, in which the lawyer stated that he had pleaded guilty despite the fact that he had never pleaded fully guilty, thereby acting to his detriment and assisting the prosecution in substantiating the charge against him. The applicant claimed that he had found out about this motion only during the appeal proceedings. He further claimed in his motion that he had pleaded guilty to distributing leaflets because he was not aware that such act did not constitute an offence. He realised this only following his release from detention because no copy of the Criminal Code had been provided to him by either the investigator or his lawyer while in detention, despite his numerous requests. The applicant lastly claimed that the case against him had been fabricated. He submitted that, while sitting behind a glass wall at the police station, he was shown to some people who later became witnesses and made false statements against him. Some of them he was not able to examine and only two of them appeared in court. One of those two retracted his pre-trial statement, while the second one, because of giving a false statement, was even ashamed to look him in the eyes and was only able to mumble a confirmation of his pretrial statement.
The applicant stated at the same time that it was his personal choice to dispense with the services of his lawyer. The Court of Appeal decided to grant the applicant’s motion and to allow him to defend himself in person. The lawyer was then asked to leave the courtroom.
On the same date the Criminal and Military Court of Appeal adopted its judgment upholding the applicant’s conviction. In doing so, the Court of Appeal referred to the statements of witnesses N.S., M.M., O.V. and S.K. and of police officers G.D. and G.A. As regards the statement of witness V.Z., the Court of Appeal found that it should not have formed a basis for the applicant’s conviction because that witness had failed to appear in court despite a court order. The Court of Appeal further rejected the applicant’s claim that he had only distributed leaflets but not made any calls for a violent overthrow of the government. In doing so, the Court of Appeal stated that five witnesses had testified that the applicant had made such calls. Furthermore, the police officers had arrested him while he was handing out the leaflets. In the light of the overall sufficiency of evidence, the fact that witnesses O.V. and S.K. had failed to appear in court could not put into doubt the applicant’s involvement in the act and his guilt. The criminal element in his actions lay in the making of calls inciting violent seizure of power and change of the constitutional order. Those calls were public and aimed at a big group of people. Since he made such calls at a marketplace during the daytime, they were audible to the public. The fact that they were perceived as calls inciting to a violent overthrow of the government was confirmed by the witness statements.
The Court of Appeal further dismissed the applicant’s complaint about lawyer H.I., stating that the applicant’s right to defence had been ensured by the investigating authority, he had chosen his position regarding the charge against him without any outside pressure and he had not previously made any complaints about the lawyer. Furthermore, the fact that the nature of the charge was clear to the applicant was evident from the records of investigative measures. He had certified this with his signature in the presence of his lawyer.
On 14 July 2004 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law in which he raised arguments concerning the witnesses against him and the alleged failure of lawyer H.I. to provide effective legal assistance, similar to those raised in his complaint of 12 July 2004. He also added that the witness statements against him had been fabricated under police pressure. The witnesses in question were people trying to make a living by working at the market, so if they had refused to follow police orders they would have been immediately expelled from the market.
On 6 August 2004 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal. In doing so, the Court of Cassation found that both witnesses M.M. and N.S. had made statements implicating the applicant. As regards the legal representation, the applicant had agreed that lawyer H.I. defend his interests and the lawyer had properly done so.
By a letter of 11 November 2004 the head of staff of the Armenian Bar Association informed the applicant, in reply to his complaint, that lawyer H.I. had lawfully carried out the applicant’s defence and had not done anything illegal. The motion of 7 May 2004 had been filed upon the applicant’s and his relatives’ request.
The relevant provisions of the CC provide:
Article 301: Public calls inciting to a violent change of the constitutional order of 
“Public calls inciting to a violent seizure of State power and violent change of the constitutional order of Armenia shall be punishable by a fine of between 300 and 500 times the minimum wage or by detention of between two and three months or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding three years.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure provide:
Article 62: A suspect
“1.  A suspect is the person ... who has been arrested on suspicion of having committed an offence...”
Article 63: Rights and obligations of a suspect
“1.  The suspect has the right to defence. The investigating authority shall allow the suspect to implement his right to defence by all lawful means.
The suspect, in accordance with a procedure prescribed by this Code, has the right ... to have a defence counsel or to dispense with a defence counsel and defend himself in person from the moment when he is presented with the investigating authority’s decision on arrest, the record of arrest or the decision on choosing a preventive measure...”
Article 86: A witness
“3.  A witness is obliged ... to appear upon the summons of the authority dealing with the case in order to give testimonies or to participate in investigative and other procedural measures...
The failure of a witness to comply with his obligations shall lead to sanctions prescribed by law.”
Article 153: Compulsion to appear
“1.  [A] witness ... may be compelled to appear by a reasoned decision of ... the court if he fails to appear upon summons without valid reasons. [A] witness ... is obliged to inform the summoning authority if there are valid reasons preventing his appearance within the time-limit fixed in the summons.”
Article 216: Confrontation
“1.  The investigator is entitled to carry out a confrontation of two persons who have been questioned previously and whose statements contain substantial contradictions. The investigator is obliged to carry out a confrontation if there are substantial contradictions between the statements of the accused and some other person.
...
In cases envisaged by this Code, a defence counsel, an interpreter and the lawful representative of the person being questioned can participate in the confrontation and shall also sign the record.”
Article 332: Deciding on the possibility of examining the case in the absence of a witness, expert or specialist who has failed to appear
“1.  If any of the witnesses ... summoned to court has failed to appear, the court, having heard the opinions of the parties, shall decide on continuing or adjourning the proceedings. The proceedings may be continued if the failure to appear of any of such persons shall not obstruct the thorough, complete and objective examination of the circumstances of the case.”
Article 342:  out of witness statements
“1.  Reading out at the trial of witness statements made during the inquiry, the investigation or a previous court hearing ... is permissible if the witness is absent from the court hearing for reasons which rule out the possibility of his appearance in court, if there is substantial contradiction between those statements and the statements made by that witness in court, and in other cases prescribed by this Code.”
Article 426.1: The court reviewing judicial acts on the ground of newly discovered or new circumstances
“1.  Only final acts are subject to review on the ground of newly discovered or new circumstances.
On the ground of newly discovered or new circumstances a judicial act of the court of first instance shall be review by the appeal court, while the judicial acts of the appeal court and the Court of Cassation shall be reviewed by the Court of Cassation.”
Article 426.4: Grounds and time-limits for review on the ground of new circumstances
“1.  Judicial acts may be reviewed on the ground of new circumstances [if] ... a violation of a right guaranteed by an international convention to which  is a party has been found by a final judgment or decision of an international court...”