The case originated in an application (no. 22635/09) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Austrian national, Mr Gerhard Willroider (“the applicant”), on 2 April 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr H. Pochieser, a lawyer practising in Vienna. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador H. Tichy, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry of European and International Affairs.
On 30 May 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Leithen.
In 2007, the applicant was recipient of emergency relief payments (Notstandshilfe) under the Unemployment Insurance Act (Arbeitslosenversicherungsgesetz).
On 18 September 2007 the Salzburg Labour Market Service (Arbeitsmarktservice) withdrew payments of emergency relief for eight weeks finding that the applicant had thwarted an employment offer. The applicant appealed contesting the establishment of facts by the authority and requesting the taking of further evidence.
On 24 October 2007 the Salzburg Regional Labour Market Service, without holding an oral hearing, dismissed the appeal as unfounded. It found that the applicant’s information to the potential employer to be only available for work until 4 p.m. due to continuing education that the applicant followed at the time was effectively a frustration of an attempt to find employment.
The Constitutional Court (Verfassungsgerichtshof) dismissed the applicant’s request for legal aid to lodge a complaint on 28 February 2008.
However, after having been awarded legal aid, the applicant lodged a complaint with the Administrative Court (Verwaltungsgerichtshof), explicitly requesting an oral hearing.
On 2 July 2008 the Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint as unfounded. On the merits it found that the applicant had not acted sufficiently seriously interested in the employment offer at issue and therefore had thwarted an attempt to find employment. The withdrawal of the emergency relief by the authorities, based on the Unemployment Insurance Act, had therefore not been unlawful. With regard to the decision not to hold an oral hearing the Administrative Court stated that, since the relevant facts had already been established and since the legal questions were sufficiently answered by existing case-law, an oral hearing had not been necessary.
That judgment was served on the applicant’s counsel on 3 October 2008.
Section 39 § 1 of the Administrative Court Act (Verwaltungsgerichtshofgesetz) provides that the Administrative Court is to hold a hearing after its preliminary investigation of the case where a complainant has requested a hearing within the time-limit. Section 39 § 2 (6) provides however:
"Notwithstanding a party’s application, the Administrative Court may decide not to hold a hearing when (...)
It is apparent to the Court from the written pleadings of the parties to the proceedings before the Administrative Court and from the files relating to the prior proceedings that an oral hearing is not likely to contribute to clarifying the case, and if this is not against Article 6 § 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights."