The case originated in an application (no. 41534/98) against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a British national, Mr Brian Bell (“the applicant”), on 22 May 1998.
The applicant was represented by Mr J. Mackenzie, a lawyer practising in Oxfordshire. The  Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr C.A. Whomersley and, subsequently, Mr J. Grainger, both of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
The case concerned proceedings before his Commanding Officer (“CO”). He complained under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 that his CO lacked independence and impartiality, that those proceedings were consequently unfair, that the trial was not “public”, that his CO did not constitute a tribunal “established by law” and that he had no legal representation.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
By a decision of 15 November 2005, a Chamber of the Fourth Section of the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The Government, but not the applicant, filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine).
The applicant was born in 1973 and lived in Surrey.
At the time of the events in question, he was a soldier serving as a Private with the Grenadier Guards of the British Army, stationed at Alexandra Barracks in .
On the evening of 19 December 1997 the applicant was talking with an officer, Captain J, in the foyer of the cookhouse at the barracks. There followed an exchange of words between the applicant and a non-commissioned officer, Sergeant H, who subsequently ordered another non-commissioned officer, Corporal G, to have the applicant locked up overnight. The applicant was not told the offence of which he was accused, but on his arrival at the guardroom he overheard Sergeant H tell the Guard Commander that he had seen the applicant with a bleeding nose and that, when he asked the applicant about it, the latter had told him to “fuck off”.
The applicant was released the following morning and went to the medical centre. He submitted that his examination established that he had not had a nose bleed the night before.
On 22 December 1997 at approximately 2 p.m. the applicant was informed that he would have to appear before his company commander. At approximately 4 p.m. he appeared before his company commander, who, in connection with the events of 19 December, charged the applicant with the offence of using insubordinate language to a superior contrary to section 33(1)(b) of the Army Act 1955 and informed the applicant that the case would be heard the following day by the battalion commanding officer (“CO”). He informed the applicant of the facts alleged against him.
The applicant claimed that he then went to the medical centre and asked for a record of his examination establishing that he had not had a nose bleed on the night in question. He claimed that staff at the medical centre refused to provide the record and the Government disputed this.
The applicant accepted that he received a version of the information pamphlet entitled “Rights of a Soldier charged with an offence under the Army Act 1955”, although he claimed that it was the pre-October 1997 version and thus out of date.
On the morning of 23 December 1997 the applicant was asked if he had any witnesses to call at the hearing before the CO. He asked that Captain J and Corporal G be called to give evidence on his behalf. When the applicant arrived at the Regimental Offices later that morning he saw Corporal G being called into the Regimental Sergeant Major’s office. The applicant claimed that Corporal G had been directed not to give evidence in support of his case. The Government argued that it was routine for witnesses to be called into the Regimental Sergeant Major’s office so that the procedure to be followed at the hearing could be explained and they denied that Corporal G had been directed as the applicant alleged or at all.
The applicant appeared before the CO at 10.30 a.m. on 23 December 1997. The hearing lasted approximately ten minutes. Present in the CO’s office for the hearing were the CO, the battalion adjutant, the regimental sergeant major, Sergeant H and the “accused adviser”, an officer appointed to look after the applicant’s interests, whose identity remained unknown to the applicant and with whom he had not discussed his case. That officer did not speak at any point during the hearing. The applicant was required to stand to attention throughout the hearing and was permitted to speak only when invited to do so by the CO.
The CO asked Sergeant H to give his evidence. The latter said that he had seen the applicant in the foyer of the cookhouse on the relevant evening and that his nose had been bleeding. When he had asked the applicant about his nose bleed, he had replied: “Fuck off, it’s nothing to do with you”.
The CO then asked the applicant if he admitted the offence described and the applicant pleaded not guilty. The CO asked him to give his evidence and he said that he had been speaking to Captain J when Sergeant H had ordered him to go to bed. The applicant had said to Sergeant H that he was speaking to Captain J, but Sergeant H had then ordered Corporal G to lock him up. The CO asked the applicant if he had any evidence to call and the applicant asked to call Captain J. The latter said that he had been speaking to the applicant in the foyer of the cookhouse and had not heard him swear at Sergeant H. The applicant claimed that, at this point, Sergeant H interrupted Captain J’s evidence saying that he did not think the Captain could have heard anything as the exchange in question had taken place outside the cookhouse. The Government denied any such interruption. The applicant further alleged that Captain J responded to Sergeant H: “In which case I would not have heard it”. Corporal G did not give evidence.
The CO asked the applicant if he wished to elect trial by court-martial, but the applicant said that he would accept the CO’s award. The company commander, who was present by this time, said that the applicant was a satisfactory member of his company. The CO then said that he found the applicant guilty and sentenced him to seven days’ detention and seven days’ associated loss of pay. The applicant served his sentence in a locked cell in the battalion guardroom.
The Armed Forces Act 1996 (“the 1996 Act”) came into force on 1 April 1997 and amended the disciplinary and court-martial procedures regulated by the Naval Discipline Act 1957, the Army Act 1955 and the Air Force Act 1955. References below to “the 1955 Act” are to the Army Act 1955 as amended. The statutory disciplinary provisions applicable to armed forces personnel are contained in the above-listed three “service discipline Acts”. Each Act specifies, in virtually identical terms, the offences for which persons subject to that Act can be tried and the punishments applicable. Persons subject to armed forces law are thereby subjected to a common code of offences and punishments.
The offences triable under the 1955 Act include misconduct in action; offences by or in relation to sentries, person on watch etc; failure to attend for, neglect of, duty; looting; mutiny and related offences; insubordinate behaviour; disobedience of a lawful command or standing order; desertion, absence without leave and related offences; malingering, drunkenness, disorderly conduct and fighting; refusal to submit to drug testing; false statements on entry or enlistment; offences harmful to morale; scandalous or disgraceful behaviour; ill-treatment of persons of inferior rank and conduct or neglect to the prejudice of good order and military discipline (see sections 24-68 of the 1955 Act).
In addition to the above, any person subject to armed forces law who commits a civilian offence (any act punishable by the laws of England) is also guilty of an offence against the service discipline Acts (section 70 of the 1955 Act).
Section 33(1)(b) of the Army Act 1955 (“the 1955 Act”) provides:
“Any person subject to military law who - ...
(b) uses threatening or insubordinate language to his superior officer
shall, on conviction by court-martial, be liable to imprisonment or any less punishment provided by this Act.”
Section 76 of the 1955 Act provides that an allegation that an accused has committed an offence, including the offence cited above, shall be reported to his commanding officer (“CO”). Regulation 25 of the Investigation and Summary Dealing (Army) Regulations 1997 (“the 1997 Regulations” - enacted under section 83 of the 1955 Act) provides that COs shall investigate the charge by, inter alia, causing such enquiries to be made as appear necessary. Following investigation, the CO may dismiss the charge, refer the charge to a higher authority or deal with it summarily.
Regulation 9 of the 1997 Regulations notes that COs may deal summarily with any charge under section 33 of the 1955 Act. Before dealing summarily with a charge, a CO shall, inter alia, call witnesses whose evidence he considers may be relevant to the charge, allow the accused to question those witnesses, allow the accused to give evidence on his own behalf and allow the accused to call his own witnesses (Regulation 29 of the 1997 Regulations). The CO had to either hear evidence orally himself or cause it to be reduced to writing. The latter was obligatory if it was considered that extended detention could be awarded on any finding of guilt (see “Penalties” at paragraph 28 below).
If, having heard the evidence, the CO finds that the charge has been proved, the CO shall, before so recording, afford the accused the opportunity of electing trial by court-martial (Section 76B of the 1955 Act). If the accused does not so elect, the CO can, inter alia, record a finding of guilty and award penalties.
While an accused cannot be legally represented at the CO hearing, Chapter 62 of the Army General Administrative Instructions (“AGAIs”) describes the Accused’s Adviser procedure. The Adviser acts in the accused’s best interests but is not to be considered a form of defence lawyer and is not legally qualified. An Adviser’s function is limited to advising the accused before and at the hearing (for example, as regards whether to elect trial by court-martial) and making a statement during the trial about the accused’s background and in mitigation. Detailed guidance for the Accused’ Adviser is set out at Annex M to Chapter 62, including on the procedure for electing trial by court-martial and the advice to be given to an accused in that respect.
The maximum duration of the imprisonment for the offence of using insubordinate language is not defined under the 1955 Act.
By virtue of Regulation 12 of the 1997 Regulations, a CO dealing summarily with an offence can make an award of detention not exceeding 28 days unless he complies with Regulation 31 of the 1997 Regulations. That Regulation provides that a CO may award extended detention (up to 60 days) if he has taken written statements from all the witnesses (Regulation 31(3)), satisfied himself that the accused was not likely to dispute the charge (Regulation 31(4)), obtained permission from a higher authority to award extended detention (Regulation 31(5) and (7)) and informed the accused of his extended powers (Regulation 31(9)).
A district court-martial can award imprisonment of up to two years (section 85(2) of the 1955 Act). There is no upward limit on the awards of imprisonment of a general court-martial.
All soldiers are provided with a pamphlet entitled “The Rights of a Soldier Charged with an Offence under the Army Act 1955”. The pamphlet was amended on 1 October 1997 following the entry into force of the 1996 Act.
The post-October 1997 version of the pamphlet submitted by the Government in the present case informs soldiers of their right to have an Accused’s Adviser both before and during the hearing, of the role of the Adviser (see paragraph 26 above), the procedure at the hearing, the penalties available, the procedure for applying for extended detention powers, the means of electing for trial by court-martial (including when and how much time is accorded to decide), the time available to withdraw any such election and the consequences of such an election (including the possibility of being prosecuted on more serious charges).