The case originated in an application (no. 45729/05) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Mitrophane Sturua (“the applicant”), on 29 November 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr N. Kvaratskhelia, a lawyer practising in Tbilisi. The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr D. Tomadze, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that, contrary to Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the disciplinary proceedings against him had been unfair, that his appeal had been heard by a body lacking impartiality and that he did not have access to a court.
On 27 August 2007 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Tbilisi.
On 15 May 1999 the applicant was appointed President of the Abasha District Court for a ten-year term.
On 3 December 2004 the Supreme Council of Justice initiated disciplinary proceedings against the applicant under section 2(2)-(e) of the Act of 22 February 2000 on Disciplinary Proceedings against Judges of Ordinary Courts (hereinafter, “the Disciplinary Proceedings Act” – see paragraphs 15-18 below). He was accused in particular of having retained a criminal case file for six months after withdrawing from the case on 29 October 2003.
On 23 December 2004 a Panel of the Disciplinary Council of Judges (hereinafter, “the Panel”), composed of Mr K.K. (the President of the Panel and rapporteur), Mr G.Ch, Mr D.S. and Mr Th.Th., considered the case at an oral hearing. According to the transcript of the hearing, the applicant admitted to the act of negligence he had been accused of. After examining the circumstances of the case, the Panel found the applicant guilty of the misconduct in question. It considered his conduct all the more serious because the defendants in the case had been in detention at the time and because he had had a duty, under Article 6 of the Convention, to act promptly and without fault. The Panel took into account the nature of the misconduct, which it classified as serious, and the existence of another disciplinary measure against the applicant in the past, and decided to remove him from office.
On 29 December 2004 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Disciplinary Council of Judges (hereinafter, “the Disciplinary Council”) on points of fact and law under section 60(1) of the Disciplinary Proceedings Act (see paragraph 17 below). He questioned the assessment of the circumstances of the case and the application of the legal provisions to the established facts in the decision of 23 December 2004. His appeal was examined at a plenary session of the Disciplinary Council composed of eight members, including the same four, Mr K.K., Mr G.Ch., Mr D.S. and Mr Th.Th, who had sat at the first hearing. As before, Mr K.K. acted as President and rapporteur in the examination of the applicant’s appeal.
By a decision of 27 January 2005, the Disciplinary Council unanimously upheld the Panel’s decision of 23 December 2004 in its entirety. The appellate instance confirmed that the lower body had correctly established the facts and applied the relevant law to the factual findings.
The applicant then lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court under section 74 of the Disciplinary Proceedings Act, as amended on 25 February 2005 (see paragraph 18 below). He argued that he had not been given notice that he could appear before the Panel and that there had been a delay in the Disciplinary Council examining his appeal. He also stated that under Article 6 of the Convention the four members of the Panel who had taken the decision of 23 December 2004 had not had the right to sit subsequently in the Disciplinary Council appeal hearing.
In a judgment of 11 July 2005, the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s cassation appeal as ill-founded. Based on the transcript, it found that he had in fact been present at the Panel hearing on 23 December 2004 and had been able to state his case without impediment, contrary to his allegation. At the hearing the applicant had admitted to the act of negligence with which he had been charged. The Supreme Court rejected the allegation of a delay in the examination of the case by the Disciplinary Council by noting that the latter had given its ruling within the statutory time-limit of one month. The Supreme Court also found that the presence of four members of the Panel as participants in the subsequent Disciplinary Council proceedings had not contravened the requirements of sections 22 and 24 of the Disciplinary Proceedings Act (see paragraph 17 below).
Pursuant to sections 48(1) and 49(1) of the Act of 13 June 1997 on Courts of Ordinary Jurisdiction, as in force at the time of the applicant’s appointment to the judicial post in 1999 (see paragraph 6 above), President of Georgia was empowered to appoint qualified candidates as judge for the ten years’ term of office.
Articles 84 and 86 of the Constitution of Georgia, the provisions proclaiming the principles of independence and irremovability of judges, read, at the material time of the relevant events, as follows:
“1. A judge shall be independent in his/her activity and shall be subject only to the Constitution and law. Any pressure upon the judge or interference with his/her activity with the aim of influencing his/her decision shall be prohibited and punishable by law.
The removal of a judge from the consideration of a case, his/her early dismissal from office or transfer to another judicial position shall be permissible only in the circumstances defined by law.
No one shall have the right to hold a judge accountable for a case under his/her consideration.”
“2. The term of office of an appointed judge shall be no less than ten years. The procedures for selection of judicial candidates, their appointment to or early removal from office shall be determined by law.”
As in force at the time of the opening of the disciplinary proceedings against the applicant, Section 2(2)-(e) of the Disciplinary Proceedings Act provided that a judge who had contributed to making the examination of a case protracted without any valid reason was considered to be in breach of his or her official duties.
Prior to 30 June 2004, the Disciplinary Proceedings Act, notably section 62(2), explicitly forbade the members of the Panel which had examined a disciplinary case at first instance from sitting in the case when the Disciplinary Council reviewed it on appeal. In addition, section 66(1) stated that if the President of the Disciplinary Council had participated in a Panel then he or she should withdraw from presiding over a Disciplinary Council session during the appellate review of the same case. An amendment of 30 June 2004 removed the above-mentioned provisions by rewording sections 62(2) and 66(1).
After the amendment of 30 June 2004, the most relevant provisions of a procedural nature in the Disciplinary Proceedings Act read as follows:
“1. The Disciplinary Council of Judges of Ordinary Courts shall be composed of eight members.
The members of the Council ..., of whom four shall be judges of ordinary courts, shall be elected by the Conference of Judges of Ordinary Courts by a majority vote, on a proposal from the Supreme Council of Justice ...
Within the Council, Panels of four members each shall be formed. ...
The Council shall have a President who is also one of its members. The President shall chair the Council’s sessions. ...”
“The term of office of members of the Disciplinary Council shall be four years.”
“Once a decision has been taken by a Disciplinary Panel to remove a judge from office, the judge in question shall be disqualified, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law, from considering cases and from other activities arising out of the exercise of his or her office.”
“A decision by a Disciplinary Panel may be reconsidered on appeal before the plenary of the Disciplinary Council of Judges.”
“The Disciplinary Council shall consider the case ... within a month of the appeal being lodged.”
“... Hearings [before the plenary of the Council] shall be chaired by the President of the Council or, by decision of the President, by another member of the Council.”
“Decisions of the Disciplinary Council, sitting in plenary session, shall be taken by a simple majority vote. In the event of a tie, the President shall have the casting vote.”
Prior to 25 February 2005, section 74 of the Disciplinary Proceedings Act stated that a Disciplinary Council appellate decision in disciplinary proceedings, which had reviewed the factual and legal wellfoundedness of a first-instance decision taken by a Panel, was final and enforceable. However, an amendment of section 74 on 25 February 2005 allowed the Supreme Court of Georgia, the cassation instance, to carry out a further review of Disciplinary Council appellate decisions. Such reviews can only be on points of law.