The case originated in an application (no. 2683/12) against the Hellenic Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Greek national, Ms Eleni Frezadou (“the applicant”), on 22 December 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr N. Kondylis a lawyer practising in Athens. The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent’s delegate, Mr K. Georgiadis, Senior Advisor to the State Legal Council.
The applicant alleged that the domestic courts’ failure to review her application for annulment on time, which led to the termination of proceedings on the grounds that the contested administrative act had expired, had violated her right of access to a court.
On 2 June 2017 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Palaio Faliro.
She has worked as a kindergarten teacher for the Greek Ministry of Education since 1983. On 23 August 2005, following her participation in a selection procedure, she was appointed educational coordinator of the Hellenic Republic at the General Consulate of Greece in Chicago for a period of two years. On 14 August 2007 the Ministers of Education and Foreign Affairs issued a decision informing all educational coordinators abroad of the end of their term of service. On the same date, the Minister of Education issued a decision informing the educational coordinators that they were to remain in their posts until the completion of the next selection procedure. The applicant’s name was omitted from the second ministerial decision and the post of educational coordinator in Chicago remained vacant. She applied to have the decision annulled, which the Athens Administrative Court of Appeal agreed to do as the applicant had been omitted from the decision without any specific reasoning (decision no. 1363/2008). The applicant was therefore allowed to occupy the position until the successful completion of the next selection procedure.
In the meantime, a call for applications for educational coordinators for the next two-year period was published on 27 November 2007. The applicant submitted an application. On 23 July 2008 the coordinators selection committee published a ranking of candidates in which the applicant, having received 48.00 points, was placed 13th among those who had chosen French as their foreign language. On 22 August 2008 the Official Gazette (Εφημερίδα της Κυβερνήσεως) published a decision by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Education to appoint the candidates who had been selected. The applicant was not included. That decision was revoked and replaced with a ministerial decision dated 29 August 2008 including the same content.
On 24 September 2008 the applicant lodged an application for annulment of the ministerial decisions of 22 and 29 August 2008 on appointing the selected educational coordinators with the Athens Administrative Court of Appeal in so far as she had been omitted. The applicant complained that the ranking had not been published in the Official Gazette, as required by law, and that she had been erroneously awarded fewer points than she should have had.
On 16 July 2009 the applicant’s legal representative requested that the court accelerate proceedings, arguing that an educational coordinator’s term of appointment lasted two years and that the contested administrative act would soon expire. The hearing was scheduled to take place on 13 November 2009, but was adjourned to 5 March 2010.
On 3 February 2010 the applicant submitted additional grounds of annulment. The 5 March 2010 hearing was adjourned to 4 June 2010 as the Ministry had not provided the court with its submissions regarding the additional grounds for annulment. On 27 May 2010 the applicant sent a memorandum to the Court, requesting that the case be heard speedily, adding that an eventual discontinuation of the trial would violate her rights under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. Nevertheless, the hearing was again adjourned owing to the Ministry’s failure to provide submissions. Adjournments took place on 4 June, 17 September and on 8 October 2010. On 26 October 2010, the Ministry sent its observations to the court, and a hearing took place on 10 December 2010, when the two-year term for educational coordinators and the contested ministerial decision had already expired.
On 13 December 2010 the applicant submitted a memorandum requesting that the examination of her application for annulment be continued despite the expiry of the administrative act, arguing that she had special locus standi to continue to pursue the annulment process. In particular, she argued that if the contested act was annulled she would be credited with two more years of experience, which would improve her chances of being selected as a deputy coordinator of education in a future selection procedure.
On 16 March 2011 the Athens Administrative Court of Appeal published decision no. 508/2011 rejecting the applicant’s arguments. As regards her first reason for continuing the proceedings, it held that she had already been awarded the maximum number of points allowed by law for experience abroad. As regards her chances of being selected as a deputy coordinator of education in a future selection procedure, the domestic court held that that was not a lawful reason to continue the procedure in court, because it concerned an uncertain, future administrative procedure. Based on the above and on domestic law, the Athens Administrative Court of Appeal held that there was no need to adjudicate, on the grounds that the contested act was no longer in force (decision). As regards the applicant’s arguments that the eventual rejection of her application would violate Article 20 of the Constitution and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the domestic court held that the provision of Article 32 § 2 of Presidential decree no. 18/1989 served the legal aim of avoiding any unnecessary trials. The individual who had lodged the application was no longer in need of judicial protection as the contested act no longer had any unfavourable consequences. Having also regard to the possibility provided for by law to continue the trial if the individual could prove that he or she still suffered from unfavourable consequences that could be removed only by the annulment of the contested act, the right to judicial protection remained intact.
The relevant provisions of Presidential Decree no. 18/1989 read as follows:
“1. The Administration or the legal person operating under public law against which the application for annulment or the legal action has been lodged, has the obligation to send their views for each of the submitted reasons...”
“1. The omission to send on time to the Council the data and information foreseen in the previous Article, as well as the relevant report, constitutes a disciplinary offence of the competent employees...”
“1. The submission of additional grounds of annulment is allowed by lodging a legal document in accordance with Article 19 § 1 which shall be communicated by the person who lodged the legal remedy at least fifteen full days before the hearing, or else it shall be declared inadmissible...”
“... 1. There is no need to adjudicate if the contested act or judicial decision has been revoked, cancelled or repealed following application for a legal remedy.
Similarly, there is no need to adjudicate if the contested act has stopped being valid for any reason following the lodging of an application for annulment and by the first hearing of the case, unless the applicant invokes a special interest which justifies continuation of the trial ...”
By Law no. 4055/2012, Article 24 of Presidential Decree no. 18/1989 was amended to include a third paragraph. Pursuant to this, if the case has been adjourned once due to failure of the Administration to provide the relevant data and information, the domestic court may proceed to adjudicate and may consider that the Administration has admitted the factual basis of the applicant’s allegations.