The case originated in an application (no. 48554/10) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Slovak nationals, Ms Mária Borovská, Ms Mária Buzová and Mr Štefan Forrai (“the applicants”), on 16 August 2010.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Hrouda, a lawyer practising in Košice. The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their rights under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention had been violated in that their property claim had been arbitrarily dismissed. In particular, the courts had failed to respond to their argument that a number of generically similar claims concerning other plots of land on which the same functional sports complex had been built had been granted.
On 18 March 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
Ms Borovská and Mr Forrai (“the first and third applicants”) were born in 1948 and 1927 respectively, and live in Košice.
Ms Buzová (“the second applicant”) was born in 1937 and also lived in Košice.
On 17 April 2014 the Court received a letter from the applicants’ lawyer informing it that, on 27 October 2013, the second applicant had died and that the inheritance proceedings were pending.
This application and three others (nos. 18803/10, 42812/10 and 44019/11) concern the regularisation of the relationship between ownership and use of real property located in the cadastral area of Košice-Sever.
Certain land in that area was expropriated in the 1980s by the (then socialist) State and a public sports centre was built on it. The sports centre comprises buildings and various other facilities, such as a tennis court, a grandstand, a water station and paved areas.
After the post-1989 political, constitutional and legal changes, litigation took place with a view to resolving various property claims made by the original owners (or their legal successors) against the entities that owned or operated the sports centre or various parts of it.
The land concerned is divided into a number of plots with various owners, many of whom are linked by family relations and history, and who had the same legal representation in the above-mentioned proceedings. Their lawsuits followed a similar pattern, but sometimes had varying results. They included the following proceedings.
The applicants in the present case are successors in title to a plot of land in the above-mentioned area, having inherited their title from the original owner, who died in 1959.
On 22 August 1994 the applicants lodged an action against the owner of a sports centre seeking to obtain a court order for the removal of the constructions on the land.
The principal line of argument was that the expropriation decision of 24 February 1984 was invalid in law. The applicants were therefore the lawful owners of the land in question, in particular plot no. 10610 (recorded on sheet no. 1460 in the “old” records), and the defendant had no lawful title to have the constructions on the applicants’ land.
The action was subsequently amended to state that, alternatively, the applicants sought a judicial ruling establishing an easement on their land for the benefit of the owner of the sports centre in return for financial compensation payable to the applicants. It was also extended to two more defendants: the municipality concerned and a private company.
The action was examined and determined at first instance by the Košice I District Court (Okresný súd). In its judgment (rozsudok) of 11 August 2008, the District Court acknowledged that (i) the expropriation of 1984 was legally ineffective on account of procedural flaws; (ii) as a consequence the applicants were the owners of the land in question; (iii) the constructions on it had been built without a valid legal title in so far as the land was concerned; and (iv) the applicants were entitled to seek redress under general civil law, that is to say Article 135c of the Civil Code (Law no. 40/1964 Coll., as amended), which was not subject to any statute of limitation, unlike the special legislation on restitution, which contained specific time-limits (see paragraph 24 below).
The District Court further held that, for practical reasons, it was out of the question to regularise the situation by establishing that the applicants were the owners of the constructions and ordering them to pay the current owners financial compensation. Furthermore, in the circumstances, it was likewise not practical to order the physical removal of the constructions in question.
However, contrary to the applicants’ assertions, the District Court found that no easement could be established on the land.
The bone of contention was the legal nature of the constructions concerned. Unlike in construction law, in civil law these constructions could not be considered as “buildings” (stavba) in legal terms. An easement over land could only be established for the benefit of the owner of a building in the given sense. In that connection, the court relied on Article 135c § 3 of the Civil Code (Law no. 40/1964 Coll., as amended) (see paragraph 21 below).
The court also noted that it was bound by the legal classification of the applicants’ claim and concluded that, since the constructions on their specific plots of land were not buildings, the claim had to be dismissed.
The applicants challenged the first-instance judgment by means of an appeal (odvolanie) to the Košice Regional Court (Krajský súd).
They argued in particular that the District Court had failed to appreciate that the property in question was part of a large complex serving a single purpose, that a number of claims had been raised in respect of that property, that those claims had been fully or partly successful, that the legal nature of the claims was identical to those raised by the applicants; and that the only difference was the technical parameters of the specific plots at stake.
The applicants pointed out specifically that, in its judgment in case no. 15C 251/94, the District Court had established an easement in respect of plots of land comprising the sports centre on which similar constructions had been built, exactly as claimed by the applicants in the present case. The court had made no distinction between plots with and those without “buildings” on them (see paragraphs 25 et seq. below).
On 11 February 2010 the Regional Court, sitting in chambers, dismissed the applicants’ appeal and upheld the firstinstance judgment, albeit on different grounds. It concurred with the District Court that the expropriation of 1984 was legally ineffective. As a consequence, the State was to be considered as having appropriated the land in question without legal title within the meaning of section 6(1)(p) of the Act on adjustment of ownership rights in respect of land and other agricultural property (Law no. 229/1991 Coll., as amended – “the Land Ownership Act”). The restitution of land in such circumstances fell under the regime of the said legislation and any claims for it had had to be lodged by 31 December 1992 at the latest (see paragraphs 22 et seq. below).
The Regional Court observed that the applicants had failed to pursue that course of action and held that asserting their property rights under general civil law, as the applicants had done, was not permissible.
The applicants’ argument concerning the differing judicial practice went unanswered.
The Regional Court’s judgment became final and binding on 16 March 2010.
On 5 May 2010 the applicants lodged a complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ústavný súd) under Article 127 § 1 of the Constitution (Constitutional Law no. 460/1992 Coll., as amended).
They considered the dismissal of their action arbitrary and alleged that their rights under, inter alia, Article 6 § 1 of the Convention (access, fairness, adequate reasoning) and the constitutional equivalent of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 had been violated.
Among other things, they argued that – on the specific facts – their case fell outside the purview of the restitution laws cited in the Regional Court’s judgment and that the existence of the restitution laws as leges speciales did not exclude the application of the rules on protection of property rights under the Civil Code as a lex generalis.
In addition, the applicants submitted that judicial practice had varied. They referred to the District Court’s judgment in case no. 15C 251/94 and its judgments in a number of other cases concerning the same sports centre, in which the application of general civil law in an identical context had been accepted. Although they had raised this specific argument before the Regional Court, the latter had taken no position on it and its reasoning had been generally inadequate and arbitrary.
Moreover, the applicants emphasised that it had been sixteen years since the introduction of their action, a protracted period for which they bore no responsibility. They considered that, therefore, any case-law that may have meanwhile been established should not be detrimental to them.
On 3 June 2010 the Constitutional Court declared the complaint inadmissible as being manifestly ill-founded. It observed that it was not a court of further appeal against decisions of the ordinary courts. It cited extensively from the Regional Court’s judgment, finding no constitutionally relevant unfairness, arbitrariness or irregularity in it.
The applicants’ argument concerning the differing judicial practice went unanswered.
The decision was served on the applicants’ lawyer on 30 July 2010.
Article 135c deals with situations concerning so-called “unlawful constructions”, that is buildings (stavba) constructed on somebody else’s plot of land (pozemok) without an entitlement to do so.
At the request of the owner of the land, the court has the power to order the removal of such buildings at the cost of the person who constructed them (paragraph 1).
However, if the removal of the building is not practical, and subject to consent by the owner of the land, the court has the power to rule that the title to the building be transferred to the owner of the land in return for compensation (paragraph 2).
The court also has the power to regularise the relationship between the owner of the land and the owner of the building by taking other measures, in particular by establishing an easement, which is necessary for the exercise of ownership rights in respect of the building, in return for compensation (paragraph 3).
The Act governs, inter alia, the restitution of certain agricultural and other property defined in section 1 which was assigned or transferred to the State or other legal persons between 25 February 1948 and 1 January 1990. Section 6(1) lists the acts giving rise to a restitution claim.
Under section 6(1)(p), ownership of real property is to be restored if it passed to the State in the given period as a consequence of appropriation without legal title.
The time-limits for making restitution claims under the Act are governed by its section 13, under which – in principle – if a claim was not made by 31 December 1992, it would become extinct (zánik práva).
In a case registered at the District Court under file no. 15C 251/94 other claimants raised essentially the same claims as the applicants in respect of other plots of land under the same sports centre, the defendant being the respective municipality.
Before the case was resolved on the merits with final effect, the Supreme Court had determined the claimants’ appeal on points of law (dovolanie) (no. 3 Cdo 96/98) against a previous judgment of the Regional Court. In its judgment of 25 February 1999, the Supreme Court observed that before the action could be determined on the merits (of the claim for an easement), preliminary questions had to be answered as to whether the claimants were the owners of the land concerned and, if they were, whether they had standing to sue in the case.
The Supreme Court further observed that, when dealing with those questions, the Regional Court had noted that the land in question had been expropriated in 1984. The Regional Court had therefore held that, even assuming that the expropriation had been flawed, it could only have been challenged by means of administrative-law remedies and within the statutory timelimits. That, however, had been beyond the scope of the case at hand and, therefore, the Regional Court had held that the 1984 expropriation should be considered as being a matter of fact.
The Supreme Court disagreed with the Regional Court’s position described above. As was found in the present case (see paragraph 14 above), it found that the expropriation of 1984 was legally ineffective. As a consequence, the courts were bound to examine the preliminary question of the claimants’ ownership, independently and irrespective of the expropriation decision.
The case was finally decided on the merits by the District Court on 13 March 2002. The action was granted and an easement was established for the benefit of the claimants in respect of the entire property covered by their claim, that is to say including some plots on which no “buildings”, in the sense explained above, were situated.
The judgment was not appealed against and became final and binding on 3 May 2002.
The ensuing question concerning the financial compensation payable by the municipality to the claimants for the easement was resolved by the District Court in a judgment of 13 December 2006 (case no. 15C 717/02) on the basis of an expert assessment.
In two further cases concerning the same property it was decided that the claimants were entitled to assert their property claims under the general provisions of the Civil Code.
The determinative factor for those cases was whether or not the land in question was under “buildings”. This was partly so in the former case and not in the latter.
Accordingly, the claim in the former case was partly granted and partly dismissed, while in the latter case it was dismissed in its entirety. The respective judgments were given on 11 August and 24 November 2008 (the District Court) and 2 February and 20 April 2009 (the Regional Court), and the final decisions were given by the Constitutional Court on 8 September 2009 and 18 March 2010.
In an unrelated case leading to a Supreme Court judgment, the claimants sought a ruling declaring that a piece of real property fell within the estate of their ancestor. Just as in the present case, the property in question had “passed to the State as a consequence of appropriation without legal title” within the meaning of section 6(1)(p) of the Land Ownership Act.
In the context of those proceedings an appeal on points of law was lodged with the Supreme Court, which was called on to resolve specifically the question whether, in the circumstances, the claimants had standing to seek the protection of their rights under the general provisions on property law under the Civil Code.
The Supreme Court resolved the question in the negative. It observed first of all that the claimants’ case fell within the purview of the above-cited provision of the Land Ownership Act and held that that piece of legislation constituted a lex specialis in relation to the respective provisions of the Civil Code. The application of the Land Ownership Act precluded the subsidiary application of the Civil Code provisions, which would otherwise lead to circumventing the provisions of the Land Ownership Act.
The Supreme Court also observed that the special legislation on restitution of property was based on the presumption that the property to be restored had passed to the State, including those instances where it had been appropriated by the State without any legal title, and that the claimants would only become the owners if the property was restored to them.
The conditions for having the property restored were set by the Land Ownership Act with the attendant consequence of excluding the application of the general provisions of the Civil Code.
In the restitution laws, the lawmaker acknowledged that there had been frequent instances of occupation of property by the State without valid legal title. However, although those laws were not intended to provide the State with title of its own but rather to vindicate the claimants by providing them with the means of restoring their title, if the claimants failed to do so within the given time-limit, their claims would become extinct and the position of the State vis-à-vis the property would become regularised.
The same position was taken in a subsequent case concerning substantially the same claims as in the present case in relation to the same sports centre. The respective judgments were given on 2 April 2009 (the District Court) and 10 May 2010 (the Regional Court), and the final decision was given by the Constitutional Court on 12 May 2011.
The proceedings ultimately leading to the Constitutional Court’s judgment (nález) concerned claims that were essentially the same as those of the applicants, except that they had been made by a different group of claimants and concerned different plots of land under the same sports centre.
In that set of proceedings the claimants challenged before the Constitutional Court a Supreme Court judgment dated 13 September 2011 concerning an appeal on points of law (no. 4 Cdo 180/2010). In that appeal, the Supreme Court had been called on to resolve specifically the same question as mentioned above. It did so in the negative, along the same lines as in its judgment of 25 February 2009 in case no. 4Cdo 130/07 (see paragraphs 31 et seq. above), referring to that judgment and several others.
However, the Constitutional Court arrived at a contradictory conclusion, finding that the Supreme Court had violated the claimants’ rights to protection of property and to a fair trial. It quashed the judgment of 13 September 2011 and remitted the claimants’ appeal on points of law to the Supreme Court for a new determination.
The Constitutional Court noted that the restitution laws had not been enacted to terminate the ownership rights of those entitled to restitution, but rather to facilitate their reactivation. Therefore, if property had passed to the State in the given period as a consequence of appropriation without legal title, the original owners had not lost their title and nothing prevented them or their legal successors from asserting it under the general provisions of the Civil Code. It had by no means been the intention of the lawmaker, when enacting the restitution laws, to provide for new entitlement on the part of the State to unlawfully seized property or to legalise in any way the unlawful actions of the State committed in “the period of suppression”.
In that connection, the Constitutional Court cited an established line of its case-law, dating back to 2004, 2006, 2009 and 2011, and found no reasons for departing from it.
In addition, the Constitutional Court found it of relevance that in various proceedings in respect of claims that were generically similar, concerning real property constituting the same sports centre, the ordinary courts – including the Supreme Court – had been arriving at contradictory conclusions. This amounted to divergent decision-making contrary to the principles of foreseeability of the law and legal certainty, and was manifestly unfair.
Lastly, the Constitutional Court held that, although the ordinary courts were bound to accept its legal views over the case, this did not necessarily mean that the outcome of the proceedings had to be entirely in the claimants’ favour or that the ordinary courts had to reach different overall conclusions.
The relevant parts of the report state that, in order for the principle of legal certainty – essential for maintaining confidence in the judicial system and the rule of law – to be achieved, the State must make the law easily accessible and must also apply the laws it has enacted in a foreseeable and consistent manner. As the existence of conflicting decisions within the highest courts may be contrary to this principle, it is necessary for those courts to establish mechanisms to avoid conflicts and ensure the coherence of their case-law.
“47. While recognising the judges’ power to interpret the law, the obligation of the judges to promote legal certainty has also to be remembered. Indeed legal certainty guarantees the predictability of the content and application of the legal rules, thus contributing in ensuring a high quality judicial system.
Judges will apply the interpretative principles applicable in both national and international law with this aim in mind. ... In civil law countries, they will be guided by case law, especially that of the highest courts, whose task includes ensuring the uniformity of case law.
Judges should in general apply the law consistently. However when a court decides to depart from previous case law, this should be clearly mentioned in its decision.”