The case originated in an application (no. 40127/04) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by fifteen Macedonian nationals, on 29 September 2004.
The applicants were represented by Mr T. Torov, a lawyer practising in Štip. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by their former Agent, Mrs R. Lazareska Gerovska, and subsequently by their present Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov.
The applicants’ personal details are provided in the appendix below.
On 15 March 1982 the first, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth applicants initiated civil proceedings for determination of title to plots of land, together with Mr Mite Ristov, Mr Dinko Ristov. Upon the death of Mr Mite Ristov, the domestic proceedings on his behalf were pursued by his heirs, from the second to fifth applicants. Upon the death of Mr Dinko Ristov the domestic proceedings were pursued on his behalf by his heirs, from the sixth to eighth applicants.
On 21 July 2004, namely before the application was introduced, the ninth applicant had died. With a letter of 3 September 2007 the applicants’ representative informed the Court about the ninth applicant’s death and that the application would be pursued on his behalf by his heir Mr Taško Šterjov (the name of this heir is the same with the name of the third applicant).
On 21 December 2004 the first applicant died and the application was pursued on his behalf by his heirs Mr Taško Mihajlov, Mr Saltir Mihajlovski and Mr Stojan Mihajlov.
The proceedings ended on 7 March 2008 when the legal representative was served with a judgment of the Štip Court of Appeal of 28 January 2008 which listed the following plaintiffs: the heirs of the first applicant (see paragraph 6 above), the second to eighth applicants, the heir of the ninth applicant (see paragraph 5 above) and the tenth to twelfth applicants. The appeal on the points of law lodged against this judgment was rejected by the Supreme Court (отфрла) as ratione valoris.