The case originated in an application (no. 74542/12) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Vasile Asimionese (“the applicant”), on 8 November 2012.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr V. Zamă, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr O. Rotari.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings against him had not been fair within the meaning of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 10 December 2018 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in Chişinău.
At the time of the events the applicant was the mayor of the village of Bălășinești. On an unspecified date criminal proceedings were initiated against him on several charges. He was accused, inter alia, of having improperly sold a piece of land adjacent to a building belonging to the village; having sold at a reduced price several concrete blocks recovered after the demolition of a publicly owned building; having paid bonuses to a number of employees of the mayor’s office and later misappropriated the money; and having forged a Schengen visa for a third person.
On 23 October 2009 the Briceni District Court acquitted the applicant of all the charges. The court found the accusations against him to be illfounded, on the basis of the materials in the case file and having heard witnesses in respect of each of the charges. The witnesses stated, inter alia, that the decision to sell the plot of land in question had been taken by the former mayor and voted upon by the local council. They also submitted that it was the local council which had decided to sell the concrete blocks and which had set their price. Witnesses also stated that they had been coerced by prosecutors into signing written statements containing accusations to the effect that their bonuses had been appropriated by the applicant, and that the applicant had not been involved in the forging of a Schengen visa. The prosecutor’s office lodged an appeal against the District Court’s judgment.
On 12 May 2010 the Bălți Court of Appeal dismissed the prosecutor’s appeal and upheld the judgment of the first-instance court. The prosecutor in charge of the case lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court of Justice.
On 22 February 2011 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the appeal on points of law, quashed the decision of the Court of Appeal and ordered a fresh re-examination of the case by the Court of Appeal. The court ordered, inter-alia, the re-examination of the case in accordance with Article 419 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, that is, according to the rules on the examination of criminal cases by the first-instance courts.
On 22 December 2011, after re-examining the prosecutor’s appeal against the judgment of 23 October 2009, the Bălţi Court of Appeal upheld the appeal, quashed the judgment and found the applicant guilty of all the charges enumerated in paragraph 6 above. The court sentenced the applicant to a criminal fine of approximately 713 euros and barred him from public office for a period of three years. In reaching its conclusions, the Court of Appeal heard only two witnesses and read out the statements given at first instance by more than twenty further witnesses. The Court of Appeal reached the conclusion that the first-instance court had wrongly interpreted the statements of the above-mentioned witnesses. The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against this judgment in which he argued, inter alia, that the Court of Appeal had failed to observe the provisions of Article 419 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, requiring it to hear all the witnesses anew, as instructed by the Supreme Court.
On 6 June 2012 the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law after finding, inter alia, that the provisions of Article 419 had not been breached by the Court of Appeal.
Article 419 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the procedure for rehearing a case on appeal must follow the general rules for the examination of criminal cases at first instance.
An explanatory judgment of the Plenary Supreme Court of Justice (No. 22 of 12 December 2005) reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“Bearing in mind the provisions of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, the appellate court, after an acquittal by a first-instance court, cannot order a conviction for the first time without hearing the accused or assessing the evidence directly.”
Article 4641 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides for the possibility of reopening domestic proceedings where the Court has found a violation of an applicant’s fundamental rights and freedoms and where the consequences of the violation continue to have effect and can be redressed only by a review of the final judgment.