The case originated in an application (no. 5769/11) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Sándor Zsigmond Scheszták (“the applicant”), on 18 January 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms M. Palásti, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the labour law proceedings to which he had been a party had been unfair, in breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, because the Supreme Court had given judgment without awaiting his pleadings.
On 14 March 2016 this complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Ercsi.
On 28 February 2007 the applicant filed an action with the Székesfehérvár Labour Court against his former employer, claiming unlawful dismissal. On 6 June 2008 the court found in his favour and obliged the respondent to the action to pay him a severance payment, outstanding wages, a lump sum in compensation, and default interest.
On appeal, on 25 February 2009 the Fejér County Regional Court changed the judgment in part. In June 2009 the respondent filed a petition for review.
In an order of 2 June 2010 the Supreme Court forwarded the respondent’s petition to the applicant and informed him that, within eight days of receiving the order, he could file comments on the respondent’s petition and/or request an oral hearing.
On 7 June 2010 the applicant received the order, and on 14 June 2010 he dispatched his comments on the petition for review. The document was received by the Supreme Court on 17 June 2010.
Meanwhile, on 16 June 2010 the Supreme Court, sitting as a review court, had given a judgment in which it had reversed the previous decisions and dismissed the applicant’s action. The court stated that the applicant had not filed any comments on the petition for review.
The applicant complained and addressed his complaint of 6 December 2010 to the President of the Supreme Court. The Head of the Civil Division informed him that his comments on the petition for review had been belated.
As in force in the relevant period, section 339(1) of Act no. IV of 1959 on the Civil Code provided as follows:
“Anyone who unlawfully causes damage to another person shall be obliged to pay compensation. He shall be exculpated if he proves that he proceeded in such a manner as could generally be expected in the given situation.”
Moreover, section 349 of the same Act provided as follows:
“(1) Liability for damage caused by the State administration shall only be established if the damage could not be prevented by means of ordinary legal remedies, or if the person concerned has resorted to ordinary legal remedies appropriate for preventing damage.
...
(3) These rules shall also apply to liability for damage caused by the courts or the prosecution authorities, unless otherwise provided by law.”
The Government submitted three court decisions illustrating the domestic practice on official liability actions under section 349.
In case no. BDT2008.1817 (in which the official liability action was dismissed) it was emphasised that only an extremely grave mistake in the application or interpretation of law can be conducive to establishing the responsibility of the judicial body applying the law; and that the judicial body will be exculpated if the facts of the case are capable of prompting various different interpretations of the law.
In case no. 1.Pf.20.799/2015/7/II. the plaintiff was awarded a substantial amount of compensation for non-pecuniary damage sustained on account of the respondent court’s repeated mishandling of the underlying child access dispute.
In case no. 9.Pf.21.115/2014/6/I. the plaintiff was awarded a substantial amount of compensation for pecuniary damage sustained on account of the respondent Hungarian court’s failure properly to transmit a previous final and binding judgment to the Slovakian authorities, as a result of which that judgment, although entitling the plaintiff to a large sum of money, could not be executed.
In a decision postdating the facts of the present application, the Constitutional Court elucidated the nature of official liability actions in the following terms (§ 14 of decision no. 3007/2015. (I. 12.) AB):
“In pursuit of a judicial liability action ... the decisions adopted in the principal litigation cannot be revised or reversed. However ... the eventual unlawfulness of the final and binding decision can be examined as a matter underlying any tort liability...”