The case originated in an application (no. 39442/98) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) by a Greek limited company, Sotiris and Nikos Koutras ATTEE (“the applicant company”), on 11 July 1997 under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”).
The applicant company was represented by Ms V. Kasseri, who was subsequently replaced by Ms E. Vratsida, of the Athens Bar. The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by the delegates of their Agent, Mr V. Kyriazopoulos, Senior Adviser at the State Legal Council, and Mrs M. Papida, Legal Assistant at the Legal Council of State.
Relying on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention the applicant company complained of an infringement of its right of access to a tribunal.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
It was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 9 December 1999 the Court declared the application admissible [Note by the Registry. The Court's decision is obtainable from the Registry.].
On 11 February 1992 the applicant company applied to the Ministry of the National Economy under the provisions of Law no. 1892/1990 for a subsidy to build a hotel. That statute provided that companies satisfying certain conditions were entitled to a State subsidy for their investments.
The applicant company's request was rejected in a decision of 29 June 1992.
On 30 September 1992 the applicant company lodged an application with the  for judicial review of the above-mentioned decision. Its lawyer delivered the application by hand to two police officers at  police station no. 4. The police officers affixed the police station's seal to the first page of the application and wrote the registration number and date on it. They did not, however, note the registration number on the record of deposit stamped onto the application itself.
On 6 February 1996 the  ruled the application inadmissible on the following grounds:
“Article 19 §§ 1 and 2 of Presidential Decree no. 18/1989 provide that in order for an application for judicial review to be validly lodged with a public authority, it must be registered in the said authority's register and stamped with a record of deposit. This record must mention the registration number and the date and must be signed by the official receiving the application and by the applicant ... There can be no substitute formalities for compliance with that procedure, to which the applicant himself is a party, because it is a legal requirement for the valid registration of an application. Accordingly, if an application lodged with a public authority other than the  is incorrectly stamped, this will affect the validity of the application.
In the present case the notice of application was lodged with Athens police station no. 4 and stamped with a record of deposit which was signed by the lawyer depositing the application, the two police officers receiving it and the senior officer at the station. However, this stamp did not bear a registration number. Admittedly, the registration number and date of deposit are indicated both on the seal next to the stamp and the first page of the application, but they do not appear on the stamp recording the deposit of the application itself and are signed neither by the lawyer who lodged the application nor by the police officers who took delivery of it. Accordingly, they do not satisfy the statutory conditions of admissibility of applications.”
That judgment was finalised (καθαρογραφή) on 16 May 1997 and the applicant company obtained a copy on 13 June 1997.