The case originated in an application (no. 33807/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Iván Lantos (“the applicant”), on 31 July 2007.
The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr L. Höltzl, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
On 9 February 2010 the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. In accordance with Protocol No. 14, the application was allocated to a Committee of three Judges.
The applicant was born in 1939 and lives in .
On 20 December 1994 the applicant's mother died in hospital. In April 2000 the applicant brought an action in compensation against the hospital, the head of the hospital, his mother's doctor and finally a nurse, requesting the court to establish a violation of his privacy rights in relation to his mother's treatment in hospital and to order the respondents to surrender all medical documentation related to her treatment.
In its interlocutory judgment of 26 February 2002 the Pest Central District Court dismissed the applicant's claim for non-pecuniary damages. This judgment was quashed by the  on 21 November 2002.
In the course of the resumed proceedings, one of the respondents died on 22 December 2002. The proceedings were thus discontinued in this respect pending the establishment of the heirs.
On 19 June 2003 the District Court partly found for the applicant. This judgment was reversed by the , which dismissed his action on 13 January 2004, finding inter alia that the applicant was not able to prove that a particular image of computer tomography, deemed to be of crucial importance, was in the possession of the respondent hospital – if it existed at all.
The proceedings continued thereafter solely in respect of the doctor who had once been in charge of the applicant's mother. Since this doctor had meanwhile died (see paragraph 7 above), her legal successors entered the case on 3 January 2005. The Pest Central District Court dismissed the applicant's action in this respect on 4 November 2005, which was finally upheld by the review bench of the Supreme Court on 21 February 2007. The courts found inter alia that the late doctor or her successors held no personal liability in the circumstances and that, in any event, the respondent hospital (against which the applicant's action had already been dismissed, see paragraph 8 above) could not have possibly been ordered to release the image in question since it had been made and preserved in another institution. The judgment was served on the applicant on 5 April 2007.