The case concerns the expropriation of the applicant’s land and the length of the related domestic proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1936 and lives in Castelpagano. The applicant was represented by Mr L. Crisci, a lawyer practising in Benevento.
The Italian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their former Agent, Ms E. Spatafora, and their former coAgent, Ms P. Accardo.
The applicant was the owner of a plot of land in Castelpagano. The land in issue was recorded in the land register as Folio no. 30, Parcel no. 365.
On 6 September 1989 the Alto Tammaro Mountain Municipalities Authority (comunità montana Alto Tammaro – hereinafter “the Mountain Authority”) approved a plan to construct a road on the applicant’s land.
On 23 October 1989, the company T., which had been awarded the construction project by the Mountain Authority, took physical possession of 708 square metres of the applicant’s land, having been given authorisation to do so by the applicant’s husband.
On 10 May 1990 the Castelpagano Municipality issued an order formally authorising the Mountain Authority to occupy the applicant’s land in order to begin the construction of the road.
On 14 February 1992, the Mountain Authority paid the applicant an advance on the compensation payable for the expropriation in the amount of 1,260,000 Italian lire (ITL).
On 27 June 1995 the Castelpagano Municipality issued an expropriation order in respect of the portion of the land that had been materially occupied (see paragraph 5 above).
On 14 September 1992 the applicant brought an action for damages against the Mountain Authority before the Benevento District Court. She argued that the occupation of her land had not been in accordance with the law on account of the fact that it had begun before the order formally authorising it had been issued (see paragraphs 5 and 6 above). She sought an award of damages to compensate her for the loss of ownership of her property, which she contended had been de facto transferred to the local authority. She further requested a sum for the loss in value to the remainder her land as well as for the destruction of the crops that had been growing on it.
In a judgment of 22 December 2004, filed with the registry on 10 February 2005, the Benevento District Court found that the compulsorypurchase order had not been issued in a timely manner. It found that the order ought to have been issued within a five-year period starting from the beginning of the occupation of the applicant’s land, which the court identified as coinciding with the date the authorities took physical possession of the land on 23 October 1989 (see paragraph 5 above). Accordingly, pursuant to the constructive-expropriation principle (occupazione appropriativa), the applicants were no longer the owners of the land, which had become the property of the Mountain Authority. The court further accepted that the applicant was entitled to damages for the loss of her property but dismissed her other claims on account of a failure by the applicant to provide adequate supporting evidence.
On 25 April 2005, the Mountain Authority appealed against the firstinstance judgment to the Naples Court of Appeal.
By a judgment of 28 March 2008, filed with the registry on 28 May 2008, the Naples Court of Appeal overturned the Benevento District Court’s judgment and held that the expropriation of the applicant’s land had been carried out in accordance with the law. The Court of Appeal found that the District Court had erred in considering that the formal expropriation order had been issued in an untimely fashion, a determination which had led the latter court conclude that the transfer of the property had occurred by means of the application of the constructive-expropriation principle. At the outset, the court made a finding to the effect that the applicant had failed to provide evidence that the duration of the period of lawful occupation in the case at hand had been set for a time-frame inferior to the five-year period prescribed by the relevant legislation in force at the time. The appellate court went on to note that, as it considered the occupation to have commenced on the date the authorities first took physical possession of the land in on 22 October 1989 (see paragraph 5 above) – which was the date referred to by the first-instance court (see paragraph 10 above) – the period of lawful occupation of the land should have expired on 23 October 1994. However, the court pointed out that, on the basis of the legislation applicable at the time, five-year lawful occupation periods were to be considered automatically extended for a further period of two years. It followed that the deadline for the issuing of an expropriation order had been extended until 23 October 1996. Accordingly, the court concluded that the expropriation order had been issued in a timely fashion, that is to say within the period of lawful occupation.
The applicant did not lodge an appeal with the Court of Cassation against the judgment of the Naples Court of Appeal.
On 17 April 2002 the applicant lodged an application with the Rome Court of Appeal under Law no. 89 of 24 March 2001, known as the “Pinto” Act, complaining of the excessive length of the above-described proceedings. The applicant asked the court to rule that there had been a breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and to order the Italian Government to pay compensation for the non-pecuniary damage sustained, which he assessed as being 18,550 EUR.
In a decision of 17 March 2003, filed with the registry on 17 April 2003, the Court of Appeal found that the reasonable time for proceedings had been exceeded. It awarded the applicant EUR 1,400 in compensation for non-pecuniary damage and EUR 500 for costs and expenses incurred in connection with the domestic proceedings and EUR 700 for costs and expenses incurred in connection with the proceedings before the European Court of Human Rights.
The decision of the Rome Court of Appeal was served on the local authorities on 26 May 2003 and became final 26 July 2003.
The domestic law and practice concerning constructive expropriation are to be found in Guiso-Gallisay v. Italy ((just satisfaction) [GC], no. 58858/00, §§ 18-48, 22 December 2009).
The domestic law and practice concerning Law no. 89 of 24 March 2001, known as the “Pinto Act”, are set out in the Cocchiarella v. Italy judgment ([GC], no. 64886/01, §§ 23-31, ECHR 2006V).