The applicant alleged that his rights to a fair trial and presumption of innocence pursuant to Article 6 §§ 1 and 2 of the Convention had been breached in the domestic civil compensation proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1946 and lives in Ankara, Turkey. The applicant was represented by Mr I. Aliyev, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In the early 1990s the applicant served as Prime Minister of the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic (“the NAR”), an autonomous entity within the Republic of Azerbaijan. By the time of the events giving rise to the present application, he had not held any public positions for years and had been living in Turkey since 1993.
On 9 November 2005, on the basis of an application by the Cabinet of Ministers of the NAR, the Nakhchivan prosecutor’s office instituted criminal proceedings under Articles 179.2.1 (embezzlement by a group of people), 179.3.2 (embezzlement in very large amounts) and 308 (abuse of official powers) of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan in respect of an incident involving alleged embezzlement of public funds from the budget of the NAR that had taken place in November and December 1991 and February 1992. It was alleged that State funds had been allocated for the purchase of several helicopters in a transaction involving a private company, however those helicopters had never actually been delivered and the money had instead been embezzled. The decision to institute criminal proceedings stated, inter alia, as follows:
“Following an enquiry, it was established that on 1 November 1991 former Minister of Health of the [NAR], [F.J.], and [a businessman, A.M.] concluded a contract of sale concerning six helicopters ... with the purpose of embezzling State property in significant amounts. Based on that contract, [the applicant], by way of abuse of his official authority, [arranged for the transfer of various amounts of money from the budgets of various State bodies to the bank account of A.M.’s private company, and thus] embezzled State funds. Therefore, criminal proceedings under Articles 308.1, 179.2.1 and 179.3.2 of the Criminal Code must be instituted and an investigation carried out.”
During the investigation, the prosecuting authorities questioned eight people, including F.J. and A.M. They attempted to question the applicant as well, in the capacity of a witness, by issuing an order to attend, but were unable to do so because the applicant was abroad. It is not clear what practical steps, if any, they took in order to ensure his appearance for questioning. The prosecuting authorities also examined other material, including an accounting expert report.
According to the documents in the case file, the final version of the events established by the prosecution authorities was that in 1991 F.J. and A.M., who had been acquainted for a long time, had concluded two contracts concerning delivery by 28 December 1991 of helicopters to be purchased by A.M.’s company in Ukraine. If delivery had not been possible by that date, the money had had to be returned to the budget. Based on those contracts, following several orders on the part of the applicant a total amount of 11,750,000 Soviet Union roubles (SUR) had been transferred to A.M.’s company in several instalments. Ultimately, A.M. had not been able to purchase the helicopters. The following year, the amount of SUR 7,450,000 was returned to the State budget by wire transfer. As to the remaining SUR 4,300,000, A.M. promised to return it in cash. In February 1992, on the insistence of the applicant, he allegedly gave the cash to some unknown people sent to him by the applicant. However, that money was never returned to the State budget.
On 21 January 2006 the Nakhchivan prosecutor’s office discontinued the criminal proceedings in accordance with Article 75.1.3 of the Criminal Code without having formally charged anyone with a criminal offence, owing to the expiry of the twelve-year criminal prescription period applicable to the type of the criminal offence under investigation. The decision to discontinue the proceedings stated, inter alia, as follows:
“As it has been proved by the investigation material, [the applicant], having abused his official authority ..., embezzled [SUR 4,300,000 in February 1992 following a State purchase transaction in the amount of SUR 11,750,000 that he had authorised in November and December 1991], he ought to be charged as an accused person under Articles 308.1, 179.2.3, 179.2.1, 179.3.2 of the Criminal Code. However, he must be absolved from criminal liability owing to the expiry of the criminal prescription period under Article 75.1.3 of the Criminal Code ...
Decided:
In accordance with the findings made in the descriptive part of the decision, [the applicant], [F.J.] and [A.M.] are to be absolved of criminal liability owing to the expiry of the criminal prescription period under criminal case no. 62602 and the proceedings in the criminal case are to be discontinued ...”
The applicant was not aware of the institution and subsequent discontinuation of the criminal investigation at the time those decisions were taken. It appears that he might have first become aware of those decisions sometime between February and May 2006, after a civil claim had been lodged against him by the prosecuting authorities and during the examination of the civil claim by the first-instance court (see paragraphs 11 and 12 below).
In 2006 and 2007, the applicant challenged, unsuccessfully, the decision to discontinue the criminal proceedings before the prosecution authorities and courts, arguing that it had been taken in breach of various requirements of domestic law. His first complaint in this regard was made on 25 September 2006 to the Nakhchivan prosecutor’s office, and subsequently he complained to the Prosecutor General’s Office and the courts. In those complaints, he argued, among other things, that his procedural rights had been breached because he had not been informed of the criminal proceedings instituted against him and had never been questioned. He further argued that the criminal proceedings should have been discontinued on the grounds of a lack of corpus delicti.
On 16 February 2006 the Nakhchivan prosecutor’s office, relying on Articles 179 to 183 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”), applied to the Nasimi District Court with a civil claim against the applicant, F.J. and A.M. under the procedure provided by the CCrP for “lodging a civil claim within the framework of criminal proceedings”, asking the court to order these individuals to compensate the State for the embezzlement they had allegedly committed in 1991 and 1992. In their claim the Nakhchivan prosecutor’s office noted that “it had been proved” by the evidence collected by the investigation that the defendants had committed embezzlement of State funds in large amounts, but that they had been “absolved” of criminal liability owing to the expiry of the prescription period. The prosecutor’s office further noted that, although the criminal proceedings had had to be discontinued for this reason, the defendants still had an obligation to compensate the State for “the crime”. They also mentioned that, according to Article 179.4 of the CCrP, the periods for lodging a civil claim provided for by civil law and other fields of law did not apply to civil claims lodged within the framework of criminal proceedings. In support of the claim, the prosecutor’s office submitted the documentary material and witness depositions contained in the criminal file.
At a hearing held in the applicant’s absence but with the participation of his lawyers, the Nasimi District Court examined the defendants’ statements, a number of documents from the criminal case file and heard evidence from two witnesses.
In particular, the applicant, in his submissions made through his lawyer, noted that there had been inconsistencies in A.M.’s and F.J.’s statements as to how and on whose initiative the contracts had been concluded, and argued that the transactions had been initiated by A.M. and F.J. themselves. The applicant accepted that he had issued ministerial orders on transferring of money from the State budget to A.M.’s company, but argued that those orders had been based on the earlier negotiations conducted and the contracts signed by F.J. and A.M. He further noted that he had not been in any way involved in the process of returning the money to the State budget in 1992 because by that time (since 24 February 1992) he had no longer been Prime Minister.
A.M. stated, inter alia, that he had first spoken about the purchase of helicopters with F.J., and that he had subsequently been contacted by the applicant, who approved the signing of the contracts. Following the inability of his company to deliver the helicopters, in February 1992 two people had visited him on behalf of the applicant and told him that the applicant had demanded that the money be returned in cash. A.M. had given them only the part of the money that he had had available in cash – SUR 4,300,000 – while they had signed and given him a receipt. A.M. stated that he could not present a copy of that receipt, because his company had been dissolved in 1994 and he had not kept any of its financial records. As to the remaining SUR 7,450,000, it had been returned to the budget by wire transfer.
F.J. stated, inter alia, that it had been the applicant who had first contacted him in 1991 about the planned purchase of helicopters and had instructed him to sign two contracts of sale with A.M.’s company. He had not been involved with the financial aspects of the transactions, which had been handled by the applicant. After A.M.’s failure to deliver the helicopters, A.M. had returned part of the money in cash to the applicant’s associates. F.J. had further stated that, since he had left the office of Minister of Health in 1992, he did not know most of the details concerning the return of the money.
The court also examined the documents in the case file, including the contracts for purchase of helicopters, the ministerial orders signed by the applicant as Prime Minister concerning transfers of various amounts to A.M.’s company (there were a total of three transfers from various Stateowned accounts), and the payment orders confirming those transfers. It also examined an expert report concerning the current value in Azerbaijani manats (AZN) of the original amount in Soviet Union roubles, adjusted for inflation.
The court also heard witness evidence from N.I., a former Minister of Finance of the NAR, and S.H., a former chief accountant at the Ministry of Finance of the NAR. N.I. stated, inter alia, that, pursuant to the applicant’s ministerial order, in November 1991 he had dealt with only one of the transfers to A.M.’s company in the amount of SUR 7,450,000. The applicant had instructed him to secure additional funds to be transferred to A.M.’s company, but he had refused to do so, stating that he would not be in a position to make any further transfers until the delivery of the helicopters paid for by the first transfer. N.I. furthermore stated that, although there had been two other transfers made in December 1991 for the total amount of SUR 4,300,000, he had not known about them, because during the month of December 1991 he had been first dismissed from and then reinstated to his position as Minister of Finance in quick succession, while those two transfers had been made during the intervening period. After reinstatement, in May 1992 he arranged for the return by A.M. of SUR 7,450,000 by wire transfer to the State budget. He did not know about the remaining SUR 4,300,000.
S.H. stated that, of the total amount originally transferred to A.M.’s company, SUR 7,450,000 had eventually been returned by wire transfer to the State budget, while the remaining SUR 4,300,000 had never been returned.
By a judgment of 8 May 2006, the Nasimi District Court allowed the claim of the Nakhchivan prosecutor’s office in respect of the applicant and A.M., and dismissed the claim in the part relating to F.J., finding that the latter was not responsible for the embezzlement. It ordered the applicant and A.M. to pay, jointly, the amount of AZN 2,327,059 (approximately 2,025,000 euros (EUR) at the material time) in respect of the damage caused as a result of the criminal offence of embezzlement. It also ordered them to pay the court fees in the amount of AZN 19.80. In its judgment, the court stated, inter alia, the following:
“... It has been determined that ... [SUR] 4,300,000, equivalent to [AZN] 2,327,059, ... was embezzled. Even though [the defendants] were absolved of criminal liability by way of discontinuation of the criminal proceedings ... owing to the expiry of the prescription period, the damage caused as a result of the criminal offence has not been compensated. Therefore, the court considers that [the applicant and A.M.] should jointly pay [AZN] 2,327,059 ... to the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.”
In appeals lodged with the higher courts, the applicant disputed the factual findings of the court and argued that the evidence collected in the case file of the discontinued criminal proceedings should not have been referred to by the civil court pursuant to rules of the civil procedure.
In particular, he complained that the first-instance court had assessed the factual circumstances incorrectly and had not duly examined the inconsistencies in the other defendants’ statements. He argued that, as Prime Minister at the relevant time, issuing orders to allocate State funds on the basis of the contracts concluded by the Minister of Health had been part of his official duties and that he should not be held criminally liable for those orders. He denied any knowledge about or involvement in what had eventually happened to the money transferred on the basis of those orders.
He also complained that, in the absence of a final judgment resulting in a criminal conviction, the civil court had erred in finding him liable for committing a criminal offence and ordering him to pay compensation. He further argued that the civil court had referred to the prosecution’s statement of facts of the alleged criminal offence and had accepted those facts as having been proved, in the absence of any such finding by a court in a criminal trial, thus committing a “serious procedural violation”.
He furthermore argued that, even though there had no longer been any criminal proceedings against him owing to the discontinuation decision, the Nakhchivan prosecutor’s office had unlawfully brought a civil claim under Articles 179 et seq. of the CCrP. According to the applicant, even though it had been clear that the prescription period under criminal law had expired, the criminal proceedings had been knowingly instituted in 2005 in a belated manner with the sole purpose of artificially “reviving the claim period” for civil claims lodged under criminal-procedure law. The applicant argued that the admissibility of the civil claim should have been examined under the relevant provisions of civil law, under which all the statutes of limitations had long expired for any types of civil claims.
Following appeals by the applicant, on 21 July 2006 the Court of Appeal and on 13 December 2006 the Supreme Court upheld the Nasimi District Court’s judgment mainly repeating its reasoning. The higher courts did not expressly respond to the applicant’s arguments raised in his appeals.
The applicant subsequently attempted to have the case reopened and reviewed by the Plenum of the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court, but his attempts were unsuccessful.
Article 63 of the Constitution provides as follows:
Article 63.  Presumption of innocence
“I.  Everyone has a right to presumption of innocence. Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty in accordance with the law and until a final court verdict in this connection enters into legal force.
A person reasonably suspected of being guilty cannot be presumed guilty.
A person charged with a criminal offence cannot be required to prove his or her innocence.
Unlawfully obtained evidence cannot be used in administering justice.
No one may be presumed guilty of a criminal offence in the absence of a court verdict.”
The relevant provisions of the CCrP provide as follows:
Article 91.  Accused person
“91.1.  An accused person is an individual charged with a criminal offence by a decision taken by an investigator, prosecutor or court.
...”
Chapter XIX
Civil claim within the framework of criminal proceedings
Article 179.  Law applicable to a civil claim
“179.1.  A civil claim within the framework of the criminal proceedings is lodged, proved and decided in accordance with the rules established in the provisions of this Code.
2.  Where the rules of the civil-procedure law are not contrary to the principles of criminal procedure and where this Code does not provide for rules required for the proceedings concerning the civil claim, application of the provisions of the civilprocedure law is allowed.
3.  The decision in respect of the civil claim is taken in accordance with the provisions of civil law and other fields of law, dependng on the subject matter of the claim.
4.  Any period for lodging a claim provided for in the civil law and other fields of law does not apply to a civil claim lodged within the framework of criminal proceedings.”
Article 180.  Importance of the enforcable court judgment or
decision in respect of the civil claim
“...
2.  If a person does not lodge a civil claim within the criminal proceedings, he or she shall be entitled to lodge a civil claim in civil proceedings.
3.  If a civil claim lodged within the framework of the criminal proceedings is left unexamined by the court, the claim can be later lodged under the rules of civil procedure.”
Article 181.  Persons who have the right to lodge a civil claim
“...
6.  During the criminal proceedings the prosecutor shall lodge and argue a civil claim in order to protect State property or defend the rights of an individual entitled to lodge a civil claim who is unable to defend his or her legal interests personally.
...
7.  Within the framework of criminal proceedings a prosecutor lodges and defends a claim against the accused person or a person who could be held liable for the actions of the accused person in the following cases:
7.1.  on the basis of an application by a State entity, company or organisation for the defence of State interests;
...”
Article 183.  Lodging of a civil claim
“183.1.  During the course of the criminal proceedings, a civil claim may be lodged at any time between the beginning of the prosecution and the beginning of the [trial] court’s examination of the case ...
2.  Within the framework of criminal proceedings a civil claim is lodged against an accused person or a person who could be held materially liable for the actions of the accused person.
...”
Article 187.  The jurisdiction of a civil claim
“187.1.  Regardless of the amount of the civil claim, it shall be examined by the court dealing with the criminal case or other prosecution material, in conjunction with that case or material.
2.  During the criminal proceedings the court shall include its decision on the civil claim in its [criminal] judgment [hökm].”
Pursuant to Article 75.1.3 of the Criminal Code, the criminal prescription period in respect of “serious crimes” is twelve years from the date of the criminal offence. No person can be held liable in respect of that offence after the expiry of this period. In accordance with Article 75.2, the prescription period is calculated from the day the criminal offence was committed to the moment the judgment on criminal conviction takes effect.
Under Article 373 of the Civil Code, the general period for lodging a civil claim is a maximum of ten years, and can be shorter depending on the type of the claim and the civil-law relations giving rise to it. In accordance with Article 377.1 of the Civil Code, subject to certain exceptions, the period of limitation starts running from the day a person became aware or should have become aware of a violation of his or her right. A civil court accepts the claim for examination irrespective of the expiry of the limitation period (Article 375.1 of the Civil Code). The court applies the statute of limitations only on application by a party to the dispute made before the delivery of a judgment. The expiry of the limitation period is grounds for a decision to reject the claim (Article 375.2 of the Civil Code).