The case originated in an application (no. 52571/11) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Mykola Fedorovych Siyanko (“the applicant”), on 27 July 2011.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms N. Okhotnikova, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
On 16 May 2018 notice of the application was given to the Government.
No comments were received in due time from Res Publica, an Albanian non-governmental organization, which was given leave to intervene in the written proceedings under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1959 and is detained in Cherkasy.
Between October 2004 and May 2009 four old women, Tso., S., Z. and Ye., were found dead in their houses in the village where the applicant was living. Some of them had visible head injuries. The police were not called and no criminal proceedings were instituted at the time in connection with their deaths on the assumption that there was nothing suspicious in their deaths; it was considered that they had died by accident.
In March 2008 criminal proceedings were instituted in connection with a theft of money from K.’s house. The applicant and his wife, who were K.’s neighbours, had been involved as attesting witnesses in those proceedings. The proceedings were suspended on an unspecified date in 2008 as no perpetrator had been identified.
In the early morning on 7 July 2009 Kl., another aged neighbour of the applicant, was found murdered at her home. The police dog had brought the police to the applicant’s house. The applicant was taken to the village council and then to a police station.
The applicant did not contest before the Court that it had been him who had killed Kl. According to him, he had planned to go to the police to confess to the murder but the police had come first.
On the same date a criminal investigation was instituted against the applicant for the murder of Kl. and at 10 a.m. on that day he was formally arrested at the police premises. The available documents suggest that during his arrest the applicant was apprised of his rights as a suspect but waived his right to a lawyer in writing indicating that his refusal was not linked to his financial situation. Investigator Pav. accepted the waiver, noting that legal representation was not mandatory under a murder charge. Following this, from 12.05 to 12.50, the applicant was questioned as a suspect. During the interview, he admitted his guilt in Kl.’s death, submitting that he had killed her by accident on 6 July 2009 and providing details.
The applicant stated that after his arrest he had requested the assistance of a legal-aid lawyer or a meeting with a person who could assist him in hiring a private one but the request had been dismissed by the investigator. Following an insistent request by the investigator, he had had to waive his right to legal assistance.
At 2 p.m. on the same day a record of the applicant’s voluntarily surrender and confession to the police (явка з повинною) was drawn up by Investigator P., whom the applicant knew. The applicant confessed, in a concise fashion, to the murder of Kl.
According to the applicant, the confession was written on the demands of, and as dictated by, the investigator.
On 8 July 2009 a reconstruction of the crime was organised at Kl.’s house in the absence of a lawyer and in the presence of attesting witnesses, a forensic medical expert and a criminal law specialist. According to the reconstruction record, the applicant was invited by the investigator to show, of his own free will, how he had killed Kl. The applicant agreed. He provided a detailed account of the relevant circumstances, clarifying them on the request of the forensic expert and the investigator.
According to the applicant, he gave evidence as instructed by Investigator Shch., who did not appear in the formal records at the time but was de facto heading the investigation instead of Pav.
On 10 July 2009, from 9 to 9.20 a.m., the applicant was informed by Investigator Pav. of his procedural rights, including the right to legal assistance, and again waived his right to a lawyer in writing. He was then charged with the premeditated murder of Kl. and, between 9.30 and 10.30 a.m., he repeated his earlier testimony, maintaining that he had killed Kl. by accident.
According to the applicant, he requested a meeting with a lawyer but his request was again rejected.
Later on the same date, from 11 a.m. to 3.20 p.m. five records of the applicant’s voluntary surrender to the police had been consecutively drawn up by Investigator P., suggesting that the applicant had appeared before him and confessed to having committed a number of crimes: the theft from K.’s house (see paragraph 7 above); the murders of Z. and Tso.; the murder and robbery of Ye.; and the murder of a woman from his village named Motria whose last name he did not remember but who was later identified as S. (see paragraph 6 above).
According to the applicant, his confession to the theft from K.’s house had been made following a threat by an investigator that if he refused to confess, his wife would be charged as his accomplice to the theft and that this would expose their child to the risk of placement in an orphanage. Other self-incriminating statements were also made under “pressure” from the investigator and as dictated by him. He also submitted that on the same date, he had been forced to agree that some ammunition would be planted in his house by the police; he had been promised in this connection that he would not be prosecuted as the bullets were too old and no longer usable.
On 11 July 2009 the police conducted a search of the applicant’s house and seized seventy-six bullets for different weapons.
On 13 July 2009 the applicant was additionally questioned as a suspect in the investigation related to Kl.’s murder. The available documents suggest that before the questioning, at which a prosecutor was also present and of which a video-recording was made, the applicant was apprised of his procedural rights in writing and he requested the assistance of Ts., a lawyer; the lawyer was admitted to the proceedings and the above interview took place in his presence. According to the record of the above interview, the applicant admitted his guilt regarding Kl.’s death and, as a reply to unspecified questions on the part of Investigator Pav., made further statements in which he confirmed he had murdered Z., Tso., Ye. and S., providing details. He stated, inter alia, that he had come to the victims’ house to ask for a loan as he had needed money to pay his bills; once the victims had refused to give him money, he had killed them.
According to the applicant, before being questioned he was apprised of his rights orally but did not understand a word. He further stated that after he had managed to talk to the prosecutor, he had been provided with legal assistance by Ts., but that he had had no possibility to talk to the lawyer in private before or during the interview.
Between 14 and 22 July 2009, still in the framework of criminal proceedings in respect of Kl.’s murder, a number of investigative measures were taken to verify the applicant’s confessions in respect to the other murders which included examination of the crime scenes, questioning of the victims’ relatives and other witnesses, and exhumation and examination of the victims’ corpses. Material evidence, including one of the victim’s hairs found covered with blood on a doorframe, was discovered following an examination of the crime scene. The forensic expert confirmed following the exhumation that there had been injuries inflicted on the victims’ bodies. In his reports issued after the reconstructions of the crime with the applicant’s participation had been conducted (see paragraph 19 below), the expert concluded that the victims’ injuries could have been inflicted in the circumstances indicated by the applicant.
On 20 July 2009 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant on account of unlawful possession of ammunition seized from his house on 11 July 2009 (see paragraph 14 above).
On 23 and 24 July 2009 investigator L. questioned the applicant as a suspect and accused accordingly in the proceedings concerning unlawful possession of ammunition. No lawyer was present during the interviews as the applicant had waived his right to legal assistance. The applicant admitted his guilt in the offence. According to the applicant, he did so at the request of the investigator and provided evidence as dictated to him in exchange for a promise to grant him a meeting with his wife to discuss the issue of hiring a private lawyer.
On 29 July 2009, in order to verify statements given by the applicant during his questioning of 13 July 2009, reconstructions of the crimes were conducted in the village in the presence of Ts., a forensic medical expert, attesting witnesses and criminal law specialists. The applicant provided a detailed account of the crimes, confirming his guilt. The applicant alleged that he had done so following the instructions of Investigator Shch. in exchange for a new promise to allow him to meet with his wife at the spot. The relevant record, which bears the applicant’s signature, suggests that during the crime reconstruction, when asked why he had confessed to the crimes on 10 July 2009, the applicant stated that he had not been able to bear such a burden any longer. According to the applicant, he had never signed the reconstruction records and had refused to watch the videorecording of this investigative step.
On 31 July 2009 criminal proceedings regarding the theft from K.’s house were resumed. The applicant was informed of his procedural rights but waived his right to legal assistance in respect of the theft charge. His waiver was accepted by Investigator Shch., as legal representation was not mandatory under domestic law in respect of that charge, and the applicant was questioned without a lawyer present. He confirmed his guilt in respect of the theft and provided details regarding the circumstances of the crime.
According to the applicant, both the waiver and the self-incriminating statements were given following demands by the investigator.
On 3 August 2009 Investigator Shch. instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant in connection with the aggravated murders of Z., Tso., Ye. and S.
On the same date all sets of criminal proceedings against the applicant were joined in a single case with the applicant’s charges listed as premediated murder for profit, robbery, theft, and unlawful possession of ammunition. He was then questioned in respect of these crimes in the presence of Ts., whom he wished to maintain as his lawyer. During the questioning, the applicant partly admitted his guilt in respect of Kl.’s murder and refused to give any other evidence.
According to the applicant, he refused to give evidence as Shch. had not kept his promises to allow him a meeting with his wife.
On 30 December 2009, having viewed a video recording of the questioning of 13 July 2009 and the reconstructions of the crimes of 29 July 2009, a psychological expert asserted that the applicant’s behaviour showed that he had been testifying of his own will.
On 25 March 2010, apparently after a complaint by Kl.’s friend, criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant for having also robbed Kl. These proceedings were joined to the main case and the charges against the applicant were amended accordingly.
On 30 March 2010, during his questioning in the presence of Ts., the applicant denied his guilt in respect of all the charges against him – with the exception of Kl.’s murder, which he insisted had been an accident – and refused to give further evidence, relying on his constitutional right not to incriminate himself.
On 26 April 2010 the investigation was completed and the applicant and Ts. were granted access to the case file. According to the applicant, following Ts.’s advice, he signed the relevant record raising no complaints or requests.
On unspecified date the case was sent to the Court of Appeal of Cherkasy Region (“the Court of Appeal”) for trial at first instance.
On 31 May 2010 following the applicant’s request, the Court of Appeal replaced Ts. with F., a legal-aid lawyer.
During the hearings at the trial court, in which the applicant and F. were present, the applicant admitted his guilt with respect to Kl.’s death only, maintaining that he had killed her by accident and denying he had robbed her. He complained, for the first time, that his confessions to the crimes he had not committed had been obtained by the police under psychological duress and in breach of his defence rights. He submitted in this context that during the investigative actions in respect of Kl. murder Investigator P. had asked him “if he [had known] anything else”; he told the investigator about different accidents and crimes that had occurred in the village and that there were rumours that some old villagers had been murdered, rather than having died accidently as everybody thought. Then, Investigator P. gave him forms and forced him, by threatening to harm his family, to confess to some of the crimes he had chosen from the applicant’s story; in doing so, he dictated to him the text of the confessions. The applicant also informed the trial court that he had been made aware of some factual circumstances related to the deaths of Z., Tso., Ye. and S. from their relatives and had used those details in his testimonies; the remainder of the circumstances had been set out by him as instructed by the investigators P. and Shch.
On being questioned by the trial court, the residents of the village denied that there had been any rumours of any suspicious deaths. Investigator P. in his turn submitted, inter alia, that: he had offered the applicant a chance to confess to “all his sins” at the same time, if there had been any apart from Kl.’s murder; on 10 July 2009 the applicant had been brought to his office as he had wished to tell him something; in the office, the applicant had made his statements of voluntary surrender and confessed to the theft and murders; the applicant’s confessions to the murders had prompted the relevant investigation as nobody had known about the murders before.
On 19 July 2010 the applicant lodged a complaint with the trial court alleging, without any details given, that F. was not representing his interests effectively and asking to replace her with another legal-aid lawyer. No information has been provided to the Court as to whether that complaint was ever considered by the trial court.
On 19 October 2010 the Court of Appeal found the applicant guilty as charged. He was given a life sentence for murder for profit and terms from two to ten years’ imprisonment in respect of the remaining charges. Using the rule of absorption of a more lenient punishment by a more severe one, the applicant’s final sentence was life imprisonment. The court relied, inter alia, on the applicant’s statements of voluntary surrender and confession to the police, and his self-incriminating statements made during a number of investigative actions, including in the absence of a lawyer.
Having questioned the investigating officers in the case, attesting witnesses, forensic medical experts and having examined video-recordings of procedural actions and reports by psychological expert, the court found no evidence in support of the applicant’s allegations that he had made selfincriminating statements under psychological pressure from and as instructed by investigators. It also observed in this connection that neither the police nor the victims’ relatives suspected that Z., Tso., Ye. and S. had been murdered until the applicant had confessed and that therefore the factual circumstances of those crimes could not have been given by the applicant at the instigation of the authorities. In addition, the court noted that the applicant had confirmed his confessions in the presence of his lawyer and that no complaints of any pressure on the part of the investigating authorities had been made by the applicant or his lawyer at the investigation stage. The fact that the applicant had retracted his confessions during the trial and complained of duress on the part of the police was seen by the court as the applicant’s attempt to avoid punishment for the crimes he had committed.
The Court of Appeal found no breach of the applicant’s defence right as the absence of a lawyer at his arrest and during some of investigative actions resulted from his waivers, made of his own free will, of his right to legal assistance. Given that at that time the crimes he had been suspected of did not require compulsory legal representation under domestic law his waivers had been lawfully accepted by the investigator; once the applicant expressed his wish to be represented by a lawyer, on 13 July 2009, his request was granted.
The applicant and his lawyer, F., drafted appeals. The applicant’s lawyer mainly challenged the court’s findings that the murders had been committed intentionally and for profit. She also stated, without drawing any conclusions, that no assessment had been given by the first-instance court in respect of the fact that the exhumation of the victims’ bodies had taken place before the reconstructions at the crime scene of 29 July 2009, during which the applicant had provided a detailed accounts how he had caused injuries to the victims, and that therefore the nature of bodily injuries, their location and the way they had been inflicted had already been known to the investigating officers.
In his appeal, the applicant repeated, inter alia, his complaints about the lack of access to a lawyer and the forced nature of his confessions. In addition, he complained that both his lawyers had been inactive. In particular, Ts. had been appointed by and had been working for the investigation and, despite being aware of the violations of the applicant’s rights, had failed to lodge any complaints; F. had also been “silent”, had not reacted to his requests for assistance and had not held private meetings with him to discuss his legal defence strategy, visiting him in detention only once during the seven months of the trial.
By a letter of 24 December 2010 the Court of Appeal notified the parties to the proceedings, including F., of the date and time of the examination of the appeals in the applicant’s case by the appeal court. It was also mentioned in the notification letter that the appearance of the parties before the appeal court was not mandatory.
On 15 February 2011 the Higher Specialised Court on Civil and Criminal Matters (“the Higher Specialised Court”), acting as the second-instance court, upheld the applicant’s conviction and sentence, finding that the applicant’s guilt was proven by a number of pieces of evidence which had been carefully assessed and relied on by the first-instance court.
The Higher Specialised Court rejected as unsubstantiated the applicant’s complaint that his conviction had been based on inadmissible evidence obtained in breach of his rights. It noted, inter alia, that the first-instance court had relied on detailed self-incriminating statements made by the applicant during his questioning while a suspect and after having been accused, including in the presence of a lawyer, and that that evidence had been obtained in compliance with the procedural law and had been corroborated by a number of other pieces of evidence.
The Higher Specialised Court further supported the lower court’s reasoning and conclusion as to the lack of evidence of any psychological pressure applied to the applicant. It reiterated that the authorities had had no knowledge of the murders of Z., Tso., Ye. and S. “until the applicant had made his statements in July 2009”, which excluded the possibility of any pressure on him having been exerted with a view to extracting that information. It went on, noting that once the relevant statements had been made, the relevant facts had been verified by the authorities and the evidence which had confirmed the applicant’s allegations had been obtained. The court also pointed to the level of details given by the applicant in his testimony and suggested that such details could have been known to him only if he had been the perpetrator.
As regards the defence rights, the Higher Specialised Court advanced the same reasoning as the first-instance court (see paragraph 32 above).
The text of the judgment suggests that the hearing took place in the presence of the applicant and that the applicant’s lawyer was absent from the hearing. The reason for his absence is unknown to the Court. According to the applicant, the hearing at the Higher Specialised Court lasted about thirty minutes and he was allowed to be present and make his statement only at the end.
On 3 July 2013 the applicant also complained to the prosecutor’s office that all confessions in the criminal proceedings against him had been made under psychological pressure from Investigator P.
On 30 September 2013, mainly citing the testimonies of police officers, who had denied any pressure having been exerted on the applicant, and the results of examination of the same complaint by the trial court, the prosecutor dismissed the applicant’s allegations as unsubstantiated. This decision was upheld by the Kamyanka Town Court and the Cherkasy Regional Court of Appeal on 14 February and 21 March 2014 respectively.
It appears from the prosecutor’s decision that the police officers submitted, inter alia, that a few days after his arrest when he had been brought to the police station from a detention facility the applicant had stated that he had wished to confess to Investigator P. to a number of murders he had committed between 2003 and 2007; the records of his confessions had been sent to Investigator Shch. who had then ordered an investigation into the relevant facts.
In 2017 a similar complaint by the applicant was dismissed by the police as unsubstantiated following an internal inquiry.
Under paragraph 1 of Article 115 of Criminal Code of 5 April 2001, premeditated murder is punishable by imprisonment for a term of seven to fifteen years. Under paragraph 2 of Article 115, premeditated murder in the aggravating circumstances listed in that paragraph is punishable by imprisonment for a term of ten to fifteen years, or life imprisonment.
The relevant provisions of domestic law governing access to a lawyer and the reopening of criminal proceedings can be found in Zakshevskiy v. Ukraine (no. 7193/04, §§ 48 to 51, 17 March 2016).