The case originated in an application (no. 62377/16) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Margarit Ivanov Delin (“the applicant”), on 24 October 2016.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Margaritova-Vuchkova a lawyer practising in Sofia. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Obretenov, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 26 January 2017, notice of the complaints raised under Articles 6, 8 and 13 of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The applicant complained in particular that he had been unable to effectively challenge the decision to revoke his security clearance for access to State secrets on the basis of which his employment contract with the National Security Service had been terminated.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Blagoevgrad.
He had been employed by the National Security Service, at the Regional Office of Blagoevgrad, as an agent since 1998. On account of the nature of his duties, he had held a security clearance permitting him access to classified information constituting State secrets. According to the applicant’s job description, being in a possession of such a security clearance had been a prerequisite to him holding his post.
On 20 November 2013, the Director of the National Security Service issued a decision to revoke the applicant’s security clearance allowing access to classified information. The decision did not contain any reasoning in respect of that revocation, apart from a reference to section 59, in relation with section 40 § 1 f) and h); section 41 c) and d), and section 42 a) and b) of the Classified Information Protection Act (see paragraphs 12 and 13 below).
The applicant lodged an appeal against the revocation with the State Commission for Information Security. The latter, by a decision of 9 January 2014, upheld the revocation. That decision was final and not amenable to judicial review.
On 6 March 2014, the Director of the National Security Service ordered that the applicant be dismissed. The reason given for the termination of his employment was the revocation of his security clearance, possession of which was an indispensable precondition for him to be able to perform his duties.
The applicant challenged his dismissal at two levels of jurisdiction. He contested the lawfulness of the dismissal procedure, arguing that he was not able to challenge, in the course of the procedure before the State Commission for Information Security, the facts on which the revocation of the security clearance permit was based. The Director of the National Security Service abused his powers in dismissing the applicant, who was not allowed an opportunity to defend himself.
By its judgment of 19 March 2015, the Blagoevgrad Administrative Court rejected the applicant’s claims, reasoning that the decision of the Director of the National Security Service to revoke the applicant’s security clearance was a final and valid administrative act, and it rendered the applicant’s dismissal inevitable because he was no longer able to perform his duties. The court added that the applicant had exhausted the remedy provided by law by challenging the revocation decision, and that the latter had become final; in addition, the court was not competent to examine, within the framework of the dismissal proceedings, any questions related to its lawfulness.
On 11 July 2016, the Supreme Court of Cassation upheld that judgment, confirming that the decision to revoke the applicant’s security clearance was not amenable to judicial review.
Section 40 § 1 of this Act provides that under no circumstances other than those stipulated under section 39 (concerning access to classified information in connection with the performance of a limited scope of official duties at the highest level of State authority) shall clearance for access to classified information be issued to any person, unless he/she meets the following requirements: he/she must a)  be a Bulgarian citizen; b)  be of legal age; c)  have completed secondary education; d)  have not been convicted of any premeditated felony, notwithstanding any subsequent rehabilitation; e)  not be the subject of any pre-trial or trial proceedings for premeditated felony; f)  be reliable for the purposes of security; g)  not be suffering from any mental disorder (and be duly certified as such); and h)  be considered reliable for the purposes of protecting a secret.
Section 41 adds that reliability for the purposes of security is established where there is no data about a)  conduct of activities against the interests of the State or the interests protected by the State by virtue of international agreements; b)  participation or accomplice in spying, terrorist, sabotage or subversive operations; c)  conduct of other activities against the national security, territorial integrity and the sovereignty of the State or aimed at forceful changes of the established constitutional order; d)  conduct of activities against the public order. According to section 42 § 1 of the Act the reliability for the purposes of protecting a secret is established where there is data about a)  hiding information or giving false information by the employee under security check for the purposes of the latter check; b)  facts and circumstances that could lead to possible blackmailing of that employee; c)  incompatibility of the lifestyle of the employee under security check and his/her income; d)  psychiatric illness or other mental disorders that could have a negative impact on his/her capacity to work with classified information.
Section 59 § 1 a) stipulated, in its version applicable at the relevant period, that clearance for access to classified information had to be revoked where it was established, in the course of a security check, that the person in question did not meet one of the requirements under Section 40 § 1. Under sections 11 and 49, security checks of employees of the national security services (служби за сигурност) are conducted by those same national security services, which are also competent to grant or refuse security clearance.
Under section 59 §§ 3 and 5, in their version as applicable at the relevant period, a revocation of clearance did not need to be accompanied by any explanation and had to only set out the legal reasons for such a revocation. The revocation of the right to access to classified information could be challenged before the State Commission for Information Security. The State Commission for Information Security is an executive administrative body composed by five members elected for a five year period by the Council of Ministers, under a proposal of the Prime Minister (sections 4 to 6 of the Act). Under section 68 of the Act, as applicable at the relevant time, the decision of that Commission was final and not appealable before courts of law.
On 13 September 2016, section 68 of the Act was amended, introducing judicial review of the decisions of the State Commission concerning the refusal to grant security clearance to classified information or the revocation of such clearance.
The applicable provisions of that code are described in the judgment of Miryana Petrova v. Bulgaria (no. 57148/08, §§ 20-22, 21 July 2016).