The applicant complained under Article 6 § 3 (c) of the Convention that the domestic criminal proceedings against him had been unfair on account of his absence from the appeal hearings in his case.
The applicant was born in 1976 and is currently serving a life sentence in Azerbaijan. He was represented by Mr E. Osmanov, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr. Ç. Əsgərov.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 19 April 2006 the Court of Serious Crimes convicted the applicant of committing a number of serious crimes, including participation in an illegal armed group, murder of a person on duty and attempted murder of other persons, illegal possession and supply of weapons, illegal border crossing and forcible resistance to public officials on duty, all committed in a group, and he was sentenced to life imprisonment. During the trial, which he and a number of his co-accused attended in its entirety, the applicant admitted that he had killed one person but stated that he could not have known that the victim was a police officer and that he had never attempted to kill the other police officer.
On 3 May 2006 the applicant lodged an appeal against the judgment, arguing that the first-instance court had erroneously assessed the facts of the case and misapplied the law. In particular, the court had failed to take into account the fact that the person he had killed had been in plain clothes and driving a civilian car, and that therefore he could not have known that the victim was a police officer. Furthermore, his conviction for the premediated attempted murder of a second police officer had not been supported by sufficient evidence, and his conviction for illegal border crossing had not been supported by the facts of the case. Moreover, the decision of the firstinstance court to apply the most severe sentence had not been adequately reasoned.
On 16 June 2006 the Court of Appeal held a preliminary hearing and decided to hold the main hearing on 28 June 2006. The court further decided to conduct the proceedings “without a court investigation” (məhkəmə istintaqı aparılmadan), summarily rejecting the applicant’s lawyer’s request to the contrary, but with all the accused present, including the applicant. The applicant’s lawyer participated in the preliminary hearing and did not lodge a cassation appeal against that decision.
According to the transcript of the main hearing, which was held on 28 June 2006, the presiding judge informed the parties that the applicant had been transferred from the detention facility to the Gobustan High Security Prison and it had therefore not been possible to bring him to the court. He then asked the participants whether they objected to the hearing being held without the applicant being present and no one, including the applicant’s lawyer, voiced any objections in this regard. No objection concerning the applicant’s absence was raised during the subsequent hearings.
According to the transcript of the appeal hearings, the Court of Appeal held three more hearings, on 5, 12 and 20 July 2006, at which the applicant’s and the other accused’s lawyers elaborated on their points of appeal without presenting any new evidence. At none of the hearings did the applicant’s lawyer raise an objection concerning the applicant’s absence.
On 21 July 2006 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the judgment of the first-instance court.
On 8 September 2006 the applicant’s lawyer appended a note to the transcript of the proceedings (məhkəmə prosessinin məhkəmə protokoluna qeydlər) expressing his disagreement with its content and requesting that it be amended. He alleged that, contrary to what had been stated in the transcript, he and the other accused and their lawyers had raised objections to the hearing being held in the applicant’s absence. He further alleged that similar objections had been repeated several times throughout the proceedings.
On 22 September 2006 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s lawyer’s request, finding that his allegations had not been substantiated by the court’s clerk, who was in charge of keeping records of the hearings. The court further found that the only objection that had been made by the applicant’s lawyer had concerned the applicant’s allegedly unlawful transfer to prison before the first-instance judgment had become enforceable, but the objection had not been registered because it had been made after he had expressly agreed to the proposal to hold the hearing without the applicant being present and it had been made orally at the hearing, outside the scope of the procedural rules.
On 1 November 2006 the applicant lodged a cassation appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal, arguing that, contrary to the requirements of the relevant domestic legislation, he had been transferred from the detention facility to prison before the judgment concerning him had become enforceable. Furthermore, the proceedings in the Court of Appeal had been conducted in his absence despite his lawyer’s consistent objections and the Court of Appeal had failed to enter those objections in the transcript of the hearings and had unlawfully rejected his lawyer’s request to that effect.
On 15 December 2006 the applicant’s lawyer filed a supplement to the cassation appeal whereby he informed the Supreme Court of the applicant’s wish to be personally present at the hearing and asked the court to make the necessary arrangements.
On 26 December 2006 the Supreme Court held an oral hearing at which the applicant was not present but in which his lawyer participated and made submissions. It did not examine the question of the applicant’s absence from the hearing held in the Court of Appeal. On the same date the Supreme Court delivered a judgment by which it dismissed the applicant’s appeal as being unsubstantiated and upheld his conviction and sentence in their entirety.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure are described in detail in the Court’s judgment in Abdulgadirov v. Azerbaijan (no. 24510/06, §§ 18-25, 20 June 2013). Furthermore, Article 391.12 of the Code provides that decisions taken by a court of appeal following a preliminary hearing on the complaint or appeal may be appealed against to the cassation court.