The case originated in an application against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Viktor Petrovych Nazarenko, who was born in 1939 and lives in Kryvyy Rig.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr M. Tarakhkalo and Ms O. Protsenko, lawyers practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
On 21 April 2016 the part of the application concerning compliance with the principle of equality of arms in the appellate proceedings in the applicant’s case was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
In a dispute between the applicant and the domestic pension authorities, on 18 February 2011 the Kryviy Rih Dovgyntsivskyy District Court ruled in his favour, ordering an increase of his pension based on the rise in the average wages in the country since his retirement. The court sat in camera.
On 3 November 2011 the first-instance court amended the judgment at the applicant’s request, indicating that it was enforceable immediately. In doing so, the court referred to the provision of the Code of Administrative Justice governing abridged procedure (see paragraph 11 below).
The defendant pension authority appealed to the Dnipropetrovsk Administrative Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”).
On 23 November 2011 the first-instance court informed the applicant that an appeal had been lodged in his case. On 29 February 2012 he wrote to the Court of Appeal, requesting to be informed about the date of the hearing of his case. According to him, he received no response and no further information about the proceedings until 22 February 2013 when he received the Court of Appeal’s final decision, dated 26 June 2012, quashing the first-instance court’s judgment.
It can be seen from the material before the Court that the applicant’s domestic case file contains copies of the ruling of the Court of Appeal’s judge (date illegible) opening appeal proceedings in his case and a notification letter dated February 2012 from the court clerk informing him of the upcoming examination of his case in camera on 26 June 2012 and stating that the judge’s ruling and a copy of the appeal were enclosed with the letter. The Government alleged that the above documents had been sent to the applicant, while the applicant alleged that they had not. The file does not contain any postal documents or registers of sent correspondence showing that the above documents had been sent or delivered to the applicant.
On 26 June 2012 the Court of Appeal, in a final decision not amenable to appeal, quashed the first-instance court’s judgment, dismissing the applicant’s claim for a pension increase and holding that the domestic law did not require the pensions to be increased in case of rise in the average wages in the country following retirement. The court sat in camera.
Article 33 of the Code of Administrative Justice distinguishes between court summons (повістки про виклик) and court notification letters (повістки-повідомлення), the former being sent to the parties summoned to appear while the latter are simple notices of procedural events participation in which is not required. Both summonses and notification letters must be sent by registered correspondence (letter or telegram) or by courier, with a delivery receipt, or by fax, telefax, email, telephone or publication in the media.
Under Article 35, both summonses and notification letters require signature on delivery. The person delivering the document must return the signed delivery slip to the court, which will add it to the case file. In the case of an absent addressee, the person delivering the document must make a note on the document to be delivered. A delivery slip or, in the case of an absent addressee or a refusal to accept the document, the document itself must be promptly returned to the court.
Article 183-2 provides, inter alia, that claims concerning social and pension payments can be considered by way of an abridged procedure in camera without the parties being summoned. The judgment of the first-instance court is enforceable immediately but can be appealed against before an appellate court, whose decision is final.
Article 197 provides that an appellate court may consider an appeal sitting in camera on the basis of the material in the case file in particular (i) if the parties have not requested that the court hear the appeal in their presence or (ii) if the case concerns social benefits or pension payments and was decided at first instance by way of an abridged procedure.
At the material time Articles 189 and 190 provided that when a new case arrived at an appellate court, it was to be allocated to a judge rapporteur. The judge, once he or she had decided to open appeal proceedings, had to send the parties within ten days a copy of the ruling opening the proceedings together with a copy of the appeal, and set a timelimit for replying to the appeal.
By Order No. 578/5 of 12 April 2012 the Ministry of Justice approved the List of standard documents produced by public authorities and other organisations. Item 128 of the List provides that registers of sent correspondence had to be kept for at least one year and could be destroyed, subject to a number of conditions, after that period.
By Order No. 22 of 11 February 2010 the State Court Administration approved the List of court files and documents produced by courts. Item 15 of the List provides that documents related to appeal proceedings had to be kept for at least five years and could be destroyed, subject to a number of conditions, after that period.
By Order No. 155 of 5 December 2006 the State Court Administration adopted the instructions on record keeping and case management at local and appellate administrative courts. They were repealed on 17 December 2013.
Paragraph 2.4 provided, in particular, that delivery slips for served or undelivered summons and notification letters were to be added to the relevant case file. Paragraph 7.1.1 listed receipts confirming delivery of a summons or notification letter on the parties to the proceedings among the documents to be added to the case file. Paragraph 7.1.5 required that copies of documents sent to the parties had to contain a note indicating the date on which they had been sent and the signature of the person who had sent them.