The case originated in an application (no. 47829/99) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Anton Stoyanov Dimitrov, a Bulgarian national born in 1934 and living in , on 30 April 1999.
The applicant was represented by Mr Y. Grozev, a lawyer practising in . The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms G. Samaras, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that the proceedings concerning his claim for restitution of agricultural land had lasted unreasonably long and that he had not had an effective remedy against the excessive length of the proceedings.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
On 1 November 2001 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed First Section (Rule 52 § 1).
By a decision of 19 June 2003 the Court (First Section) declared the application admissible.
The applicant, but not the Government, filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1934 and lives in .
In March 1991 a statute providing for the restitution of agricultural lands collectivised during the communist regime, the Agricultural Lands Act of 1991, entered into force (see paragraphs 4547 below).
Between 19 November 1991 and 2 June 1992 the applicant filed seven applications with the competent agricultural lands’ commission, requesting the restitution of certain plots of agricultural land allegedly owned by his wife’s grandfather.
On 16 September 1992 the commission refused to restitute 492.3 decares claimed by the applicant. Apparently by mistake in the text of its decision the commission referred to a nonexisting application by the applicant. The applicant was informed of the decision by a letter dated 16 February 1993.
On 11 March 1993 the applicant lodged an application for judicial review of the refusal with the Tervel District Court, arguing that he was entitled to the restitution of the 492.3 decares.
The court held its first hearing on 26 September 1994. Counsel for the applicant presented certain written evidence and requested an adjournment, so as to be able to adduce further written evidence and call certain witnesses. The court granted the request and adjourned the case.
The second hearing, listed for 14 November 1994, was adjourned by request of the counsel for the applicant who stated that he was encountering difficulties with the gathering of certain written evidence.
The third hearing was held on 13 March 1995. Counsel for the applicant presented certain written evidence. The court heard two witnesses called by the applicant and the parties’ closing argument.
The Tervel District Court dismissed the application for judicial review in a judgment of 15 March 1995, holding that there was insufficient evidence that the applicant’s ancestor had owned the land. The applicant was notified of the judgment in writing on 11 April 1995.
On 12 May 1995 the applicant filed a petition for review with the Supreme Court, arguing that the Tervel District Court had erred in assessing the evidence and that his ancestor had owned the land in issue.
At the end of 1996 the Supreme Court was divided into a Supreme Court of Cassation and a . The applicant’s case was taken up by the .
The  held a hearing on 13 March 1997. At the hearing counsel for the applicant presented additional written observations in which he pointed out that the agricultural lands’ commission’s file had not been appended to the court case file and that the Tervel District Court had hence decided the case without acquainting itself with all relevant documents.
On 25 March 1997 the  quashed the Tervel District Court’s judgement and remitted the case, holding that the non-appending of the commission’s file to the court’s case file had entailed a serious breach of the rules of procedure.
On remittal the Tervel District Court examined the case in three hearings.
The first hearing, listed for 22 May 1997, was adjourned because of the applicant’s request to adduce additional evidence and the agricultural lands’ commission’s failure to produce its file.
The second hearing, listed for 18 July 1997, was adjourned due to the failure of the lands’ commission to produce its file.
On 14 August 1997 the applicant complained to the  about the delay in the proceedings.
The third hearing was held on 2 October 1997. The court examined all evidence, heard the parties’ closing argument and reserved judgment.
On 19 October 1998 the applicant complained to the Ministry of Justice about the delay in the delivery of judgment. The Ministry of Justice notified the chairperson of the  (in whose region the Tervel District Court was) about the complaint. The chairperson of the  eventually sent a letter to the applicant, stating that his complaint was wellfounded and that following his intervention the district court judge had promptly completed the case.
Indeed, on 10 November 1998 judgement was delivered. The Tervel District Court dismissed the application for judicial review, holding that 492.3 decares of the applicant’s ancestor’s land had been confiscated in 1923 by the  after the Romanian occupation of the northern part of  (the socalled South Dobrudja). Thereafter, in 1942, pursuant to an international treaty concluded between  and  („Крайовска спогодба“), a statute providing for the restitution of these lands had been adopted. The court noted that the applicant had not produced evidence that in 1942 his ancestor had requested the restitution of the land in accordance with the procedure set forth in that statute. The court therefore found that the applicant had not proved that his ancestor had been the owner of the land which had been collectivised after 1944.
On 30 November 1998 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the .
The  held one hearing on 14 May 1999. At the hearing counsel for the applicant presented written observations in which she pointed out, inter alia, that the agricultural lands’ commission had issued a decision pursuant to a nonexistent application by the applicant. The applicant had filed several applications for restitution, none of which had borne the number or had related to the quantity of land mentioned in the commission’s decision. The decision was thus invalid. Accordingly, counsel invited the court to quash the lower court’s judgment and remit the case to the agricultural lands’ commission for a fresh examination of the applicant’s applications for restitution.
In a judgment of 3 July 1999 the  quashed the Tervel District Court’s judgment and remitted the case to the agricultural lands’ commission. It held that the commission’s decision had not been issued pursuant to the applicant’s applications and was thus void.
On unspecified dates in 1999 and 2000 the commission issued six separate decisions pursuant to the respective applications of the applicant. The applicant was notified of the decisions by a letter dated 26 April 2000.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged applications for judicial review of all six decisions with the Tervel District Court.
The court fixed a hearing for 7 July 2000. At that hearing it ordered the lands’ commission to produce copies of the decisions and adjourned the case.
Two hearings listed for 27 October and 24 November 2000 were adjourned, because counsel for the applicant could not attend.
The next hearing took place on 18 December 2000. On the motion of the lands’ commission the court decided to hold separate proceedings in respect of each of the commission’s decisions. It instructed the applicant to provide separate applications for judicial review of each decision and adjourned the case.
On an unspecified date in December 2000 the applicant complied with the instructions of the court. Thereafter the court opened six new case files in respect of each of the applications for judicial review.
The court held two further hearings on 9 and 23 March 2001.
On 20 August 2002 the Tervel District Court delivered six judgments, granting the applicant’s restitution claims.
The agricultural lands’ commission lodged appeals on points of law against all six judgments with the .
The  opened six separate case files and held two hearings on 19 and 26 February 2003.
On 10 March 2003 the  delivered a judgment pursuant to the first appeal. It held that the first judgment of the Tervel District Court had been delivered with respect to the agricultural lands’ commission’s decision of 16 September 1992, which had already been declared void by the  in July 1999 (see paragraph 30 above). It therefore vacated the Tervel District Court’s judgment and discontinued the proceedings.
On 17 March 2003 the  delivered five judgments pursuant to the remainder of the appeals. It held that the Tervel District Court had made material breaches of the rules of procedure. It therefore quashed its judgments and remitted the cases for a fresh examination.
In April 2003 the applicant requested the Tervel District Court to join the proceedings in the five remitted cases. However, in May 2003 he withdrew his request and thereafter withdrew his applications for judicial review, thereby terminating the proceedings.
On an unspecified date, probably in May 2003, the applicant instituted separate proceedings for a declaratory judgment under section 11(2) of the Agricultural Lands Act of 1991. He sought a declaration against the agricultural lands’ commission that he was entitled to restitution. The Tervel District Court held a hearing on 16 June 2003. At the time of the latest information from the parties (5 September 2003) the court had scheduled a hearing for 29 September 2003 and the proceedings were still pending.
The Agricultural Lands Act of 1991 („Закон за собствеността и ползването на земеделските земи“) provides that persons whose land had been collectivised during the communist regime or their heirs may request restoration of their ownership rights under certain conditions (section 10).
As a rule, the procedure for obtaining restitution is to apply to the local agricultural lands’ commission (section 11(1)). The commissions are state bodies whose members are appointed by the Minister of Agriculture (section 33). Their task, after a person applies for restitution under section 11(1) of the Act, is to establish whether the relevant statutory conditions are met and, if so, to issue a decision restoring ownership.
The commissions’ decisions are subject to judicial review by the competent district courts (section 14(3)). Until August 1997 the district courts’ judgments were reviewable by the Supreme (Administrative) Court. After August 1997 they are appealable on points of law before the regional courts.
Persons claiming restitution of agricultural land who have not applied to the agricultural lands’ commissions within the statutory timelimit may bring an action for a declaratory judgment against the local agricultural lands’ commission (section 11(2)). In these proceedings the courts determine whether or not the claimant has the right to restitution. In civil proceedings under section 11(2), if the courts decide in favour of the claimant, the lands’ commission must comply and issue the necessary decision restoring ownership.
By section 38 of the APA, an application for judicial review of an administrative act must be filed with the administrative authority which has issued the act. Section 39(1) of the APA provides that within three days after the filing of the application the administrative authority has to transmit it to the competent court together with the entire file. If the application and the file are not transmitted to the court, the applicant may file a copy of the application directly with the court. The court is then obliged to request the file from the administrative authority (section 39(2)).
Section 41(3) of the APA provides that the court must verify whether the administrative act is issued by a competent authority and in the proper form, whether the rules of procedure and the substantive law have been complied with and whether the act is consistent with the aims of the law.
Article 190 of the CCP provides that judgment with reasons must be delivered within thirty days after the final hearing in a case.
The new Article 217a of the CCP, adopted in July 1999, provides:
“1.  Each party may lodge a complaint about delays at every stage of the case, including after oral argument, when the examination of the case, the delivery of judgment or the transmitting of an appeal against a judgment is unduly delayed.
The complaint about delays shall be lodged directly with the higher court, no copies shall be served on the other party, and no State fee shall be due. The lodging of a complaint about delays shall not be limited by time.
The chairperson of the court with which the complaint has been lodged shall request the case file and shall immediately examine the complaint in private. His instructions as to the acts to be performed by the court shall be mandatory. His order shall not be subject to appeal and shall be sent immediately together with the case file to the court against which the complaint has been filed.
In case he determines that there has been [undue delay], the chairperson of the higher court may make a proposal to the disciplinary panel of the Supreme Judicial Council for the taking of disciplinary action.”