The case originated in two separate applications (nos. 38629/07 and 23718/08) against Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Serbian nationals, Mr Milan Rafailović (“the first applicant”) and Ms Svetlana Stevanović (“the second applicant”), on 28 August 2007 and 12 May 2008 respectively.
The first applicant was represented before the Court by Mr R. Misojčić, a lawyer practising in Šabac. The second applicant was represented by Mr S. Miletić, a lawyer practising in Sokobanja. The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr S. Carić.
The applicants alleged that it had been impossible for them to obtain enforcement of judicial decisions rendered in their favour.
The applications were initially allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court).
.  On 8 June 2011, the Court decided to give notice of the applications to the Government. Applying the then Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it also decided to rule on their admissibility and merits at the same time.
.  On 1 February 2014, the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). The present applications were thus assigned to the newly composed Third Section (Rule 52 § 1).
The first applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Varna. The second applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Sokobanja.
.  The facts of the cases, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
.  The applicant ran a transport business as a sole proprietor (samostalni preduzetnik) from 1979 to 1995.
.  In 1990 and 1991 the applicant provided transport services to the Pocerski Metković local community (Mesna zajednica Pocerski Metković) in Šabac. According to the contract, the local community which had engaged his services had levied what were known as self-imposed local taxes (“SILT”; samodoprinosi).
.  On an unspecified date in 1994 the applicant, together with two other traders, brought an action against the local community requesting payment for services provided. The applicant’s business ceased to exist in 1995 and the applicant, as its sole proprietor and manager, took over the outstanding claim as its successor.
.  The local community was represented in the proceedings by the Solicitor General (javni pravobranilac) of the Šabac Municipality, the latter being the founder of the Pocerski Metković local community.
.  On 11 May 2001 the Valjevo Commercial Court ordered the local community to pay the applicant 24,400 Serbian dinars (RSD) with interest. The court also ordered the local community to pay all the claimants jointly the amount of RSD 54,520 for the costs of the civil proceedings. On an unspecified date soon after, the judgment of 11 May 2001 became final and enforceable.
.  On 29 April 2003 the applicant applied to the Valjevo Commercial Court for enforcement of the said judgment, and proposed that this be carried out by bank transfer.
.  On 6 October 2003 the Valjevo Commercial Court ordered the enforcement, also awarding the applicant RSD 4,664 for the costs of the enforcement proceedings. Thereafter, the said court transmitted this enforcement order to the competent department of the Central Bank in Kragujevac (Narodna banka Srbije).
.  On 9 June 2006 and 8 October 2007 the applicant enquired about the enforcement. He was informed that the debtor’s bank account had been frozen since 13 November 2003 and that he had been registered as the second-class priority creditor.
.  According to the Government, on 19 December 2003 the Commercial Court archived the enforcement case as terminated. The applicant, however, had apparently not received any decision to this effect, nor did the Government submit that such a decision had been adopted.
.  Pursuant to the rules of court, the enforcement court was obliged to keep the case file for five years from the date on which the enforcement proceedings had been terminated. After the enforcement court’s proposal of 4 August 2010 for elimination of worthless registration material and archival holdings, the next day the Inter-Municipal Historical Archive in Valjevo destroyed the applicant’s case file in accordance with the Law on Cultural Goods (published in Official Gazette of the RS, no. 71/94). According to the relevant court’s statement, no minutes of the destruction or the record of any documents had been made.
.  The judgment of 11 May 2001 remains unenforced.
.  The applicant ran an installation business “Instalaterska radnja Sokosat” as a sole proprietor. The business entered into a contract with the Sokobanja local community (Mesna zajednica Sokobanja), regarding the maintenance of the cable-satellite transmission system on the territory of that local community.
.  As the local community failed to pay for the services provided, the business brought an enforcement action before the Zaječar Commercial Court. On 9 October 2002 that court ordered direct enforcement of the outstanding invoices (izvršenje na osnovu verodostojne isprave).
.  On 9 December 2002, following an appeal by the local community, the court suspended the enforcement order and referred the case to civil proceedings.
.  The local community was represented in the proceedings by the Solicitor General of the Sokobanja Municipality, the latter being the founder of the Sokobanja local community.
.  On 17 April 2003 the Zaječar Commercial Court partly upheld the enforcement order, and ordered the local community to pay the business (i) the amounts of RSD 342,098.80 of debt and RSD 18,672 for the costs incurred within the enforcement proceedings, (ii) interest on the two above amounts, (iii) interest on a number of other amounts that would appear to have been previously paid but with no interest calculated, and (iv) RSD 36,172 for the costs of the civil proceedings.
.  On 25 December 2003 the High Commercial Court partly upheld the judgment of 17 April 2003, while ordering the Commercial Court to re-examine the costs of the civil proceedings.
.  On 2 February 2004, with a revision on 25 March 2004, the Zaječar Commercial Court ordered the local community to pay RSD 67,750 on account of the costs of the civil proceedings.
.  On 27 May and 2 June 2004 respectively the Zaječar Commercial Court ordered the enforcement of the judgment of 17 April 2003 and of the decisions of 2 February and 25 March 2004 (domestic enforcement cases nos. I 306/04 and I 348/04) by debtor account transfer (plenidbom novčanih sredstava i prenosom na žiro-račun poverioca). The applicant was also awarded the amounts of RSD 20,574 and RSD 8,275 for the costs of the enforcement proceedings.
.  On 31 January 2005 the applicant informed the Niš Commercial Court that the Sokobanja Municipality had been failing to transfer funds from its account to the debtor’s or the applicant’s bank accounts, and that the local community had been running its activities through the municipal bank account or a special account for collection of self-imposed local taxes in order to deceive the creditor. As there were practically no funds in the debtor’s account, the applicant requested the court to change the means of enforcement by auctioning off the debtor’s specified movable assets, in particular the cable-satellite transmission system.
.  On 10 February 2005, the Niš Commercial Court (i) joined the two above-mentioned set of enforcement proceedings; (ii) repealed the enforcement order by bank account transfer; (iii) declined jurisdiction in respect of auction of the assets and transferred the case to the Sokobanja Municipal Court; and (iv) refused the applicant’s request for adoption of an interim measure in this respect.
.  On 9 May 2005, having established that the debtor was the owner of the cable-satellite transmission system, the Sokobanja Municipal Court ordered enforcement by assessment and auction. On 30 May 2005 the court revised the order, correctly increasing the debts.
.  On 13 March 2007 the Municipal Court suspended the enforcement proceedings (obustavio izvršenje) which had been instituted on the basis of the above-mentioned orders of May 2005. The court clarified that the expert engaged by the court could not establish the exact ratio of ownership between the debtor and the current distributor in respect of the cable-satellite transmission system, and stated that the citizens’ interest should not be compromised by selling it, as they had financed the development of the system. The court lastly instructed the applicant to initiate a new set of proceedings to determine the debtor’s exact ownership in respect of the system, as well as other movable and non-movable assets, and to settle the applicant’s claim in that direction. On 12 June 2007 the panel of the same court summarily upheld that decision.
On 29 November 2007 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s request for protection of legality as unavailable in the present case.
The applicant did not initiate a new set of civil proceedings as instructed.
.  The judgment of 17 April 2003 and the decisions of 2 February and 25 March 2005 remain unenforced to date.
Upon the request of the respondent’s State Agent before the Court, the President of the Administrative Court provided it with a succinct summary and her interpretation of the relevant domestic law. The president stated that neither the financial duties and liabilities of the local communities, nor the broader liability of the municipalities or the State for the local communities’ debts, were subject to regulation by it. The president also observed that the subject matter of the unenforced contracts in both the above cases was within the competences of the local communities in question (letter of 9 August 2011, Su I-1 212/11).
The legal status of local self-government and the conditions under which they operate have been set out in various legal acts, which have been amended or repealed on numerous occasions over the years. The most relevant provisions are to be found in: (i) the Constitutions of the Republic of Serbia 1990 and 2006 (Ustavi Republike Srbije; published in the Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Serbia - OG SRS - no. 1/90 and in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia - OG RS - no. 98/06); (ii) the State Organs Employment Act (Zakonom o radnim odnosima u državnim organima, published in OG RS no. 48/91 with further amendments to the sections which regulate the State territorial and local government organisation); (iii) the Local Government Act 1999 (Zakon o lokalnoj samoupravi, published in OG RS nos. 49/99 and 27/01); (iv) the Local Government Act 2002 (Zakon o lokalnoj samoupravi, OG RS nos. 9/02, 33/04 and 135/04); (v) the Local Government Finance Act 2006 and Local Government Act 2007 (Zakon o finansiranju lokalne samouprave, OG RS nos. 62/06, 47/11 and 93/12, and Zakon o lokalnoj samoupravi, OG RS no. 129/07, which came into force on 1 January 2007 and 1 January 2008 respectively and repealed the Local Government Act 2002); and (vi) the laws concerning State-owned assets, budget systems, public income and expenditure, taxes and insolvency procedures (Zakon o sredstvima u vlasništvu Republike Srbije, published in OG RS no. 53/95, 3/96, 54/96, 32/97, 44/99 and 101/05; Zakon o buǆetskom sistemu, published in OG RS nos. 9/02...86/06; Zakon o buǆetskom sistemu, published in OG RS no. 54/09; Zakon o javnim prihodima i javnim rashodima, published in OG RS nos. 76/91 ... 135/04; Zakon o poreskom postupku i poreskoj administraciji, published in OG RS nos. 80/02 ... 2/2012; and Zakon o stečajnom postupku, published in OG RS no. 84/04).
The legal status of the local communities as relevant for the present cases will be summarised below.
An entire chapter of the 2006 Constitution is dedicated to the country’s territorial organisation, according to which autonomous provinces and local self-government units have the status of legal entities and their assets are public property. Further, all assets acquired by the State and local governments and other entities established by the central or local governments, as well as all other assets and profits acquired by the investment of the State’s capital, shall constitute assets of the State.
With the reinstatement of local self-government systems in the legal system in 1990 and the gradual decentralisation of governance in the early 2000s, local self-government units (municipalities, towns, and the city of Belgrade), were entrusted with certain central competences and empowered financially, as direct beneficiaries of the State budget, by shared revenues or by transfer of competence to collect their own revenues which had in the past been collected by central authorities. The domestic law provides that through local self-government citizens engage in public administration in the immediate, mutual and general interest of the local population, either directly or through elected representatives.
The local self-government units are empowered to further create/liquidate companies, institutions and organisations to perform public functions, as well as lower tiers of local self-government (oblik mesne samouprave), such as local communities, wards, neighbourhoods and counties (mesne zajednice, kvartove, četvrti i rejone).
The local community is established by the founder’s statute to deliver services which are of general, direct and daily interests of the local population (in the 1990s they were apparently a type of interest-based “citizens’ association”) and may be entrusted by its founders with certain competences of local self-government. They are incorporated as separate legal persons, although their legal terms of reference (pravni subjektivitet) are limited to the transferred rights and competences assigned to them by their founding acts/statutes. The competence, tasks, organisation and election of the relevant bodies, decision-making processes and other relevant matters for the operation of the local community should be set out in detail by their founding acts/statutes, which should be in accordance with the founder’s statute. The managing body is the Council (and/or a secretary), whose direct election by the citizens is called for by the founder assembly’s president. The Council may have a certain margin of operational independence.
A local community is an indirect beneficiary of the State budget, and the funds for its functioning are provided under specific budget headings set out by the founder. The local community is also entitled to finance its activities from donations and other means of collection of payment for services provided. Lastly, for a period (2002-06), local communities were entitled to levy their own revenues, known as self-imposed local taxes (SILT), and to credit the funds collected to their own accounts, if voted on and imposed exclusively on the territory of those communities. Otherwise and afterwards, the collected SILT was designed as a source of primary revenue exclusively for the local government units, and the funds collected were credited to their budgets and strictly intended for specific purposes.
Lastly, the local community cannot undergo an insolvency procedure. Neither the domestic law nor the Government suggest that the de facto insolvency of a municipal authority or local community entail any relief/recovery scheme (compare and contrast to De Luca v. Italy, no. 43870/04, §§ 14-29, 24 September 2013 in respect of the relevant Italian and comparative law on the insolvency of local organs).
Disputes arising out of the levying and refund of overpaid SILT by local communities are considered to be administrative matters. The administrative municipal authorities and the Administrative Court are invested with jurisdiction in respect of related claims (for the relevant courts’ practice, see Popović and others v. Serbia (dec.), no. 75915/12 et al., §§ 24, 31, 54 and 81, 23 September 2014).
When deciding in a case concerning outstanding collection of SILT by a local community, the Administrative Court considered that the municipality rather than the local community itself was the creditor in respect of the SILT for the purposes of standing to sue (see 9 U. 740/11 of 30 August 2011; see also Administrative Court Bulletin no. 3/2012).
Pursuant to this Act, a sole proprietor (sole trader) runs a business that is set up and owned by a natural person, aiming to make profit at his or her own expense and risk (preduzetnik, trgovac koji osniva radnju). The business will be set up by means of the founder’s submission of an application to the relevant municipal administrative body and shall cease to exist if the above application is withdrawn or in other circumstances defined by law. Registration does not have constitutive effect in respect of gaining a legal personality; it is only a condition for running a business venture.
A business does not have legal personality. The owner manages and represents the business. All rights, obligations, profit and assets made out of the business venture belong to the owner. The owner carries unlimited, exclusive and direct liability in respect of his or her own entire assets for all outstanding debts and other obligations that arise out of the business operations, just as he is entitled to all earnings/claims associated with it. In this regard he or she may appear as a party in any judicial proceedings concerning the proprietorship.