The case originated in an application (no. 34422/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mrs Natalya Nikolayevna Politova and Mr Yuriy Yefimovich Politov (“the applicants”), on 12 September 2003.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 15 September 2005 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicants were born in 1959 and 1952 respectively and live in the village of Vengerovo in the Novosibirsk region of .
In late 2000 the applicants brought a civil action against the Russian Government and the Savings Bank seeking to enforce State-issued promissory notes for the purchase of a Russian-made car or to recover the monetary value thereof. Upon the judge's request the applicants submitted the original promissory notes to the court.
On 15 January 2001 the Gagarinskiy District Court of Moscow ordered the Ministry of Finance of the  acting through the Savings Bank to ensure redemption of the applicants' bonds from the funds of the federal budget for 12,800 Russian roubles (RUR) payable to the first applicant and RUR 18,000 to the second applicant. The judgment stated that following its execution the promissory notes should be handed over to the Federal Government. Apparently, no appeal was lodged against this judgment and it became final and enforceable.
On an unspecified date the applicants submitted their writs of execution to the Ministry of Finance of the .
On 21 May 2003 the Ministry of Finance sent a letter to the applicants stating that the judgment of 15 January 2001 did not comply with the requirements of the legislation. The applicants were also informed that the Ministry of Finance would lodge a request for supervisory review of this judgment and seek suspension of the enforcement proceedings.
It appears, however, that no supervisory review has taken place and the judgment remained final and binding.
The applicants brought civil proceedings claiming pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages due to the continued non-enforcement of the judgment of 15 January 2001. On 8 October 2003 the Basmannyy District Court of Moscow rejected their claims.
The Ministry of Finance wrote on 5 June 2006 to the applicants informing them that the judgment of 15 January 2001 would be enforced only after presentation of the original promissory notes, as required by Articles 816-817 of the Russian Civil Code. It appears that these promissory notes remain in the case file kept by the registry of the Gagarinskiy District Court of Moscow. The judgment of 15 January 2001 remains without enforcement.