The case originated in an application (no. 3365/08) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Faber Firm (“the applicant company”), a company with its office in Baku and an Azerbaijani national, Mr Sabir Jafarov (“the applicant”), together referred to as “the applicants”, on 8 January 2008.
The applicants were represented by Mr I. Aliyev, a lawyer practising in . The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the failure to enforce the judgment of 12 October 2005 violated their right to a fair trial and their property rights, as guaranteed by Article 6 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 27 August 2008 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant, Mr Sabir Jafarov, was born in 1958 and lives in . He is the sole founder and the director of the applicant company incorporated in . He submitted the present application on his own behalf and on behalf of the applicant company.
By an order of 24 July 2000, issued by the Baku City Executive Authority (“the BCEA”), the applicant company was provided with a plot of land of 400 square metres situated in  with the purpose of construction of an automobile showroom. On 13 April 2002 the applicant company concluded a tenancy agreement with the BCEA concerning a right of use of this plot of land for a period of forty-nine years.
It appears from the case file that after obtaining the relevant construction permit from the competent authorities, the applicant company began to carry out construction work on the land in question. However, in August 2002 the BCEA requested the applicant company to suspend the construction work. By an order of 2 January 2003 the BCEA annulled its order of 24 July 2000 and instructed that all the construction carried out by the applicant company up to that point be destroyed.
On an unspecified date, the applicant company brought an action against the BCEA, asking for annulment of the order of 2 January 2003. The applicant company also claimed compensation in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage caused by the destruction of the structures already built on the land plot.
On 10 August 2005 Local Economic Court No. 1 delivered a judgment granting the applicant company's claim in part. The court held that the BCEA's order of 2 January 2003 had been unlawful and that the applicant company's right of use of the plot of land should be restored. Moreover, the court awarded the applicant company 104,822,212 Old Azerbaijani manats (AZM) in compensation for pecuniary damage, leaving the claim in respect of non-pecuniary damage unexamined. The judgment was appealed by both parties in the proceedings.
On 12 October 2005 the  (acting as an appellate instance) delivered a new judgment on the merits. The  upheld the lower court's judgment in the part concerning the unlawfulness of the BCEA's order of 2 January 2003. However, the  dismissed the remainder of the applicant company's claims, including the claim in respect of pecuniary damage.
On 23 December 2005 the Supreme Court upheld the 's judgment, noting that the material and procedural law had been applied correctly.
It appears from the case file that, despite the applicant company's numerous demands and the fact that the writ of execution had been sent several times to BCEA for execution, the applicant company's right of use of the plot of land was not restored.