The case originated in an application (no. 68050/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Finnish nationals, Mrs Ingegerd Ekholm and Mr Stefan Ekholm (“the applicants”), on 1 February 2001.
The first applicant was represented before the Court by the second applicant. The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Arto Kosonen of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicants complained, in particular, about the length and unfairness of the proceedings and about a violation of their property rights.
By a decision of 7 February 2006, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicants and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the parties replied in writing to each other’s observations.
The applicants were born in 1922 and 1951 respectively and live mainly in Esbo. The first applicant owns a secondary residence in the municipality of Lumparland on the .
The secondary property is also used by the second applicant, who is her son and only heir. According to the applicants, they use the property for holiday purposes as well as renting it to tourists and for business meetings. There is a dog yard on the neighbouring property.
In the summer of 1991 the applicants applied to the then South Åland Municipal Health Board (“the Health Board”; Södra Ålands hälsonämnd), requesting that the owners of the neighbouring property (“the neighbours”) be ordered to move the dog yard away from their common boundary on the grounds that the noise gave rise to a private nuisance. On 12 September 1991 the Health Board decided not to take measures as it considered that no private nuisance existed.
On 17 October 1991 the applicants appealed. The then  (Ålands länsrätt) received the Health Board’s statement and the neighbours’ reply to the appeal on 18 November 1991. It received the applicants’ rejoinder on 30 January 1992. On 14 May 1992 the court upheld the Health Board’s decision.
On 23 June 1992 the applicants appealed further. The  (högsta förvaltningsdomstolen, korkein hallinto-oikeus) received the Health Board’s statement and the neighbours’ reply to the appeal on 14 August 1992 and 15 September 1992 respectively. Meanwhile, on 23 July 1992 the applicants submitted additional information to the court and on 20 November 1992 they filed a rejoinder. On 11 March 1993 the court invited a statement from the building inspector (byggnadsinspektören) of Lumparland. It was received on 28 April 1993. The applicants filed their comments including an expert opinion on 30 April 1993. On 24 June 1993 the court, finding that the dogs’ barking amounted to a private nuisance such that the neighbours were under an obligation to put right or limit the disturbance, sent the case back to the Health Board.
On 9 September 1993 the Health Board ordered the neighbours to provide the dog yard with walls made out of sound-absorbing material and to build an exercise yard to be used by puppy litters during the summer season. The decision did not indicate a time-limit for the required measures.
On 2 November 1993 the applicants appealed, primarily requesting that the neighbours be ordered to move the dog yard. They also considered the measures ordered by the Health Board insufficient and requested the court to indicate a time-limit for the measures. The same day the  invited the Health Board’s statement, which was received on 2 December 1993. On 28 January 1994 it invited the applicants’ rejoinder, which was received on 14 February 1994. On 10 June 1994 the court, finding that the measures ordered by the Health Board were insufficient and that a time-limit should be set for the neighbours’ compliance with the order, sent the case back to the Health Board.
On 5 July 1994 the neighbours appealed. The next day the  invited the applicants’ reply to the appeal, which was received on 2 September 1994. On 5 September 1994 it invited the Health Board’s statement, which was received on 5 October 1994. The next day it invited the neighbours’ comments, which were received on 3 November 1994. On 7 April 1995 the court rejected the appeal.
It appears that the Health Board held an inspection in situ on 22 June 1995. According to the applicants, they had not been informed and did not therefore attend. It appears that no minutes were drawn up. According to the Government, it transpires from the Health Board’s minutes, apparently those from the subsequent hearing on 24 August 1995, that two families who were renting the applicants’ cottages at the time of the inspection stated that they had not heard any barking. There was also an entry according to which there was no longer any dog yard, only an outdoor place for two dogs. According to the Government, the second applicant stated that the dogs did not cause any health hazard at the time.
On 31 July 1995 representatives for the Health Board sought legal advice from an official, who drew the Health Board’s attention to the fact that it must act in accordance with the decisions of the  and the  in the matter. However, on 24 August 1995 the Health Board decided not to take any measures as it considered that there was no private nuisance.
On 22 September 1995 the applicants appealed. On 6 February 1996 the Åland Provincial Government (Ålands landskapsstyrelse), finding that the file disclosed no such circumstances as could justify departing from the Supreme Administrative Court’s decision of 24 June 1993, sent the case back to the Health Board.
On 27 March 1996 the neighbours appealed. The next day the  invited the Åland Provincial Government’s statement and the applicants’ reply to the appeal, which were received on 10 May 1996 and 15 April 1996 respectively. On 14 May 1996 it invited the neighbours’ rejoinder, which was received on 31 May 1996.
Meanwhile, on 11 April 1996, also the applicants appealed against the Provincial Government’s decision, arguing that a member of the Health Board (“M”) had been disqualified from deciding their case. They also requested that the neighbours be ordered to move the dog yard to the other side of their house. On 19 February 1997 the court invited the neighbours’ reply to the appeal, which was received on 4 March 1997. The same day it invited the Provincial Government’s statement, which was received on 1 April 1997. On 23 April 1997 it invited the applicants’ rejoinder, which was received on 22 May 1997. On 19 November 1997 the court rejected the appeals.
On 22 January 1998 the Health Board found the construction of walls sufficient to reduce the noise caused by barking from the dog yard.
On an unspecified date the applicants appealed. On 23 December 1999 the Provincial Government sent the case back to the Health Board to be reconsidered in accordance with the ’s decision of 19 November 1997.
On 27 January 2000 the Health Board once again decided to take no measures.
On 28 February 2000 the applicants requested a rectification. On 13 April 2000 the Health Board rejected their request.
On 22 May 2000 the applicants appealed, referring to an expert opinion on noise recommendations and arguing that a member of the Health Board (“A”) had been disqualified from deciding their case. They also drew the appellate court’s attention to the fact that the neighbours had taken no measures whatsoever and that the Health Board had not acted in accordance with the judicial decisions of the higher bodies. On 23 May 2000 the  (Ålands förvaltningsdomstol) invited the Health Board’s statement, which was received on 22 June 2000. On 17 July 2000 it received the applicants’ rejoinder. On 10 August 2000 the court invited the neighbours’ reply to the appeal, which was received on 24 August 2000. In January 2002 the first applicant requested that the proceedings be speeded up. It appears that she received no reply. About a year later, on 13 January 2003 the court invited the applicants’ rejoinder, which was received on 28 March 2003. On 7 May 2003 it held an inspection in situ and on 28 May 2003 an oral hearing.
On 30 June 2003 the , finding that the Health Board was under an obligation to take measures with a view to putting right the disturbance suffered by the applicants, sent the case back to the Health Board. It also ordered that the Health Board pay the applicants’ legal costs in part. Lastly, the court drew the Health Board’s attention to section 85(2) of the Provincial Act on Health Care (landskapslagen (Act no. 1967:36) om hälsovården) according to which the Health Board could order that its decision should be executed despite an appeal.
The second applicant appealed further as far as the legal costs were concerned, but the appeal was rejected by the  on 16 March 2004.
On 14 August 2003 the Health Board ordered the neighbours to supplement the noise prevention measures by 1 December 2003. On 25 September 2003 the Health Board rectified its decision insofar as it ordered the neighbours to obtain the Municipal Building Board’s (byggnadsnämnden) prior approval.
According to the applicants, in August 2003 they informed the heads of the administrative authorities of the  of the problem in their organisation as regards the Health Board. However, they received no reply.
On 4 November 2003 the applicants appealed, arguing that the dog yard should be moved to the other side of the property and that the walls and the roof should be reinforced with sound-absorbing material etc. The next day the  invited the Health Board’s statement, which was received on 21 and supplemented on 29 January 2004. The court received the applicants’ rejoinder on 11 February 2004. On 17 February 2004 it invited the neighbours’ comments, which were received on 2 March 2004. On 16 March 2004 it invited the applicants’ rejoinder, which was received on 26 March 2004. On 27 April 2004 the , finding that the measures ordered by the Health Board were insufficient and that the Health Board was under an obligation to give adequate instructions as to the measures required to put an end to the private nuisance, sent the case back to the Health Board. It also ordered that the Health Board pay the applicant’s legal costs in part.
In his proposal to the Health Board the official reporting on the case considered that the existing dog yard should not be used and recommended that the dogs should be kept on the south side of the house. He considered that the dogs should be moved by 30 July 2004. However, by its decision of 10 June 2004 the Health Board overruled the official’s proposal and accepted the neighbours’ proposal to rebuild the wall. The official reporting on the case issued a dissenting opinion. On 2 July 2004 the applicants applied for a rectification.
On 16 July 2004 the European Court of Human Rights decided that notice of the present application should be given to the Government of Finland.
At this point the Health Board decided to rectify its decision. Accordingly, in its decision of 12 August 2004 it found that a drawing submitted by the applicants made it clear that the neighbours’ proposal to rebuild the wall would not prevent the dogs’ barking from reaching the applicants’ property. The Health Board ordered that the existing dog yard should not be used and recommended that the dogs should be kept on the south side of the house. This was basically what the applicants had been requesting since the lodging of their application in 1991. However, the Health Board indicated a time-limit of over nine months by which the measures should be taken.
Following the session of 12 August 2004, the Chairman of the Health Board, B.S., was interviewed by a local newspaper about the case. According to the applicants, B.S. implied that the applicants were the trouble makers in the present case. The applicants considered that the statement rendered the Health Board’s impartiality open to doubt.
On 6 September 2004 the neighbours appealed. On 14 September 2004 also the applicants appealed, requesting that the court specify where the dog yard should be moved and that the decision should be enforced immediately, i.e. despite an appeal. They also argued that B.S. had been biased when deciding their case.
On 26 January 2005 the , finding that the above statement by B.S. rendered her impartiality opened to doubt, sent the case back to the Health Board and ordered it to issue adequate instructions. It also ordered the Health Board to pay the parties’ legal costs.
On 24 February 2005 the Health Board decided to lodge an appeal against the ’s decision insofar as it had found that the impartiality of B.S. was open to doubt.
On 12 January 2006 the , finding that the Health Board had not lodged its appeal with a view to securing any public interest, dismissed it without considering its merits.
On 7 February 2006 the European Court of Human Rights declared the present application partly admissible.
The Health Board examined the case in its sessions of 9 March and 13 April 2006. On 26 April 2006 it gave a decision, issuing the neighbours with instructions. The Health Board ordered that the existing dog yard should not be used. It also ordered that the prohibition would take effect 60 days from the date on which the decision gained legal force. Should the neighbours decide to keep dogs on the property thereafter, they had to build new dog yards that would limit the public health hazard such as the noise from dogs barking so that it did not exceed the equivalent threshold values of 55 db (A) between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m. and 45 db (A) from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. Should the neighbours choose to keep dogs outside on the property, the new dog yards had to be ready within 60 days from the date on which the decision gained legal force.
On 15 June 2006 the Health Board rejected the parties’ rectification requests.
The applicants appealed, arguing that C.H. and R.L. had been biased when deciding their case. They requested that the decision be supplemented and clarified with an instruction on noise isolation and that the decision should be enforced immediately. Also the neighbours appealed.
On 27 February 2007 the  rejected the appeals. It is not known whether anyone appealed to the .
The Constitution of Finland (perustuslaki, grundlagen; Act no. 731/1999) provides that everyone has the right to have his or her case dealt with appropriately and without undue delay by a legally competent court of law or authority, and to have a decision pertaining to his or her rights or obligations reviewed by a court of law or other independent organ for the administration of justice. Provisions concerning the publicity of proceedings, the right to be heard, the right to receive a reasoned decision and the right of appeal and the other guarantees of a fair trial and good governance shall be laid down by an Act (section 21). The Constitution also provides that the property of everyone is protected (section 15).
Section 120 of the Constitution of Finland provides that the  have self-government in accordance with what is specifically stipulated in the Autonomy of the Åland Islands Act (självstyrelselag (Act no. 1991:71) för Åland).
The right of domicile of the  is acquired at birth by a Finnish citizen if the status is held by either parent. Immigrants who have lived on the  for five consecutive years and have an adequate knowledge of the Swedish language may apply for the right of domicile, provided they are Finnish citizens. The right of domicile gives its holder certain privileges (sections 6 to 12 of the Autonomy of the Åland Islands Act).
For example, the Provincial Act laying down the requirements for pursuing business (landskapslag (Act no. 1996:47) om rätt att utöva näring) provides that a person of age, who has not been declared bankrupt, and who has the right of domicile or has continuously lived on the Åland Islands during five consecutive years automatically has the right to pursue business there. A person who does not fulfil the right of domicile or five years’ residency requirement is to lodge an application with the Provincial Government and Administrative Board, which decides the case within its discretion (sections 3 and 4).
Section 10 of the Provincial Act on Health and Medical Care (landskapslag (Act no. 1993:60) om hälso- och sjukvården) provides that there is a Health Board in connection with the Provincial Health and Medical Care Authority (Ålands hälso- och sjukvård) and that it is subject to the authority of the Åland Government and Administrative Board (landskapsregeringen; up until 1 June 2004 called Provincial Government; landskapsstyrelsen). Up until 1 January 2004 the Health Board was subject to the authority of the Public Health Federation of Åland (Ålands folkhälsoförbund), which is a federation of municipalities.
The Health Board, which is set up by the Åland Government and Administrative Board for a term of two years, acts as an authority for environmental supervision and for the grant of environmental permits as provided for in the above Provincial Act, which also regulates the composition and presence of a quorum of the Health Board and its right to determine its rules of procedure.
The Health Board must exercise its public authority autonomously, although the Health Board and its officials are organisationally part of the provincial administration, the staff being employed by the Provincial Health and Medical Care Authority and the Board members being nominated by the Åland Government and Administrative Board. The responsibilities of the Health Board are mainly regulated by the Provincial Act on Health Care. The Board is entitled to issue instructions necessary to prevent any health risk or to eliminate any health hazard (section 80). Section 20 contains more detailed provisions on the concept of health hazard. Consequently, if an unreasonably disturbing rumble or noise or something else causing a health hazard invades dwelling, work or assembly rooms, or otherwise causes a health hazard, anyone who causes such hazard is obliged to take measures in order to eliminate or restrict the nuisance. Section 73 provides that domestic animals and other animals which are kept leashed or fenced in shall be looked after so that they do not cause any health hazard to the environment.
The Administrative Judicial Procedure Act (hallintolainkäyttölaki, förvaltningsprocesslagen; Act no. 586/1996) lays down the appeal procedure. Before 1 December 1996 the provisions were contained in the Act Concerning Appeal in Administrative Matters (laki muutoksenhausta hallintoasioissa, lag om sökande om ändring i förvaltningsärenden; Act no. 154/1950).
A request for rectification of the Health Board’s decision must be filed within 21 days (section 14 of the Provincial Act on Health and Medical Care). After that remedy has been tried, an appeal lies to the , previously the Provincial Government, and before that, the . Section 85(2) of the Provincial Act on Health Care provides that the Health Board can rule to the effect that its decision must be executed despite the lodging of an appeal.
There are no provisions of law on the division of the competence between administrative courts and administrative authorities in situations where a court repeals the decision of an authority. The court can either render a decision on the merits or remit the case to the authority for reconsideration. A court usually sends a case back to an administrative authority for instance when the issuing of the decision calls for the acquisition of new evidence or involves the exercise of discretion within the competence of the authority. If an administrative court has ruled on the substance of the appeal and remitted the case to the authority, the authority is obliged to follow the ruling of the court. The decision-making may involve the exercise of discretion by the administrative authority as prescribed by law, and the authority may also take into account changes in circumstances which have taken place after the administrative court’s decision and which have an effect on the case. The discretionary power of the administrative authority is not only restricted by legislation and the court’s ruling but also by common principles of administrative law, especially the principles of equality, objective consideration, proportionality and expediency. These principles were originally established by case-law. Now they are contained in the Administrative Procedure Act (hallintolaki, förvaltningslagen; Act no. 434/2003), which entered into force on 1 January 2004.