The case originated in an application (no. 58982/12) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Heross LTD, a company incorporated in Bulgaria (“the applicant company”), on 31 August 2012.
The applicant company was represented by Mr A. Bivol, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr O. Rotari.
The applicant company alleged, in particular, that a final judgment in its favour had been quashed after being wrongfully reviewed.
On 13 April 2018 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a committee. Having considered the objection, the Court rejects it.
The case concerns the misuse of the review procedure resulting in the wrongful quashing of a final judgment in favour of the applicant company. It raises problems under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
By a final judgment of 27 December 2000, the Chişinău Economic Court ordered V., a company, to pay the applicant company 118,527.58 United States dollars and 43,914.38 Moldovan lei.
On 8 September 2010 a State-owned company, A. – which was also a creditor of V. by virtue of another unrelated judicial decision and which had not been involved in the proceedings between V. and the applicant company – lodged a request for review of the judgment of 27 December 2000. It asserted that new information had become available to it which justified the revision of that final judgment. According to A., the applicant company’s claim had been upheld despite there being no evidence that it had paid court fees. Moreover, the case file did not contain evidence that the applicant company had provided the originals of the documents submitted in support of its claim. No translator had been involved in the proceedings and a criminal investigation had been initiated against the owner of the applicant company in connection with allegations that the contract between it and another company had been forged.
On 22 March 2011 the Economic Court granted the above-mentioned request for review, quashed the judgment of 27 December 2000 and ordered the reopening of the proceedings. The court endorsed the reasons relied upon by company A. in its request for review. It also ruled that its decision was final and could not be challenged.
On 2 March 2012 the Economic Court decided to terminate the reopened proceedings between the applicant company and company V. as the latter had ceased to exist on 25 March 2009 as a result of insolvency proceedings.
The applicant company challenged the decisions of 22 March 2011 and 2 March 2012. It argued, inter alia, that the review of the judgment of 27 December 2000 had been an abuse of process and had in fact been an appeal in disguise.
On 7 June 2012 the Chişinău Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant company’s appeal and upheld both decisions. The Court of Appeal held, inter alia, that the review of the judgment of 27 December 2000 had been in accordance with the law and had not been an abuse of process.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure concerning the review of final judgments read as follows.
Article 449
“A request for review shall be granted when:
...
(c)  after a judgment has been adopted, new documents have been discovered which were withheld by one of the parties to the proceedings or which could not have been submitted to the court during the proceedings because of circumstances beyond the control of the interested party;
...”
Article 450
A request for review may be lodged:
...
(d)  within three months from the date on which the document was discovered – in cases [falling under] Article 449 (c);
...”
Under Article 453 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, as in force at the material time, a decision to examine a request for review could be challenged together with the decision on the merits of the case.