The case concerns the application of retrospective legislation to pending national proceedings commenced by the applicants. The applicants relied on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No.1.
The applicants were represented by Mr G. Romano, a lawyer practising in Rome, Mr I. Sullam, a lawyer practising in Milan, and Mr P. Biondi, a lawyer practising in Benevento.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr L. D’Ascia, State Attorney.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants had initially been employed by the local government authorities and were administrative assistants, workers, technical assistants, administrative officers, laboratory teaching assistants or general teaching assistants at a number of Italian State schools.
Their remuneration consisted of a basic salary plus other additional pay elements.
From 1 January 2000, under Article 8 of Law no. 124/99, the applicants were transferred to work for the Ministry of Education, Universities and Research (Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca), hereinafter “the Ministry”.
Unlike the remuneration scheme operated by the local government authorities, the salary for Ministry employees was calculated by reference to a basic salary only which, however, was to increase progressively over the years on the basis of length of service.
According to Article 8 § 2 of Law no. 124/99
“... the length of service of those employees with the local government authority and the right to retain their place of employment, for an initial period, where a post is available, shall be recognised for legal and financial purposes.”
The Ministry converted the salary paid by the local government authorities to the applicants at 31 December 1999 into a notional length of service with the new employer pursuant to an InterMinisterial decree of 5 April 2001 which incorporated a memorandum of understanding between the Agency for the representation of the public authorities (Agenzia per la rappresentanza negoziale delle pubbliche amministrazioni, “ARAN”) and the relevant trade unions.
Having thus not obtained full recognition of their length of service with the local government authorities, the applicants lodged proceedings before the domestic courts arguing that the conversion of their salary into a notional length of service with the new employer upon transfer had been unlawful and detrimental.
They sought placement in the professional grade corresponding to their full length of service from the date of transfer, as well as determination of any compensation due to them.
Pending those proceedings at different levels of jurisdiction, it was enacted Article 1 § 218 of Law no. 266/2005 (“the Budget Law for the Year 2006”) which intended to give effect to what the legislator claimed to be the original intention of the Parliament when adopting Article 8 of Law no. 124/1999.
The domestic courts either allowed the Ministry’s appeal or dismissed the applicants’ claims on the basis of the new Article 1 § 218 of the Budget Law for the Year 2006 and the then recent Constitutional Court judgments nos. 234 of 2007 and 311 of 2009.
The detailed information relevant to each applicant is set out in the appendix.
The relevant domestic law and practice is set out in the judgments Agrati and Others v. Italy (nos. 43549/08 and 2 others, 7 June 2011) and De Rosa and Others v. Italy (nos. 52888/08 and 13 others, 11 December 2012).