The case originated in an application (no. 73748/13) against the Republic of Estonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Estonian national, Mr Kirill Tolmachev (“the applicant”), on 16 November 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr O. Nishaev, a lawyer practising in Tallinn. The Estonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kuurberg, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that his right to a fair trial and to defend himself through legal assistance of his own choosing had been violated as a court refused to examine his complaint in respect of a misdemeanour fine because he had been absent from the hearing although his counsel had been present.
On 11 February 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1990 and lives in Narva.
On 17 September 2012 the applicant, in misdemeanour proceedings, was fined 80 euros (EUR) by a police officer of the East Prefecture of the Police and Border Guard Board for a breach of public order (breaking a glass panel of a bus shelter).
The applicant contested this decision before the Viru County Court. He argued that he had not committed the act in question and challenged the assessment of witness statements. He complained about the failure of the police to present him to a witness for identification. Lastly, he complained that the police had not indicated in its decision the specific provisions of the local rules on public order which he had allegedly breached.
The County Court sent summons to the applicant for a hearing scheduled for 21 March 2013 at 12.30 p.m. It was noted in the summons that the applicant’s participation in the hearing was mandatory. Furthermore, it was noted, with reference to Article 126 § 2 of the Code of Misdemeanour Procedure (Väärteomenetluse seadustik), that if a complainant failed to appear at the hearing, although he had been notified of the obligation to participate, and the hearing was not adjourned, the court would refuse to examine the complaint. The applicant’s counsel, a representative of the police prefecture and witnesses were also summoned.
The summons sent to the applicant’s address, which he had used throughout the proceedings and which had been indicated in his complaint, could not be served on him personally as he was not present on 4 February 2013 when the court’s security officer attempted to serve the summons. His mother refused to accept the summons and said that the applicant was living abroad. The applicant’s counsel received the summons on 8 February 2013. The witnesses also received the summons in the beginning of February.
On 20 March 2013 the County Court issued a ruling by which the applicant’s complaint was admitted for the proceedings. According to the ruling the hearing was scheduled for 21 March 2013 at 12.30 p.m. and the names of persons to be summoned to the hearing were set out.
On 21 March 2013 the County Court held its hearing. The applicant did not appear. His counsel asked the court to examine the matter without the applicant’s presence as the applicant was abroad and it was not known when he would return to Estonia. According to the applicant’s father, who was in the courtroom as a spectator, the applicant was not to return to Estonia within the next five years. The County Court refused to examine the applicant’s complaint. It delivered its decision in writing on 2 April 2013.
According to the County Court’s decision, the applicant had failed to inform the authorities of his new address. However, as the applicant’s father was aware of the time of the court hearing and of the applicant’s intention not to return to Estonia within the next five years, the court concluded that the applicant’s parents were communicating both with the applicant and his counsel. Thus, the applicant must have been aware of the court hearing and summons sent to him.
The County Court found that in view of the substance of the misdemeanour case and the court’s duty to hear a misdemeanour matter in its entirety, regardless of the limits of the complaint filed, and to verify the factual and legal circumstances on the basis of which the body conducting the extra-judicial proceedings (that is, the police) had made its decision, it was not possible to examine the case without the applicant’s participation. It noted that one of the complaints made by the applicant had been that the body conducting the extra-judicial proceedings had not presented the applicant for identification to the witness. Thus, interviewing of the applicant and presenting him for recognition to the witness were important steps for the adjudication of the matter which could not be accomplished without the applicant’s participation. The court considered that adjourning the hearing would serve no purpose since the applicant was not to return to Estonia within a month – the time-limit for which a hearing could be adjourned under the law of procedure. Moreover, the applicant’s counsel had not requested an adjournment but examination of the complaint without the applicant’s presence. However, for the above reasons the court did not consider it possible to examine the case without the applicant. Relying on Article 126 § 2 of the Code of Misdemeanour Procedure – which provided that if a complainant failed to appear at the hearing although he had been notified of the obligation to participate in the court hearing – the County Court refused to examine the complaint.
The applicant’s counsel appealed, relying, inter alia, on Article 6 § 3 (c) of the Convention according to which a person had the right to defend himself through legal assistance of his own choosing. The receipt of the summons was not disputed.
On 23 May 2013 the Tartu Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal and upheld the ruling of the first-instance court. It noted that under Article 126 § 1 of the Code of Misdemeanour Procedure the court could decide on a discretionary basis whether a complainant’s participation in the court hearing was necessary and, if needed, oblige the person in question to appear. In the case at hand the County Court had given reasons as to why the applicant’s participation was required and it was not possible to examine the case in his absence. The Court of Appeal pointed out that the applicant had challenged in his complaint to the County Court the failure of the police to present him to witnesses for identification. It was, however, unclear, how the County Court could have eliminated this deficiency in the applicant’s absence.
No appeal lay against the Court of Appeal’s ruling.
Pursuant to the Code of Misdemeanour Procedure (Väärteomenetluse seadustik), misdemeanour cases are examined in extra-judicial proceedings (kohtuväline menetlus) or in court proceedings (kohtumenetlus). It is determined by law which misdemeanours are dealt with in extrajudicial proceedings and which ones in court proceedings.
In cases to be examined in extra-judicial proceedings, the bodies conducting the extra-judicial proceedings are the police or other agencies of the executive power. The bodies conducting extra-judicial proceedings are authorised to fine the person who has committed a misdemeanour. Such decision becomes final and enforceable unless the persons subject to the proceedings files a complaint with a county court. If a complaint is filed, the county court examines the misdemeanour matter in full, including the questions of fact and law. An appeal on points of law and procedure can be filed with the Supreme Court.
In cases to be examined in court proceedings, jurisdiction lies with the county courts. An appeal lies to the courts of appeal and thereafter to the Supreme Court.
Furthermore, the Code of Misdemeanour Procedure contains the following provisions summarised below.
Article 21 § 2 of the Code provides that counsel has the right to participate in the proceedings together with the person subject to the proceedings or independently.
Article 41 of the Code stipulates that summons is served on a person against signature. If a summons cannot be served on the person being summoned, it can be served on a family member who lives together with the summoned person. If a person refuses to certify the receipt of the summons by a signature, the refusal to accept the summons and the date of the refusal is indicated in the notice. The person is deemed to have received the summons on the date of refusal to accept the summons. Upon service of the summons on counsel chosen by the person subject to proceedings, the summons is deemed to be served also on the principal.
Article 42 of the Code provides that if a person cannot appear at the body conducting the proceedings at the time specified in the summons, he or she must immediately give notice thereof. Good reasons for failure to appear include absence of the person summoned which cannot be considered evasion of the misdemeanour proceedings, belated receipt of the summons, or other circumstances considered to be a good reason by the body conducting the proceedings.
Article 43 of the Code provides that if a person subject to proceedings who has received summons in which mandatory appearance is indicated fails to appear in court, the court may fine the person (§ 1). The court may also order his or her compelled attendance effected by the police (§§ 3 and 4).
Pursuant to Article 123 § 2 of the Code a county court hears a misdemeanour matter in its entirety, regardless of the limits of the complaint filed, and verifies the factual and legal circumstances on the basis of which the body which conducted the extra-judicial proceedings had made its decision.
Article 125 § 1 of the Code provides that at the reasoned request of a party to the court proceedings the court may adjourn the hearing once for a period of up to one month.
Article 126 § 1 of the Code stipulates that a complainant and an official of a body conducting extra-judicial proceedings shall participate in the hearing in court if the court considers their participation necessary. Article 126 § 2 of the Code provides that if a complainant fails to appear at the hearing although he was notified of the obligation to participate in the hearing in the summons sent to him and the hearing of has not been adjourned pursuant to Article 125 of the Code, the court refuses to examine the complaint.
The Government provided several examples of court decisions by which the courts had refused to examine complaints in misdemeanour proceedings where the complainants had failed to appear at the hearing.