The case originated in an application (no. 30459/13) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Revaz Gakharia (“the applicant”), on 17 April 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Kvinikadze, a lawyer practising in Tbilisi. The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Meskhoradze, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that his right to adversarial proceedings, his right of access to a court and his right to respect for his family life had been infringed because his parental rights had been restricted by domestic court judgments made by default in his absence.
On 4 March 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Tbilisi.
The applicant and K.G. began living together in 1999. On 9 January 2000 their daughter, L.G., was born. She was raised mainly by her maternal grandmother in Georgia while both parents, whose relationship soon ended, left to work abroad.
On 31 March 2008 K.G. applied to the Tbilisi City Court for her daughter to be officially registered as resident at her address. On 19 May 2008 a summons was sent to the applicant at his registered address, informing him of K.G.’s action. According to the courier, the summons could not be served as the house was closed up and no one was living there. The summons was only sent once. On 3 June 2008 the court of first instance, acting on the basis of Article 78 of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter, “the CCP” – see paragraph 15 below), ordered information concerning the proceedings to be published in a daily newspaper called 24 hours. On 24 June 2008 the Tbilisi City Court granted K.G.’s application. The decision was taken in the absence of the applicant, whose whereabouts, according to the ruling, could not be established.
On 12 December 2008 the Tbilisi City Court, acting upon another application by K.G., ruled again by default that L.G. could be issued with an international passport and leave the territory of Georgia without her father’s consent. No specific time-limit for that restriction of the applicant’s parental rights was given in the ruling. The court again stated that the applicant’s whereabouts were unknown and ordered the information about the proceedings to be published in 24 hours. Unlike the first set of default proceedings, the summons was sent twice to the applicant at the address he had registered at. It was again not delivered. The courier noted that the house was closed up.
It appears from the case file that the custody and guardianship authority, which represented the interests of the child in the above proceedings, made its own attempts to contact the applicant. In conclusions submitted to the Tbilisi City Court, the authority noted that during its visit to the applicant’s registered address it had learnt from neighbours that he had sold the house in 2003 and left for Moscow. Both default decisions were sent to the applicant’s registered address and, as they could not be served, were consequently published in 24 hours according to the procedure provided for in Article 78 of the CCP (see paragraph 15 below).
On 6 June 2012 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Tbilisi City Court, seeking to have both default decisions set aside. He stated that he had learnt about the decisions only in May 2012. He also explained that he had not been living in Georgia at the material time, which his former partner had well known. The default proceedings had been unfair as he had not been properly summoned to the hearings.
By a decision of 16 August 2012 the Tbilisi City Court rejected the applicant’s application. The court ruled, with reference to Articles 71 § 3 and 422 of the CCP (see paragraphs 15 and 17 below), that the applicant had been duly informed about the proceedings via public notifications in a newspaper and that there was therefore no legal basis to set the impugned decisions aside. It noted that the applicant had been registered at the address where the summonses had been sent and that for the purposes of the proceedings the courts had been justified in using that very address.
That decision was upheld by the Tbilisi Court of Appeal on 31 October 2012. It reasoned that the domestic courts had been right to send the summonses to the applicant’s only available registered address. Furthermore, as it had not been possible to serve the summonses on the applicant, the procedure of delivering a summons via a public notification, as provided for in Article 78 of the CCP, had been duly employed.
In his last communication with the Court on 15 December 2014, the applicant stated that he could still not have any contact with his daughter.
The relevant Articles of the Civil Code (hereinafter, “the CC”) read as follows:
“1. If parents live apart due to divorce or for any other reason, they shall agree on who will have the right to decide with whom the minor shall live.
If the parents disagree, the dispute over the place of residence of a minor shall be decided by a court, taking account of the best interests of the child ...”
“1. Parents enjoy equal rights and duties with respect to their children, notwithstanding whether they are divorced or live apart.
A parent, with whom the child lives, has no right to restrict the other parent’s rights.”
“1. The rights and duties of a parent may be restricted only on the basis of a court order, unless otherwise provided for by this Code.
A court may restrict one or several rights or duties of a parent independently from the other rights and duties ...”
“1. The restoration of parental rights and duties is only possible via the initiation of court proceedings either by a child, one of the parents or by a custody and guardianship body.
The restoration of parental rights and duties shall be possible only if it is established that the basis for restricting or depriving a parental right has ceased to exist.”
The relevant Articles of the CCP, as in force at the material time, concerning the service of court documents on parties to proceedings, read as follows:
“1. A court summons is served on a recipient at the main address (place of residence) indicated by a party, at an alternative address, at a work address or any other address that is known to the court. ...
If the address of the respondent party indicated by the applicant is correct, but the court fails to serve a summons ..., the court shall be guided by the rules set out in Article 78 of the present Code.
If the address of either of the parties supplied by an applicant is found to be incorrect, the court shall leave the action unexamined.”
“1. A court summons shall be delivered by electronic means pursuant to Article 70 § 3 of the present Code, by post or by courier. The court itself decides which method of delivery to use ...
If the court summons could not be served on a recipient at the first attempt the summons shall be sent at least one more time to the same address or any other address known to the court. ...
If the parties or their representatives ... could not be notified of the date and place of a court hearing in accordance with the procedure set out in the present Code ... a judge may order a local administration body or a territorial body of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia ... to deliver a court summons to the relevant individuals. A local administration body or district police officers are obliged to ensure that a summons is served on the parties or their representatives within the period set out by the ruling ... and to inform the judge that it has been so served, or give reasons for any failure to do so ...”
“1. If a party’s whereabouts are unknown or it has been impossible to serve a court summons by other means, the court is authorised to order the publication of the summons. Public notification shall be done in a newspaper which is widely distributed in the administrative-territorial unit of the party’s place of residence ...
In the case provided for in the first paragraph of the present Article, the court summons shall be considered as being served on the party on the seventh day after its publication in the newspaper.”
“...
The clerk of the court reports to the court which of the summoned persons are in attendance, whether the absent persons have been served with summonses according to the procedure provided for in Articles 70-78 of the present Code and what information is available about the reasons for their absence. ...”
In December 2010 Article 78 of the CCP was amended to replace notices in newspapers with notices on a public notice board in a court building or on the Internet page of the court. At the same time, the amended Code maintained the possibility of publishing notices in newspapers at the request and at the expense of the applicant party.
As regards default proceedings, the relevant Articles of the CCP, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“1. If a respondent party who has been duly summoned pursuant to Articles 70-78 of the present Code fails to appear at a court hearing and the applicant requests delivery of a default judgment, the factual circumstances indicated in the complaint are considered to be proven.
If the factual circumstances indicated in the complaint legally substantiate the request, it shall be granted. Otherwise, the court shall reject the applicant’s request.”
“1. A court shall not deliver a default judgment if
a) the absent party has not been summoned in accordance with the rules of Articles 70-78 of the present Code;
b) the court has been informed of force majeure or other circumstances which could have prevented the party from appearing in court on time;
c) the absent party was not informed of the factual circumstances of the case in good time. ...”
“A party who has failed to appear at a court hearing, which has led to a default judgment being delivered against him or her, or a respondent party in the cases referred to Article 232 § 1 of the present Code, can lodge an action with the same court to have the default judgment set aside and the case reopened.”
“An appeal lies against a default judgment within ten days. That period shall run from the day when a copy of the default judgment is served on a party in a manner provided for in Article 70-78 of the present code. The default judgment shall enter into force upon expiry of the time-limit.”
“A default judgment shall be set aside and the case reopened if any of the grounds listed in Article 233 are present, or if a party was absent for a valid reason of which he or she could not inform the court at the relevant time.”
“1. A decision taken by default is not subject to appeal [to a higher court] by a party against whom it was taken ...”
“1. A final court decision may be annulled on the application of an interested party, if:
The above Convention regulates a wide range of legal matters, including the service of court or other documents, the recognition and enforcement of civil and criminal judgments and cooperation between competent authorities in the field of civil, family and criminal law. The Convention sets out that the judicial authority to which a request has been addressed serves the documents according to the law of the State to which it belongs. In addition the Convention allows diplomatic or consular agents to serve documents on their citizens and to question them without any coercion.
According to the case-law of the Supreme Court, when court proceeding involve a person residing on the territory of any of the States Parties to the Minsk Convention outside Georgia, the Minsk Convention comes into play. The Supreme Court has established that the service of court documents in such a case is to take place in accordance with the procedure provided for by the Minsk Convention rather than by the CCP (see, for example, decisions nos. a-2257-sh-73-09, 2 March 2010, and as214-199-2014, 8 April 2015).