The case originated in an application (no. 64962/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Sergeyevich Ozerov (“the applicant”), on 12 July 2000.
The applicant was represented by Mr M.N. Stepanov, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P.A. Laptev, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that he did not have a trial by impartial tribunal as his trial had been held in the absence of a prosecutor.
By a decision of 3 November 2005 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each submitted further written observations (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in .
Article 20 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure of 1960 (“the Code”), in force at the material time, required the court to undertake all lawful measures for the comprehensive, thorough and objective examination of all the circumstances of a case, and to detect incriminating and exonerating as well as both mitigating and aggravating circumstances.
Under Article 228 of the Code, during the preparation of a case for a trial a judge had to decide whether a state prosecutor should participate in the trial. If the judge decided that the prosecutor's participation was necessary his decision was binding on the prosecutor. If the prosecutor informed the court when transferring a case for trial of his wish to sustain the charges in the court the judge could not decide otherwise.
Under Articles 251 and 277 of the Code, if the prosecutor failed to appear, the court, after hearing participants present at the hearing, decided whether it was possible to examine the case in his absence or whether the hearing should be adjourned. That decision was not appealable to a higher court (Article 331 of the Code).
At the trial the prosecutor prosecuted the defendant on behalf of the State, took part in the examination of evidence, and gave conclusions and submissions, in particular in respect of the law and punishment to be applied to the defendant. If the prosecutor was convinced that the materials of the judicial investigation no longer supported the charges levelled against the defendant, he had to drop the charges and state his reasons for doing so to the court (Article 248 of the Code).
The Constitutional Court of Russia on several occasions examined the question of compatibility of functions imposed on the court according to the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure with, in particular, the court's role in administering justice independently and impartially (Article 120 of the Constitution) and the adversarial nature of criminal trial (Article 123 § 3 of the Constitution). The Constitutional Court found the following functions imposed on the judge incompatible with those principles: to institute criminal proceedings and formulate charges under Article 418 of the Code (a decision of 28 November 1996); to institute criminal proceedings, in particular against a new person, and to apply a preventive measure against that person under Articles 3, 108 § 1 (vi), 109 §§ 1, 2 and 3 (i), 112 and 115, 232 § 1 (iv) and 256 §§ 1, 2 and 4 (a decision of 14 January 2000); to sustain charges after the prosecutor's dropping the charges under Article 248 § 4 of the Code (a decision of 20 April 1999); and to remit, of its own motion, a criminal case to the prosecutor for additional investigation in case of irreparable incompleteness of investigation, in particular if evidence was found to have been received illegally, or in the case of grounds for laying more serious charges or new charges against the defendant under Articles 232 §§ 1 (i) and (iii) and 258 § 1 of the Code (the decision of 20 April 1999 and a ruling of 3 February 2000).
The  held that functions concerning formulation and sustaining the charges before the court should be performed by the prosecution and should not be imposed on the court. In particular, it stated in its decision of 20 April 1999 that a criminal trial was based on the principles of adversarial proceedings and equality of the parties, which meant first of all strict separation of the judicial function and the prosecution function, which were therefore carried out by different actors. The adversarial nature of criminal trials implied that the institution of criminal prosecution, the formulation of a charge and its sustaining before the court, were insured by competent bodies and officials, as well as victims. Imposing on the court the obligation to substitute, in one or another form, for those bodies and persons' prosecution activity, was incompatible with Article 123 § 3 of the Constitution and obstructed the independent and impartial administration of justice by the court as required by Article 120 § 1 of the Constitution, as well as Article 6 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Under Article 278 § 1 of the Code, the court investigation started with the reading out of an indictment. The  held that there was no indication under the Code that the indictment was to be read out by the court. Therefore, it did not follow from that provision that the court had to assume any functions concerning levelling, sustaining or proving charges against the defendant which would be incompatible with its constitutional function to administer justice on the basis of the principles of adversarial proceedings and equality of the parties. In particular, the prosecutor could not refuse to read out the indictment if ordered to do so by the presiding judge (a ruling of 21 December 2000).
Under the 1960 Code, the prosecutor's participation was compulsory in jury trials (Article 428).
The appeal court considered, on the basis of the materials in the case file and newly submitted materials, whether a first-instance judgment was lawful and well-founded. It was not bound by the grounds of the appeal and exercised a full review of the case (Article 332 of the Code). Under Articles 339-341 of the Code, the appeal court could decide to dismiss the appeal and uphold the judgment, to quash the judgment and remit the case for a new investigation or for a fresh trial, to terminate the criminal proceedings or to vary the judgment.
Article 342 of the Code read as follows:
Grounds for quashing or varying judgments [on appeal]
“The grounds for quashing or varying a judgment on appeal shall be as follows:
(i)  prejudicial or incomplete inquest, investigation or court examination;
(ii)  inconsistency between the facts of the case and the conclusions reached by the court;
(iii)  a grave violation of procedural law;
(iv)  improper application of [substantive] law;
(v)  discrepancy between the sentence and the seriousness of the offence or the convicted person's personality.”
Under Article 246 of the new Code of Criminal Procedure of 2001, which entered into force in 2002, the state prosecutor's participation is mandatory in all trials in public prosecution cases.
Recommendation to Member States on the role of public prosecution in the criminal justice system (Recommendation Rec(2000)19) adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 6 October 2000 (during the 724th session of the Ministers' Deputies) notes that the public prosecution's functions in all European criminal justice systems includes the decision on whether to lay charges or to abandon prosecution, the prosecution of these charges before the courts and the possibility to appeal all or certain courts' decisions. In certain criminal systems, the public prosecution also conducts, manages or supervises the investigation, provides support and legal assistance to the victims or decides on alternative measures to prosecution (§§ 2 and 3). As to the relationship between state prosecutors and court judges, the recommendation provides as follows:
“17. States should take appropriate measures to ensure that the legal status, the competencies and the procedural role of state prosecutors are established by law in a way that there can be no legitimate doubt about the independence and impartiality of the court judges. In particular states should guarantee that a person cannot at the same time perform duties as a state prosecutor and as a court judge.”
The United Nations adopted certain Guidelines on the Role of Prosecutors (1990) at the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (Havana, Cuba, 27 August to 7 September 1990). Guideline 10 on roles in criminal proceedings states “the office of prosecutors shall be strictly separated from judicial functions.”