The case originated in two applications (nos. 52637/09 and 21973/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals. The applicants’ names and the dates of their applications to the Court appear in the Appendix.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 30 August 2016 the complaints concerning quashing of the final judgments on the grounds of newly discovered circumstances were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
All the applicants were parties to civil proceedings in which the first instance and appeal courts granted their claims against the welfare authorities to recalculate periodical payments for social benefits (i.e. monthly payments for compensation of damage, annual payments for food allowance and arrears of payments). These judgments became final but were subsequently quashed on the basis of newly discovered circumstances. The courts found that the interpretation of law given in the quashed judgments had been different from that of the Supreme Court and/or Constitutional Court of Russian Federation. All the judgments were fully enforced prior to their quashing (for more details see the Appendix).
The Code of Civil Procedure (“CCivP”), as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“[Judgments] which have come into force may be re-considered on the basis of newly-discovered circumstances. The grounds for re-consideration ... shall be:
significant circumstances which were not and could not have been known to the party who applies for re-consideration;
...
cancellation of a court [judgment] or of another authority’s decision which served as legal basis for the [judgment] in question.”