The case concerns the impartiality of a judge who examined the applicant’s case on appeal twice in the same capacity and considered a challenge for bias against himself.
The applicant was born in 1981 and lives in Pskov. He was represented by Mr Popov, a lawyer practising in Pskov.
The Government were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 16 August 2005 the Municipality of the Gdovskiy District of the Pskov Region (the “Municipality”) agreed to sell a plot of land to the applicant. His father, who was the head of the Municipality, and he concluded a sale contract with regard to the plot of land.
In June 2007 the prosecutor of the Pskov Region brought civil proceedings against the applicant before the Gdovskiy District Court of the Pskov Region, seeking to have the sale declared invalid. At the same time, he initiated criminal proceedings against the applicant’s father for selling plots of land to his relatives at below market-level prices and charged him with abuse of power.
On 25 December 2007 the Justice of the Peace of Court Circuit No. 3 of the Gdovskiy District dismissed the prosecutor’s claim.
On 10 June 2008 the Gdovskiy District Court, sitting in a single-judge formation composed of Judge A., quashed the decision of 25 December 2007 and declared the sale null and void in the absence of the applicant and his representative.
Meanwhile, the criminal case against the applicant’s father was referred for trial to the Gdovskiy District Court sitting in a three-judge formation, one of whom was Judge A.
On 7 July 2008 Judge A. withdrew from the criminal case. His withdrawal request read as follows:
“[P]lease be advised that I examined the civil claim against [the applicant] filed by the prosecutor of the Pskov Region, who sought to declare the sale of the plot of land invalid. The writ of indictment in the criminal case contains facts which have already been considered in civil proceedings [against the applicant]. Thus, I have already expressed my view that the sale of the plot of land to the accused’s relatives was unlawful. In view of the above, please accept my withdrawal as I cannot sit as a judge ... in this criminal case.”
On 21 July 2008 the Pskov Regional Court referred the criminal case to another court. It held that the Gdovskiy District Court was composed of only three judges, and therefore it could not allow Judge A.’s withdrawal.
On 10 October 2008 the Pskov Regional Court quashed the decision of 10 June 2008 in supervisory-review proceedings on the ground that neither the applicant nor his lawyer had attended the hearing, and remitted the case to the Gdovskiy District Court for a fresh examination.
The applicant lodged a challenge for bias against Judge A., referring to Judge A.’s withdrawal statement in the criminal case. He submitted that Judge A. had already formed his opinion about the outcome of the case and that he had a legitimate doubt as to his impartiality.
On 18 November 2008 Judge A. considered the applicant’s challenge and dismissed it. He held that, in accordance with the Code of Civil Procedure, the withdrawal of a judge in a criminal case could not be a ground for a challenge against a judge in a civil case.
On 26 January 2009 the Gdovskiy District Court, sitting in a singlejudge formation and composed of Judge A., quashed the decision of 25 December 2007 and allowed the prosecutor’s claim.
The Code of Civil Procedure provides that a judge may not take part in the consideration of a case if he or she:
–  has previously acted in the case, whether as a prosecutor, courtroom secretary, representative, witness, expert, specialist or interpreter;
–  has a parental or other close family relationship with any of the parties or their representatives;
–  has a personal direct or indirect interest in the case or if for any other reason, his or her impartiality may be called into doubt.
Under Article 16, a case may not be assigned to judges who are related to each other.
Under Article 17, a judge who examined a case at first instance may not sit in the appellate court proceedings in the same case. A judge who ruled on a case in appellate court proceedings may not consider the case in proceedings before a first-instance court.
Article 19 provides that the withdrawal of a judge from a case must be reasoned and must be submitted before the examination of the merits of the case. It is not possible for a judge to withdraw during the examination of the case unless the person requesting withdrawal or the court has become aware of grounds for withdrawal during the examination of the case on the merits.
According to Article 20, in the case of withdrawal, the court takes into account the opinion of the parties to the proceedings and the person who wants to withdraw from the case. A challenge against a judge sitting in a single-judge formation is considered by that judge. If a case is assigned to a panel of judges, that panel will rule on the challenge against the judge in the absence of the judge. In the case of a challenge against several or all of the judges, all the judges shall decide by a simple majority vote.
The Constitutional Court of Russia held in its decisions no. 155-O-O of 20 March 2008 and no. 465-О-О of 15 July 2008 that the procedure for challenging a judge sitting in a single-judge formation had as its aim to avoid delays due to unjustified challenges against judges, such an approach being based on the constitutional principles of the independence of judges and of the confidence in judicial authorities which should only be compromised on the basis of sound evidence. The requirement to give a reasoned decision confirming that there were no circumstances which could raise doubts as to the impartiality of the judge, and the possibility of requesting a review before a higher court which would be guided by the Constitution and international law, constituted sufficient guarantees against arbitrariness.
The Constitutional Court also held that the courts were to determine whether a judge was biased on the basis of particular circumstances of each case. Where doubts exist as to the impartiality of the judge, the higher court may remit the case for a fresh examination to a different judicial formation of the relevant lower court.