The case originated in an application (no. 14934/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vyacheslav Anatolyevich Potapov (“the applicant”), on 20 March 2003.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, the then Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 31 August 2006 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate to the Government the complaint concerning the alleged failure to provide the applicant with legal assistance. It also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1977 and is serving a sentence of imprisonment in the Novosibirsk Region.
The applicant was arrested on suspicion of murder. Legal aid counsel was appointed to represent him. The applicant and his accomplice were accused of having unlawfully entered the victim’s flat and having robbed him. The applicant was also charged with having wounded the victim with a knife, causing the victim’s death.
On 11 October 2001 the  appointed another legal aid counsel to represent the applicant at the trial. The applicant admitted the relevant facts, while giving a version of the events which differed from that of his accomplice. In particular, he made admissions to the effect that he had wounded the victim in a fight and had then taken his belongings in order to simulate a robbery.
On 16 October 2001 the  convicted the applicant of murder and robbery and sentenced him to seventeen years’ imprisonment. In his points of appeal to the Supreme Court of the  the applicant challenged the admissibility and assessment of evidence by the trial court. He asked the court to ensure his attendance at the appeal hearing.
The applicant asked for legal assistance with a view to preparing for the appeal hearing. No response was received. On 20 June 2002 the Supreme Court granted the applicant leave to appear in person.
On 31 October 2002 the Supreme Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal. The applicant was not represented. According to the applicant, the hearing was conducted by means of a videoconferencing facility (VCF). The Government, however, submitted that the applicant “had been present at the hearing”.
The applicant lodged a request dated 22 August 2003 for supervisory review of his conviction. This request was received by the Supreme Court on 26 September 2003. In another request dated 31 October 2002, received by the Supreme Court on 26 September 2003, the applicant challenged the appeal decision of 31 October 2002. He alleged that he had not been afforded an opportunity to be present at the appeal hearing and had not been provided with the assistance of counsel. By a decision of 25 May 2004, a Supreme Court judge rejected his request.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and practice, see the Court’s judgment in Shulepov v. Russia, no. 15435/03, §§ 17-20, 26 June 2008.