The case originated in an application (no. 22006/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovak national, Mr Karol Mihal (“the applicant”), on 10 May 2007.
The applicant was represented by Ms I. Rajtáková, a lawyer practising in Košice. The Government of the  (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been denied access to a court with a view to challenging decisions by court officers in respect of the costs of enforcement proceedings that he had carried out as a judicial enforcement officer.
On 23 June 2010 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Malá Ida. He is a judicial enforcement officer (súdny exekútor).
In his official capacity, the applicant acted on behalf of a number of judgment creditors with a view to enforcing their claims. The relevant details concerning the enforcement proceedings are set out in the Appendix to this judgment.
The commencement of the enforcement proceedings was authorised by judicial decisions.
The applicant or, as the case may be, the creditors themselves subsequently requested that the enforcement be discontinued as it had been established that the debtors were devoid of any assets that could serve to satisfy the enforced claims.
Together with those requests, the applicant submitted a breakdown of the costs he had incurred in the enforcement proceedings which he sought to have the creditors ordered to compensate.
Consequently, in joint decisions, the enforcement proceedings were discontinued and orders for payment of the applicant’s costs were issued.
The decisions were taken on the authority of the district courts, as the courts at the first level of jurisdiction, acting through their senior court officers (vyšší súdny úradník). Under section 2 of the Court Officers Act (Law no. 549/2003 Coll., as amended), senior court officers are civil servants (štátny zamestnanec) and, as such, are considered to be employees of the court.
The written versions of the decisions stated that they were final and not subject to appeal.
The applicant nevertheless appealed (odvolanie), seeking compensation for his costs in a higher amount.
As to the admissibility of his appeals, the applicant relied on Article 142 § 2 of the Constitution (Constitutional Law no. 460/1992 Coll., as amended), which provides for the right of appeal to a judge against decisions taken by employees of the court.
The applicant’s appeals, subsequent appeals on points of law (dovolanie) as well as complaints (sťažnosť) under Article 127 of the Constitution were all declared inadmissible.
The applicant’s constitutional complaints in respect of the enforcement proceedings in file nos. 19Er 90/04 and Er 533/00 were declared inadmissible on the ground that the applicant had failed to exhaust ordinary remedies by asserting his rights by way of an appeal on points of law (dovolanie).
The remaining constitutional complaints were declared manifestly illfounded, although in respect of the enforcement proceedings in file nos. Er 641/2004 and Er 2541/2001 no appeal on points of law had been lodged.
The ordinary courts and the  (in decisions nos. III. ÚS 344/06, II. ÚS 27/07, II. ÚS 28/07 and III. ÚS 66/07) held that, pursuant to Article 202 § 2 of the Code of Civil Proceedings (Law no. 99/1963 Coll., as amended) (“the CCP”), decisions (uznesenie) in enforcement proceedings, which included decisions on the costs of enforcement, were not subject to appeal. This rule was in the position of lex specialis in relation to Article 142 § 2 of the Constitution and was held to take precedence over the latter. The fact that the impugned decisions had been taken by employees of the court and not by judges was therefore found to be of no consequence.
In a number of unrelated but similar situations, raised before the Constitutional Court by the applicant, the Constitutional Court took contradictory views (see “Relevant domestic law and practice” below).
Meanwhile, the relevant provisions of the CCP were amended, in that they now specifically provide that an appeal to a judge against decisions taken by senior court officers is always available (see “Relevant domestic law and practice” below).
Article 127, as amended by Constitutional Law no. 90/2001 Coll. with effect from 1 January 2002, provides:
“1.  The Constitutional Court shall decide complaints by natural or legal persons alleging a violation of their fundamental rights or freedoms ... unless the protection of such rights and freedoms falls within the jurisdiction of a different court.
If the Constitutional Court finds a complaint justified, it shall deliver a decision stating that a person’s rights or freedoms as set out in paragraph 1 have been violated by a final decision, specific measure or other act and shall quash such decision, measure or act. If the violation that has been found is the result of a failure to act, the  may order [the authority] which has violated the rights or freedoms to take the necessary action. At the same time it may remit the case to the authority concerned for further proceedings, order such authority to refrain from violating the fundamental rights and freedoms ... or, where appropriate, order those who have violated the rights or freedoms set out in paragraph 1 to restore the situation to that existing prior to the violation.
In its decision on a complaint the  may grant appropriate financial compensation to the person whose rights under paragraph 1 have been violated.”
Article 142 § 2 was also amended by Constitutional Law no. 90/2001 Coll., the relevant part of which entered into effect on 1 July 2001.
Under the amended Article 142 § 2, an act of Parliament may specify matters, within the jurisdiction of courts, which may be decided upon by employees of the court authorised to do so by a judge. Decisions taken by employees of the court, upon authorisation of a judge, are subject to a remedy which must always be determined by a judge.
Article 202 defines which judgments and decisions are not subject to appeal.
Under Article 202 § 2, unless the Enforcement Code (Law no. 233/1995 Coll., as amended) provides otherwise, an appeal is not admissible against decisions taken in enforcement proceedings under the Enforcement Code.
With effect from 1 July 2007, the relevant provisions of the CCP were amended by Law no. 273/2007 Coll. Since then the amended rule (section 374 (4)) has specifically provided that an appeal to a judge against decisions taken by senior court officers is always available.
The explanatory memorandum (dôvodová správa) of the amending Law no. 273/2007 Coll. refers to Article 142 § 2 of the Constitution and acknowledges that, under that provision, an appeal had been available against such decisions even previously.
Under Article 228 § 1 (d), civil proceedings can be reopened where the Court has found a violation of the requesting party’s Convention rights and where serious consequences of the violation have not been adequately redressed by the award of just satisfaction. However, in principle, only those proceedings can be reopened which have been concluded by means of a judgment (rozsudok).
The Constitutional Court Act (Law no. 38/1993 Coll., as amended) governs the organisation of the , the procedure before it and the status of its judges.
Section 53(1) and (2) lays down the rule of exhaustion of ordinary remedies. It provides that a complaint to the  is admissible only where the applicant has used effective remedies provided for by the law to protect his or her fundamental rights. The requirement does not apply if the applicant shows that he or she has not exhausted such remedies on grounds worthy of special consideration.
In cases nos. I. ÚS 191/06, III. ÚS 348/06, IV. ÚS 209/07 and IV. ÚS 200/07, the applicant raised before the  the same issue as in the present application.
The complaint in file no. I. ÚS 191/06 was directed against a District Court, a senior court officer of which had determined the applicant’s costs. The complaint was declared admissible on 14 June 2006 and ended with a judgment (nález) of 18 October 2007, in which the Constitutional Court found no violation of the applicant’s rights under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. The finding was based on the fact that the applicant’s submissions had eventually been examined by a judge upon the applicant’s appeal.
The complaints in file nos. III. ÚS 348/06, IV. ÚS 209/07 and IV. ÚS 200/07 were directed against the Supreme Court which had declared the applicant’s appeals on points of law inadmissible. They resulted in judgments of 17 January 2008 and 6 and 26 March 2008, in which the Constitutional Court found a violation of the applicant’s rights under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, quashed the impugned decisions, remitted the cases to the ordinary courts for a new determination and expressed a binding legal view that is summarised in the subsequent paragraph.
In the judgments mentioned above in cases nos. I. ÚS 191/06, III. ÚS 348/06, IV. ÚS 209/07 and IV. ÚS 200/07 the  upheld its established case-law to the effect that, to the extent possible, legislation is always to be interpreted and applied in conformity with the Constitution. Senior court officers do not provide the guarantees of judicial independence under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. Their decisions can therefore never be final and must always be reviewable by a judge. Interpreting the relevant legislative rules at variance with the wording, object and purpose of Article 142 § 2 of the Constitution is out of the question.