The case originated in an application (no. 1509/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by the Bulgarian nationals Mr Asen Angelov Kostov and Mr Hristo Yankov Yankov (“the applicants”) on 14 December 2004.
The applicants were represented by Mrs S. Stefanova and Mr A. Atanasov, lawyers practising in . The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs R. Nikolova, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 30 September 2008 the Court decided to communicate to the Government the applicants’ complaints concerning the length of the criminal proceedings against them and the lack of remedies in that respect. It decided also to rule on the admissibility and merits of those complaints at the same time (Article 29 § 3). The complaints of the remaining initial applicants were dismissed as inadmissible.
The applicants were born in 1961 and 1966 respectively and live in the .
On different dates in 1991 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicants and four other persons. The applicants were charged with the theft of a car tyre. An indictment against them was introduced at court on 29 June 1992.
On 3 December 1992 the  remitted the case to the investigation authorities finding that there had been procedural violations.
No investigative measures were taken until September 1998 when one of the accused was questioned. In the following months the remaining accused were also questioned and other evidence was collected.
On several occasions during these months a prosecutor from the  regional prosecutor’s office instructed the investigation authorities to take further investigative measures and make up for certain earlier breaches of the procedural rules.
On an unspecified date towards the end of 1999 the investigation was completed. The prosecution filed an indictment with the  and the applicants were brought to trial.
In a judgment of 24 June 2002 the  acquitted the applicants. One of the remaining accused was also acquitted and the others were convicted and received suspended sentences.
Upon appeal by the prosecution, on 8 October 2004 the Plovdiv Court of Appeal upheld fully the Regional Court’s judgment. In affirming the suspended sentences of three of the accused, it referred, inter alia, to the excessive length of the proceedings, finding that
“the criminal proceedings [had been] subject to excessive delays without there having been an objective justification for that delay ”.
Upon cassation appeal by the prosecution, on 1 November 2005 the Supreme Court of Cassation upheld the lower courts’ judgments and reiterated the Court of Appeal’s findings in respect of the excessive length of the proceedings.