The case originated in an application (no. 27582/07) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Zeki Çelebi (“the applicant”), on 21 June 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Erbil, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged that the criminal proceedings against him had been unfair on account of the statutory restriction on his right to a lawyer while in police custody in accordance with Law no. 3842 and the subsequent use by the trial court of his statements taken without a lawyer present to convict him.
On 23 January 2018 notice of the above complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Van.
On 23 July 1999 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of membership of a terrorist organisation, namely the PKK (Workers’ Party of Kurdistan).
On 26 July 1999 the applicant was questioned by the police and gave statements without a lawyer present. The applicant first gave an account of how he had joined the illegal organisation and then provided details about the following three acts: so-called “taxation activities”, meaning collection of money on behalf of the illegal organisation through coercion; opening fire on a police armoured vehicle during a demonstration organised in the aftermath of Abdullah Öcalan’s arrest; and the killing of M.Y.
As to the “taxation activities”, the applicant stated that he had threatened a person named M.K., the owner of a furniture store located in the Esenyurt district of Istanbul, with a view to taking 1,000 German marks (DEM) from him. When M.K. had been able to hand over only DEM 25, the applicant had told him that he would come back for the remainder. Subsequently, the applicant had handed that money over to another member of the PKK. The applicant had also gone to a bakery with a gun and asked for money on behalf of the terrorist organisation. The bakery owner’s son had given him DEM 2,500, which he had then delivered to another member of the organisation. Likewise, the applicant had also threatened A.K., who had been involved in the construction business, and collected 1,500 United States dollars from him. He had also attempted to collect money from three other people, but they had not given him anything. Together with those, the applicant gave detailed explanations about a total of six incidents of extortion.
As regards opening fire on the police vehicle, the applicant stated that he had participated in the demonstration to protest against Abdullah Öcalan’s arrest together with R.B. (who was the applicant in Ruşen Bayar v. Turkey, no. 25253/08, 19 February 2019) and Ma.Y., who had opened fire on a police armoured vehicle.
Lastly, in relation to the murder of M.Y., the applicant maintained that certain other members of the organisation had abducted M.Y. with a view to questioning him after having heard that he had tried to collect money on behalf of the organisation without their permission. Another member, Ma.Y., had told the applicant that they should go to the house where M.Y. was being held to act as lookouts. The applicant had gone to that house but he had later been sent to A.Y.’s shop to wait for R.B., who had not come. The next day at around 11 a.m. the applicant had once again gone to the house where M.Y. was being held, but he had again been sent to A.Y.’s shop to wait for R.B., who had not come. Later on, R.B. had gone to the house with another member of the organisation with the code name “Ezgi-Ayşe” and had continued questioning M.Y. When “Ezgi-Ayşe” had told R.B. that the house had been discovered, they had decided to move M.Y. to another house, in the course of which M.Y. had tried to run away. As a result, he had been killed by R.B. or Ma.Y. The applicant maintained that this had been told to him by Ma.Y., but that he had not asked them who had killed M.Y. The applicant also stated that after this incident he had become estranged from the organisation and had decided to leave it.
On 26 July 1999 the applicant participated in a reconstruction of the events (yer gösterme). According to the record drafted by police officers and signed by the applicant, the latter showed the workplace of co-defendant Ma.Y. to the police officers. During a search of Ma.Y.’s workplace, three unlicensed guns of 7.65 mm calibre and corresponding ammunition were found.
On 30 July 1999 the applicant took part in an identification parade and three of the four complainants identified him as the person who had asked for money from them on behalf of the terrorist organisation.
On the same day M.K. gave statements to the police in his capacity as a complainant, stating that the applicant had come to his workplace together with another person approximately one and a half months before and had asked for money from him on behalf of the terrorist organisation by threatening him.
On 31 July 1999 the applicant participated in an identification parade and identified Ş.A., M.H., Ma.Y. and F.A. as people who had carried out activities on behalf of the terrorist organisation. The other suspects, namely Ş.A., M.A., M.H. and A.K. identified the applicant as a member of the organisation.
On 1 August 1999 the applicant was brought before the public prosecutor, to whom he made statements without a lawyer present. The applicant told the public prosecutor that most of his statements to the police had not been correct, alleging that the police had made him sign whatever they had written, as he was illiterate. However, the applicant admitted that he had threatened certain individuals in order to collect money on behalf of the terrorist organisation and acknowledged three incidents of extortion. He also denied the allegation that he had been involved in an armed attack. The applicant further stated that he did not know how M.Y. had been killed and denied having taken part as a lookout, arguing that he had learned of the killing from newspapers.
On the same day the applicant was questioned by the investigating judge at the Istanbul State Security Court without a lawyer present, when he accepted the content of his statements to the public prosecutor. When asked whether he accepted his statements to the police, the applicant denied them, stating that he was illiterate and that the police had not read out the content of his statements. He also told the court that he had been beaten at the police headquarters. At the end of the questioning, the judge ordered his pretrial detention.
On 10 August 1999 the public prosecutor at the Istanbul State Security Court lodged a bill of indictment with that court against the applicant and four other persons, charging the applicant with membership of an illegal organisation, attempted extortion (3 counts) and extortion (3 counts) under Articles 61, 495 § 1 and 168 § 2 of the former Criminal Code. The acts attributed to the applicant were, inter alia, as follows: collection of money on behalf of the illegal organisation through coercion, opening fire on a police armoured vehicle during a demonstration organised in the aftermath of Abdullah Öcalan’s arrest, and the killing of M.Y.
At a hearing held on 22 November 1999, the applicant gave evidence in person and without a lawyer present. He denied all the charges against him and pleaded not guilty. He also denied all his previous statements.
As of the hearing held on 31 July 2000, the lawyer M.E. represented the applicant. He applied for the applicant’s release, stating that he had not committed any other illegal act apart from collecting money on behalf of the terrorist organisation. At the end of the hearing, the trial court rejected the request for release.
At a hearing held on 7 May 2001 the applicant’s lawyer asked the court to hear evidence from the complainants who had identified the applicant. The trial court subsequently heard them in person at different hearings.
At a hearing held on 18 June 2003, the public prosecutor read out his observations on the merits of the case, stating that the applicant should be convicted and sentenced as indicted. At the same hearing, the applicant’s lawyer and some of the lawyers of the other co-defendants applied for time to prepare their defence submissions in reply to the public prosecutor’s observations on the merits of the case. The trial court adjourned and granted them further time.
Another hearing was held on 23 February 2004, which the applicant did not attend. The trial court noted that the applicant had sent a written application dated 28 October 2003 in which he had expressed his wish to benefit from the provisions of the Reintegration of Offenders into Society Act (Law no. 4959).
At a hearing held on 6 April 2004, the applicant accepted the content of his “earlier statements”. He also asked to be granted a certain period of time with a view to submitting written submissions to provide more information on his activities and those of the other accused persons within the organisation.
At a hearing held on 12 May 2004, the applicant submitted a two-page-long document in which he essentially reiterated, inter alia, the information he had given to the police concerning the killing of M.Y., stating that the latter had been interrogated as he had collected money on behalf of the organisation without its approval. The applicant also described how other co-accused, namely Ma.Y., F.A. and M.H., had been involved in the killing and stated that he had been to the house where M.Y. was being held twice and that he had stayed there for fifteen and twenty to thirty minutes respectively. The applicant maintained that he had only been involved in two instances of extortion and denied his involvement in the killing.
At the same hearing the court decided to send a letter to the General Security Directorate to seek its opinion on the question of whether the applicant was eligible to benefit from the provisions of the Reintegration of Offenders into Society Act.
At a hearing held on 22 November 2004 the trial court received the response of the General Security Directorate, to which the applicant’s lawyer responded that he had no comment to make. However, considering the response of the General Security Directorate to be unclear, the trial court decided to ask for its opinion on the same issue for a second time. At the end of the hearing, the trial court ordered the release of the applicant.
At a hearing held on 5 June 2006, the trial court received the new response of the General Security Directorate, according to which there was information indicating that the applicant had taken part in violent activities on behalf of the organisation. At the same hearing, the public prosecutor read out his observations on the merits and requested that the applicant be sentenced under Article 125 of the former Criminal Code.
At a hearing held on 12 March 2007 the applicant’s lawyer submitted a three-page-long defence submission where he stated, inter alia, that his client had had nothing to do with M.Y.’s killing and that even if his police statements were regarded as genuine, he had only been a sympathiser of the organisation at that time and he had not known that M.Y. would be killed. Moreover, the victims from whom the applicant had allegedly asked for money on behalf of the organisation had not been able to identify the applicant. Accordingly, his client had to be acquitted and if the trial court considered otherwise, he could only be convicted of membership of an illegal organisation under Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code.
On 13 February 2009 the Twelfth Chamber of the Istanbul Assize Court requalified the offences and convicted him under Article 125 of the former Criminal Code of breaking up the unity of the State and seeking to remove part of the national territory from the State’s control, and sentenced him to life imprisonment. The trial court listed, among other pieces of evidence, “the statements of the accused throughout the proceedings” in the “evidence” part of its judgment. In the part entitled “assessment of evidence and reasons”, the trial court noted that the applicant had sent a letter to the court on 12 May 2004 in which he had stated that M.Y. had been abducted and killed by Ma.Y., F.A. and M.H. The trial court concluded that those statements were corroborated by the autopsy report, a crime scene report and a police report establishing that the gun that had been used to kill M.Y. was the same one that had been used at the demonstration. It went on to hold that the defendants’ denial of their guilt during the trial should be dismissed in the light of that evidence.
In view of that evidence and the statements of the witnesses and the victims, and the invoices of the illegal organisation that had been found, the trial court also found it established that the applicant had attempted to and had collected money on behalf of the illegal organisation through coercion. It found that the applicant had been involved in six different acts of extortion. It went on to hold that the applicant had taken part in the killing of M.Y. as a lookout with a view to preventing M.Y. from running away. Taking into account the participation of the applicant and Ma.Y. in the demonstration of 20 February 1999, and their positions within the illegal organisation, the trial court considered that the killing of M.Y. and the completed acts of extortion should be accepted as being “serious enough”, which was the material element of the offence set out in Article 125 of the former Criminal Code.
Lastly, in the “conviction” part of its judgment, the trial court held that the applicant had been a member of the illegal organisation, had collected money on behalf of the illegal organisation through coercion and had participated in the killing of M.Y. It also refused the applicant’s application to benefit from the Reintegration of Offenders into Society Act, holding that the applicant did not fulfil the requirements laid down therein. The trial court did not assess any evidence in that part of its judgment.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged an appeal against the trial court’s judgment. In the appeal, dated 14 May 2009, the applicant’s lawyer argued, inter alia, that the use of the applicant’s statements to the police, which had been taken under duress and which he had later retracted, had been unlawful.
On 27 April 2010 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of the first-instance court.
The relevant provisions of the former Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 1412), namely Articles 135, 136 and 138, provided that anyone suspected or accused of a criminal offence had a right of access to a lawyer from the moment he or she was taken into police custody. In accordance with section 31 of Law no. 3842 of 18 November 1992, which amended the legislation on criminal procedure, the above-mentioned provisions were not applicable to persons accused of offences falling within the jurisdiction of the State Security Courts. On 15 July 2003, by virtue of Law no. 4928, the restriction on an accused’s right of access to a lawyer in proceedings before the State Security Courts was lifted (see Salduz v. Turkey [GC], no. 36391/02, §§ 27-29, ECHR 2008).
The Reintegration of Offenders into Society Act (Law no. 4959) applies to members of terrorist organisations who surrender to the authorities without armed resistance, either directly, on their own initiative, or through intermediaries, those who can be considered to have left a terrorist organisation, and those who have been arrested. The Law also applies to those who, despite being aware of the aims pursued by the terrorist organisation, provided shelter, food, weapons, ammunition or any other kind of assistance. An important feature of the Act is that it provides the possibility of reducing the sentences of those who wish to take advantage of the Act by providing relevant information and documents on the structure and activities of the terrorist organisation (see Gül and Others v. Turkey, no. 4870/02, § 31, 8 June 2010). However, if an individual does not accept before the judge the contents of his or her previous statements, he or she is not able to benefit from the provisions of that Act.