The case originated in an application (no. 48203/09) against the Czech Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Day s.r.o., a limited liability company incorporated under Czech law (“the applicant company”), Mr Pavel Suda (“the second applicant”), Mr Karel Rybáček (“the third applicant”) and Mr Miroslav Navrátil (“the fourth applicant”) who are Czech nationals and Ms Susanne Minarik (“the fifth applicant”) and Mr Roman Minarik (“the sixth applicant”) who are German nationals, on 2 September 2009.
The applicants were represented by Mr P. Zima, a lawyer practising in . The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V.A. Schorm, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 12 January 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
On 24 June 2003 the general meeting of a company Ytong, a.s. adopted, by votes of the main shareholder, a resolution on the winding up of the company and on the transfer of all its assets to the main shareholder. The applicants received cash settlement for their shares based on an expert opinion.
The contract between Ytong, a.s. and the main shareholder for the transfer of all assets to the main shareholder included an arbitration clause by which any disagreement of the minority shareholders with the settlement amounts was to be decided in arbitration before the Arbitration Court attached to the Economic Chamber of the Czech Republic and Agricultural Chamber of the Czech Republic (“the Arbitration Court”). The asset transfer contract was approved at the general meeting by votes of the majority shareholder.
On 8 October 2003 the applicants lodged with a court an action whereby they asserted that the settlement for the transfer was not adequate and claimed the remainder thereof.
On 14 July 2005 the  (krajský soud) terminated the proceedings holding that it had no jurisdiction over the dispute because of the arbitration clause in the asset transfer contract.
On 28 November 2005 the Olomouc High Court (vrchní soud) upheld the decision not finding a violation of the applicants’ right of access to court. It held that the arbitration clause was binding even for the applicants by virtue of Article 220k § 1 of the Commercial Code. It further held that the issue of the settlement amount was first of all a technical issue.
On 24 June 2008 the Supreme Court (Nejvyšší soud) dismissed the applicants’ appeal on points of law agreeing with the lower courts.
On 17 March 2009 the  (Ústavní soud) dismissed the applicants’ constitutional appeal alleging violations of their right to a fair trial and prohibition of discrimination as manifestly ill-founded stating only that the opinions of the ordinary courts had not diverted from the generally accepted views on the matter.
After the High Court’s decision became final on 13 January 2006 the applicants, with the exception of Mr Minarik, instituted proceedings before the  as envisaged in the arbitration clause. They nevertheless submitted that the  had no jurisdiction to hear the case because the arbitration clause was not applicable to them.
On 11 October 2006 the  terminated the proceedings regarding Mr Navrátil and Mr Rybáček for lack of jurisdiction holding that they had not consented to the arbitration.
On 26 May 2007 the  terminated the proceedings regarding Ms Minarik holding that it had no jurisdiction because Ms Minarik was a German resident and a Czech-German Bilateral Investment Treaty, which was applicable, envisaged right of access to court. On the other hand the motion for lack of jurisdiction concerning Day s.r.o. and Mr Suda was dismissed and the proceedings are pending.
In addition to the domestic law and practice set out in the Court’s judgment Suda v. Czech Republic, no. 1643/06, 28 October 2010 the following law and practice is relevant to the present case.
Under section 19(1), the  is a permanent court of arbitration attached to the Economic Chamber of the  and it is an independent body for deciding disputes by independent arbitrators under regulations on arbitration proceedings.
The  has separate Rules for domestic disputes and for international disputes. However the following rules are the same for both types of proceedings.
Section 26(1) of the Rules stipulates that a dispute is considered at a hearing held in camera. The president of the tribunal can decide, with the consent of the parties, that persons who are not parties can be present at a hearing.
Under section 37(1) a decision of the tribunal is announced to the parties at the end of the hearing, or if they are not present it is sent to them in writing.
In the case of Kohlhofer v. the  [Committee], no. 22915/07, § 15, 13 October 2011, the Arbitration Court, referring to the judgment of the Court in Suda v. the Czech Republic, cited above, held that it had no jurisdiction to decide on the merits of a claim because proceedings before the Arbitration Court were not public.