The case originated in an application (no. 43714/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Croatian nationals, Mr Ante Skokandić and Mr Ivan Skokandić (“the applicants”), on 10 October 2002.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr E. Havkić, a lawyer practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
The applicants, who are brothers, were born in 1939 and 1936 and live in Pisarovina and Korčula, respectively.
On 5 September 1974 the applicants brought a civil action against a certain J.P. and the Town of  in the Korčula Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Korčuli) seeking to be declared owners of a plot of land on which a stone-pit has been located.
Following a remittal, on 5 September 1994 the Korčula Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Korčuli) decided to close the main hearing.
Afterwards, the applicants urged the Municipal Court several times to deliver the judgment, and filed several complaints with the Ministry of Justice.
On 10 April 2002 the court sent its judgment dated 5 September 1994 to the parties. The applicants, who were declared to be the owners of a part of the disputed land, received the judgment eight days later. The respondents appealed.
Meanwhile, on 19 March 2002 the applicants lodged a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act complaining about the length of the above proceedings. On 7 July 2004 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) found a violation of their constitutional rights to a hearing within a reasonable time, awarded them each 8,100 Croatian kunas (HRK) in compensation, and ordered the Dubrovnik County Court to give a decision on the appeal in the shortest time possible but no later than six months following the publication of the decision in the Official Gazette. The 's decision was published on 20 July 2004.
On 7 October 2004 the  (Županijski sud u Dubrovniku) accepted the appeal of the respondents, quashed the first-instance judgment and remitted the case.
The proceedings are currently again pending before the Korčula Municipal Court as the first-instance court.
On 14 June 1995 the Ministry of Economy (Ministarstvo gospodarstva) concluded an agreement with the company B.M. (“the company”) granting it a concession for exploitation of minerals and stone on the land in the above dispute (“the concession agreement”).
On 16 April 1997 the competent administrative authority granted the company a permit (lokacijska dozvola) for the planned exploitation.
In November 2001 the company started works on the property.
On 21 June 2002 the applicants brought an administrative action in the  (Upravni sud Republike Hrvatske) challenging the concession agreement and the obtained permit. They also requested that the works be stopped pending the civil proceedings determining ownership of the property.
On 26 June 2002 the  invited the applicants to specify the decisions they were challenging and to submit their copies.
On 1 August 2002 the applicants completed their action by specifying the impugned decisions but failed to submit their copies.
On 20 November 2002 the  declared the applicants' action inadmissible, finding that they had failed to complete their action as requested on 26 June 2002.
After the beginning of the exploitation works, on 21 November 2001 the second applicant brought an action in trespass (actio negatoria) in the Korčula Municipal Court against J.P. as the shareholder of the company B.M., the town of  and the State. He also applied for an interim measure (privremena mjera) to halt the exploitation works.
On 2 June 2004 the Municipal Court dismissed the second applicant's claim as well as his application for an interim measure. It found that he had proved neither his ownership of the land at issue nor the unlawfulness of the exploitation works.
On 9 December 2005 the  dismissed the second applicant's appeal and upheld the first-instance judgment.
On 8 March 2006 the second applicant lodged a regular constitutional complaint under section 62 of the Constitutional Court Act against the second-instance judgment. The case is currently pending before the .
Meanwhile, on 30 July 2004 the second applicant lodged a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act complaining about the length of the above proceedings. On 27 April 2006 the  dismissed his complaint finding that the length of the proceedings had not been excessive.
Section 62
“1. Everyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that the decision of a state authority, local or regional self-government, or a legal person invested with public authority, on his or her rights or obligations, or about suspicion or accusation for a criminal offence, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms, or right to local or regional self-government, guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter: constitutional right)...
If another legal remedy is allowed against the violation of the constitutional rights [complained of], the constitutional complaint may be lodged only after this remedy has been exhausted.
In matters in which an administrative action or, in civil and non-contentious proceedings, an appeal on points of law [revizija] are allowed, remedies shall be considered exhausted only after the decision on these legal remedies has been given.”
Section 63
 “(1) The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint whether or not all legal remedies have been exhausted if the competent court fails to decide a claim concerning the individual's rights and obligations or a criminal charge against him or her within a reasonable time ...
(2) If a constitutional complaint ... under paragraph 1 of this section is upheld, the  shall set a time-limit within which the competent court must decide the case on the merits...
(3) In a decision issued under paragraph 2 of this section, the  shall assess appropriate compensation for the applicant for the violation of his or her constitutional rights ... The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date a request for payment is lodged.”