The case originated in an application (no. 69143/12) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Sebastian Rechul (“the applicant”), on 2 October 2012.
The applicant was represented by Ms M. Jas-Baran, a lawyer practising in Wrocław. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska and, subsequently, by Mr J. Sobczak of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 9 January 2018 the Government were given notice of the complaint concerning Article 6 of the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Żary.
In 2011 the applicant brought an action against the State Treasury seeking compensation for the damage he alleged to have suffered as a result of the conditions in Wronki Prison from January to June 2001. He sought an award of 10,000 Polish zlotys (PLN - approximately 2,500 euros (EUR)). In parallel, he asked the district court to exempt him from the payment of a court fee of PLN 500 (about EUR 125). In support of his claim, he submitted a declaration of means stating that he was unemployed, had no savings or valuables, and had debts for unpaid child support, as well as outstanding monthly bank loan payments. In addition, he informed the court that he had been detained from 2001 to September 2004 and that since 18 July 2009 he had been serving another prison sentence, to be completed in January 2013.
On 4 January 2012 the Szamotuły District Court (Sąd Rejonowy) dismissed the applicant’s request for exemption from payment of the court fee. The court reasoned that only persons with no savings capacity could claim exemption from the payment of court fees in their entirety and that the applicant did not fulfil that condition. The applicant should have put money aside to prepare his action in respect of the conditions of his imprisonment in 2001, especially considering that he had been at liberty from September 2004 to July 2009.
On 28 February 2012 the Poznań Regional Court (Sąd Okręgowy), ruling on the applicant’s interlocutory appeal, upheld that order and subscribed entirely to the reasoning of the court of first instance. The court also observed that the applicant had no expenses as the child support was being paid from a public fund on account of the applicant’s imprisonment. Moreover, the applicant was a healthy individual and could have secured a job during his time at liberty. He could have thus made the necessary savings to pay the PLN 500 court fee for the civil action he had been planning to lodge.
The applicant did not pay the required court fee. Consequently, on 17 May 2012 the district court, ruling under Article 130 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (“CCP”), returned the applicant’s civil action. Accordingly, the proceedings in question had no legal effect and were considered, for all legal and practical purposes, to have never been instituted.
In 2011 the applicant brought an action against the State Treasury, seeking compensation for the damage he alleged to have suffered as a result of his imprisonment in Wołów Prison from June 2001 to September 2004. He claimed PLN 80,000 (approximately EUR 20,000). In parallel, he asked the domestic court to exonerate him from the payment of all court fees.
On 8 February 2012 the Wrocław Regional Court granted that request and fully exempted the applicant from paying the legal costs of that procedure.
On 17 April 2012 the Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s action for compensation as time-barred and ordered him, pursuant to Article 98 § 1 CCP and Section 108 of the Law on court costs in civil matters (see “Relevant domestic law” section below), to pay PLN 3,600 (about EUR 900) for the lawyer from the State Attorney General’s office who had represented the winning party, that is, the defendant State Treasury.
The applicant appealed against that judgment, challenging the part of the decision relating to the payment of the defendant’s legal fees. To that end he submitted that the regional court had not taken his indigenous status into consideration.
On 12 July 2012 the Wrocław Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny), relying on Article 102 of the CPC and Section 108 of the Law of 28 July 2005 on legal costs in civil matters, dismissed the applicant’s interlocutory appeal. It considered that the applicant’s poor financial situation could not be regarded as an exceptional circumstance within the meaning of Article 102 of the CCP and, consequently, that it could not lead to the applicant’s exemption from the payment of the fees of the winning party’s lawyer.
Regulations on the payment of costs and court fees in civil proceedings, as well as on exonerations on account of a plaintiff’s indigenous status, have been set out in Buczek v. Poland, no. 31667/12, §§ 13-16, 14 June 2016.
In addition, under Article 108 of the CCP, exemption from court fees does not automatically relieve the losing party of the obligation to pay the litigation costs of the winning party. These litigation costs include, among other things, expenses borne by the winning party for its legal representation. The general principle that the costs necessary for the proper conduct of the procedure are borne by the losing party is set out in Article 98 CCP. Under Article 102 of the CCP, a judge in a civil case has the discretion to order the losing party to pay only part of the above-mentioned costs of the litigation, or even to totally waive the costs, where exceptional circumstances so require.
On 12 June 2001 the Polish Constitutional Court made the following observation in that context (case no. P 13/01):
 “ ... the exemption from bearing the costs of the procedure, in particular costs other than court fees, cannot have an automatic nature, that is to say, it cannot create a situation in which the winning party would not have any claim to have his or her costs reimbursed.... Exonerating the losing party from any obligation to pay the costs of the proceedings, without the wining party having any possibility of having his or her costs reimbursed, amounts to a restriction of the right of access to a court.”
On 6 September 2001 the Constitutional Court held that the principle that a winning party of civil proceedings should have its litigation costs reimbursed and that the losing party should bear the costs of the proceedings was consistent with the principles of equality and equity (case no. P/3/01).
The fees for representation by lawyers appointed under the legal-aid scheme are set out in the Ordinance of the Minister of Justice of 28 September 2002 (Rozporządzenie w sprawie opłat za czynności radców prawnych oraz ponoszenia przez Skarb Państwa kosztów pomocy prawnej udzielonej przez radcę prawnego ustanowionego z urzędu). The fees depend on the value of the claim and they range between PLN 60 (approximately EUR 15) and PLN 7,200 (approximately EUR 1,800).
Under Article 130 § 2 of the CPC, a civil action returned to a party for failure to pay the relevant legal costs is without legal effect.