The case originated in an application (no. 8855/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Marijan Bečeheli (“the applicant”), on 9 January 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr Lj. Drageljević, a lawyer practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
On 21 March 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1963 and is currently serving a prison sentence in the Lepoglava Penitentiary.
On 14 June 2004 the applicant was indicted before the Rijeka County Court along with other twenty two accused, on charges of drug trafficking, offering illegal substances to a number of persons and extortion.
On 5 January 2006 the  pronounced a judgement whereby it found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to seven years and six months’ imprisonment.
On 5 June 2006 the applicant was transferred from the Rijeka Prison (Zatvor u Rijeci) to the Zagreb Prison (Zatvor u Zagrebu).
On 4 September 2006 a written copy of the judgement was served on the applicant’s representative.
Both the applicant and the Rijeka County State Attorney’s Office (Županijsko državno odvjetništvo u Rijeci) appealed against the first-instance judgement.
On 31 May 2007 the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) allowed an appeal by the State Attorney’s Office and increased the applicant’s prison sentence to nine years and six months.
On 30 July 2007 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the  (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske). He claimed that the Supreme Court’s judgment was in breach of his constitutional rights to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence and to free communication with his defence counsel, and that illegally obtained evidence had been used in the criminal proceedings against him.
On 23 December 2010 the  dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint. This decision was served on the applicant’s representative on 14 January 2011.