The case originated in an application (no. 72361/11) against the Republic of Albania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Albanian national, Mr Ardit Hysi (“the applicant”), on 7 November 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Meta and Mrs N. Meta, lawyers practising in Tirana. The Albanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their then Agent, Ms L. Mandia of the State Advocate’s Office.
The applicant complained under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) and (d) of the Convention about his trial in absentia.
On 26 June 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The Government implicitly objected to the examination of the case by a Committee (Article 28 § 1 (b)), arguing that it included issues that were not the subject of the Court’s well-established case-law. The Court accepts that objection.
The applicant was born in Qesarat, Tepelenë, in 1977. He is currently serving a prison sentence.
On 14 January and 10 November 2005, following proceedings in absentia, the Gjirokastër District Court and the Court of Appeal, respectively, convicted the applicant of attempted theft resulting in death in collusion with others and sentenced him to seventeen years’ imprisonment. That decision became final on 9 February 2007 after the Supreme Court dismissed an appeal by the applicant’s lawyer. It appears that the applicant was represented by a lawyer appointed by his family throughout the court proceedings.
It appears that on 30 March 2007 the applicant was extradited from Greece to Albania.
On 3 May 2007 the Gjirokastër District Court allowed a request by the applicant to appeal out of time and he lodged an appeal against his conviction in absentia.
On 12 November 2007 the Gjirokaster Court of Appeal while requalifying the charges against the applicant on the basis of the evidence obtained during the proceedings in absentia, upheld the applicant’s conviction, ruling that it had become res judicata.
By a final decision of 7 October 2009 the Supreme Court upheld the applicant’s conviction as decided in the Gjirokastër District Court’s decision of 2005, ruling that it had become res judicata and that the facts and law in the case had been examined previously. It further noted that leave to appeal out of time should not have been granted as the case had become res  judicata.
On 21 February 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal with the Constitutional Court against the Supreme Court’s decision, complaining, inter alia, about the fact that the domestic courts had not given him the possibility of a fresh factual and legal determination of the criminal charge.
On 9 May 2011 the applicant’s lawyer was notified of the Constitutional Court’s decision to dismiss his appeal.
The relevant domestic law and practice at the material time as regards proceedings in absentia have been described in detail in Shkalla  v.  Albania (no. 26866/05, § § 28-35, 10 May 2011), and Izet  Haxhia v. Albania (no. 34783/06, §§ 19-42, 5 November 2013).
The relevant provisions at the material time as regards the scope of the examination of an appeal by the Court of Appeal, the reopening of the judicial examination of a case (përsëritja e shqyrtimit gjyqësor) by the Court of Appeal, and the competences of a court of appeal were described in detail in Mulosmani v. Albania (no. 29864/03, § 106, 8 October 2013).
On 30 March 2017 the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) was amended by Law no. 35/2017 and the new provisions entered into force on 1 August 2017. The relevant new provisions applicable to the present case read as follows:
“1. The prosecutor, the defendant, the victim or accusing victim, and the private parties are allowed to have the time-limit reset if they establish that they were unable to comply with the time-limit owing to unforeseen events or force majeure.
Leave to appeal out of time cannot be granted more than once in respect of each party and of each stage of the proceedings.
An application for the resetting of the time-limit for appeal must be lodged within ten days of the date of the cessation of unforeseen events or force majeure. The application shall be examined by the authority seized at the time of its introduction (për kërkesën vendos organi që procedon në kohën e paraqitjes së saj).
An appeal against a refusal to grant leave to appeal out of time may be lodged with the court within five days ...”.
“2. Defence counsel may lodge an appeal against a conviction in absentia in so far as he has been specifically authorised by the defendant, by means of a power of attorney issued in accordance with the law, or a statement made at the hearing”.
“1. The parties are allowed to have the time-limit reset if they establish that they were unable to comply with the time-limit owing to unforeseen events or force majeure ...
In the event of trial in absentia [as a result of the defendant’s withdrawal from attending the proceedings], the defendant may request the resetting of the time-limit for appealing against the decision if he can establish that he has not been notified of the decision.
An application for the resetting of the time-limit for appeal must be lodged within ten days of the date of the cessation of unforeseen events or force majeure. For the case provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article, an application must be lodged within ten days of the date on which the defendant effectively acquires knowledge of the decision. Leave to appeal out of time cannot be granted more than once in respect of each party and of each stage of the proceedings.
...
An appeal against a refusal to grant leave to appeal out of time may be lodged with the court of appeal within five days ...”.
“An application for review [of a final decision] may be lodged:
a)  if the facts on which the decision was based do not comply with those of another final decision;
(b)  if the [court rendering the] decision has relied on a civil or administrative court decision which has subsequently been quashed;
(c)  if, subsequent to the decision, new evidence has emerged or has been found which, independently or together with previous evidence, proves that the decision is wrong;
(d)  if it is proved that the decision was given as a result of the falsification of judicial acts or another fact that constitutes a criminal offence.
(e)  if the European Court of Human Rights has adopted a judgment which makes a review of the case necessary ...
(f)  if the extradition of a person convicted in absentia is granted on the explicit assurance that the case will be reviewed. The application for review shall be lodged within thirty days of the date on which the person is extradited...
(g)  if the person is tried in absentia ... and is asking that the case be reviewed. The application for review should be lodged within thirty days of the date on which the defendant acquired knowledge [of the trial in absentia] ...”.
On 21 September 2017 the Committee of Ministers gave a decision on the execution of the judgment in the case of Shkalla (cited above) concerning, among other matters, the Albanian authorities’ failure to reopen proceedings in absentia. This decision, which was adopted at its 1265th meeting, stated, in so far as relevant:
“The Deputies
noted with satisfaction the individual measures taken in these cases, in particular that all the applicants have had an effective possibility to obtain reopening of the impugned proceedings and that, for those applicants who requested it, guarantees were given that the new proceedings either had been or would be conducted in accordance with the requirements of Article 6 of the Convention and that, pending these proceedings, the applicants could request release; considered accordingly that no further individual measures are required in this group of cases;
...
encouraged the authorities rapidly to finalise the ongoing reform of the judicial system to prevent further violations concerning the lack of guarantees surrounding criminal proceedings in absentia, the right to defend oneself in court and the appearance of witnesses; decided to continue their supervision of these measures in the cases of Caka, Cani and Izet Haxhia, and to close the similar cases Berhani and Shkalla”.
On 7 December 2017 the Committee of Ministers gave a decision on the execution of the judgment in the case of Izet Haxhia (cited above) concerning, among other matters, the Albanian authorities’ failure to reopen proceedings in absentia. This decision, which was adopted at its 1302nd meeting, stated, in so far as relevant:
“The Deputies
...
welcomed the general measures taken, in particular the legislative amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure adopted on 30 March 2017 concerning the guarantees surrounding criminal proceedings in absentia, the right to defend oneself in court and the appearance of witnesses; considered that the adopted general measures are sufficient to prevent similar violations and that these cases can be thus closed”.
In the resolution of the same day, the Committee of Ministers stated, in so far as relevant:
“The Deputies
...
Recalling the respondent State’s obligation, under Article 46, paragraph 1, of the Convention, to abide by all final judgments in cases to which it has been a party and that this obligation entails, over and above the payment of any sums awarded by the Court, the adoption by the authorities of the respondent State, where required:
-  of individual measures to put an end to violations established and erase their consequences so as to achieve as far as possible restitutio in integrum;”
By this resolution, the Committee of Ministers closed the examination of the Izet Haxhia judgment.