A domestic judicial decision ordering a State institution to pay the applicants certain amounts has not been fully enforced.
The applicants were born in 1950 and 1947 and live in St Petersburg.
The Russian Government ("the Government") were represented initially by Ms V. Milinchuk, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by her successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants were employed by a State institution in charge of controlling of the quality of dairy products (ГУ Государственная инспекция по качеству молока и молочной продукции Северного и Северо-Западного экономических районов) (“the institution”).
The institution was under the authority of the Ministry of Agriculture of Russia (“the Ministry”). According to the articles of association of the institution, it exercised state supervision over the quality of dairy products in St Petersburg. The articles further provided that the assets allocated to the institution were federal property. The institution was liable for its debts by all its monetary funds. In case of a lack of those funds, the owner of the property assigned to the institution bore vicarious liability for its obligations.
In accordance with the Government Decree no. 600 of 17 June 1998 it was proposed to change the affiliation of the institution and to place it under the control of the Government of St Petersburg.
In 1999 the Ministry stopped financing of the institution.
In November 2000, while the process of transfer of the institution had not been completed and funding by the new owner had not commenced, the Ministry decided to initiate liquidation of the institution.
On 27 August 2002 the applicants were dismissed due to the liquidation.
The applicants sued the institution and the Ministry for the unpaid annual leave, severance allowance and the outstanding arrears for the period from February 2001 to August 2002.
By judgment of 16 December 2002, the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow (“the District Court”) awarded 150,532.75 Russian roubles (RUB) to the first applicant and RUB 165,811.67 to the second applicant, to be paid by the institution. The District Court dismissed the applicants’ claim in respect of the Ministry finding that the applicants had been employed not by the Ministry itself, but its subordinate, i.e. the institution, and noting that the liquidation proceedings in respect of the latter were still pending.
On 23 December 2002 the Ministry paid RUB 36,039 and RUB 39,031.82 to the first and the second applicants respectively in salary arrears and severance allowance.
On 28 March 2003 the Moscow City Court upheld the judgment of 16 December 2002. As regards the applicants’ arguments that the Ministry was vicariously liable for the debts of the institution, the court noted, in particular, that the Ministry was not the owner of the property allocated to the institution, and that the applicants did not meet the requirements under the Articles 120 and 399 of the Civil Code, and that, in any event, the monetary obligation stemmed from the labour relations to which those Articles did not apply.
On 12 May 2003 the District Court issued a writ of execution. On various dates the applicants submitted the writ of execution to the Federal Treasury and to the bailiffs’ service.
On 3 December 2003 the writ of execution was returned from the treasury without enforcement as the institution was not listed among the organisations in receipt of the federal budget funds.
On 20 February 2004 the bailiffs terminated the enforcement proceedings for the debtor institution could not be found at its address, it had no property, its accounts had been closed, and, therefore, execution of the judgment was impossible.
The applicants sued the Ministry for the outstanding amounts.
By the judgment of 19 May 2006, the Justice of the Peace in the 382nd Circuit of the Krasnoselskiy District of Moscow granted their claims against the Ministry, finding it vicariously liable for the debts under the initial judgment. The court also found that since the institution was no longer funded through the federal budget the judgment of 16 December 2002 could not be executed via the Federal Treasury. The judge further noted that the Ministry had already paid a part of the debt under the judgment. Thus, she concluded that the relevant judgment could have been enforced directly by the Ministry prior to the applicants’ claim concerning the vicarious liability from the federal budget sources. The judge, inter alia, index-linked the amounts due to the applicants under the judgment of 16 December 2002. On 25 June 2006 the same judge issued an additional judgment adding the amounts of the principal debts to the awards made on 19 May 2006.
On 25 December 2006 the District Court set aside the abovementioned judgments and rejected the claims. The court considered that the question of vicarious liability of the Ministry had been already examined on 16 December 2002. The appeal court further cited the Government’s decrees in force at the time of the judgment of 19 May 2006 from which it followed that the debtor institution was not listed among the bodies supervised by the Ministry. In addition, the court mentioned that Articles 120 and 399 of the Civil Code were not applicable to that case as it concerned the labour rather than civil matters.
As of the time of the parties’ submissions in 2008 the liquidation proceedings against the institution were still pending, and the judgment of 16 December 2002 remained partly unenforced.
The applicants sought an adjustment for inflation and penalties for the delay in the payment of their salaries in 1999-2001. On 3 June 2003 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow rejected their claims partly as time-barred and partly as having no basis in the domestic law. On 16 December 2003 the Moscow City Court upheld the judgment.
As in force at the material time, Article 120 § 2 of the Civil Code of Russia provided that an institution was liable under its obligations to the extent of its cash funds. If it lacked sufficient cash funds, the owner of the property assigned to it incurred vicarious liability.
Article 399 § 1 provided that, before claiming a debt from a person whose liability is vicarious as described above, a creditor shall bring a claim before the principal debtor. If the principal debtor refuses to satisfy the claim or if no reply is received within a reasonable time, the claim may be brought against the person vicariously liable.