The case originated in an application (no. 22775/03) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mrs Mariya Vasilyevna Fandralyuk (“the applicant”), on 19 June 2003.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev.
On 12 December 2006 the Court decided to communicate the complaint concerning the length of the first set of proceedings to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1935 and lives in .
In April 1994 the applicant instituted proceedings in the  (Ірпінський міський суд Київської області) against her former husband seeking to divide their property. The latter lodged a counterclaim. On 18 August 1995 the court divided the property between the applicant and her former husband.
On 6 February 1996 the  (Київський обласний суд) quashed this judgment and remitted the case for a fresh consideration.
On 23 December 1997 the  adopted another judgment on the division of property between the applicant and her former husband. The court further rejected the remainder of principal and counter claims.
On 10 March 1998 the  quashed this judgment and, because of the complexity of the issues involved, took over the case. In its ruling the court stated inter alia that by partially rejecting the principal and counter claims the  in fact had left unsettled the matter of property right over the house which was a part of the disputed property.
In the course of the aforesaid proceedings a number of forensic examinations have been ordered by the courts. In particular, in their rulings of 22 October 1996 and 22 April 1999 the courts, ordering additional examinations, noted inter alia that “inasmuch as long period of time ha[d] lapsed since the previous forensic examination[s]” they, accordingly, were out-of-date and did not correspond to the actual state of things.
By its letter of 16 July 2001 the Kyiv Regional Court of Appeal remitted the case back to the first instance court for examination. The court did not provide any reasoning for this remittal except for a general reference to Article 31 of the Judiciary Law, which, at the material time, set forth the competence of a court of appeal.
On 19 February 2002 the  divided the property between the applicant and her former husband. In particular, the court held that the applicant did not have any property rights regarding the house, in which she lived with her former husband.
On 2 July 2002 the Kyiv Regional Court of Appeal upheld this judgment.
On 20 January 2003 the Supreme Court of Ukraine rejected the applicant's appeal in cassation.
In April 2003 the applicant instituted proceedings in the  against her former husband complaining that he had evicted her from the house in which they lived. She also sought to move in the house in question. On 26 June 2003 the court found against the applicant and held that the house in question was owned by the applicant's former husband and a certain M. Moreover, in March 2003 the applicant's former husband had sold his part of the house to D. Therefore, the applicant had no property rights over the house in question and there were no legal grounds to move her in. On 21 October 2003 the Kyiv Regional Court of Appeal upheld this judgment. On 29 August 2005 the Supreme Court of Ukraine rejected the applicant's appeal in cassation.