The case originated in an application (no. 24463/11) against the Republic of Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Serbian nationals, Mr Ivica Dimović and Mr Jožef Dimović (“the applicants”), on 5 March 2011.
The applicants were represented by Mr V. Juhas Đurić, a lawyer practising in Subotica. The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms V. Rodić.
The applicants alleged a violation of the rights of the defence with respect to witnesses.
On 5 January 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1980 and 1964, respectively, and live in Hajdukovo.
On 12 February 2007 the applicants and their friend S.K. were indicted for allegedly having stolen a wine press (presu za grožđe).
On 25 January 2008 the Subotica Municipal Court acquitted all three defendants of these charges. In so doing, it explained that while there was evidence that they had been in possession of a press, there was nothing to suggest that they had obtained it through any criminal activity. The applicants themselves maintained that they had found the press abandoned, while S.K. denied the charge and thereafter exercised his right to remain silent. No material evidence was introduced during the trial and, apart from the statement by the alleged victim ‒ who maintained that the press worked and had been kept in a locked yard ‒ the statements of two witnesses supported the applicants’ defence.
On 8 April 2008 the prosecution lodged an appeal against this judgment, emphasising, in particular, that the first-instance court had failed to take into account a statement given to the police by S.K. on 26 January 2006 (albeit in the absence of the applicants and their counsel, who had not been invited to attend).
On 12 May 2008 the Subotica District Court quashed the impugned judgment and ordered a retrial. The court explained that the statement referred to by the prosecution was particularly important because on this occasion S.K. had confessed ‒ in the presence of his counsel ‒ that he had stolen the press together with the applicants. S.K. had subsequently revoked this confession claiming that it had been given under the influence of alcohol and then refused to answer any further questions, and all of these circumstances needed to be reconsidered by the Municipal Court, even though the prosecution itself had initially failed to request that S.K.’s statement of 26 January 2006 be admitted as evidence. The court found this failure by the Municipal Court to be “unclear and inexplicable”.
On 12 October 2008 S.K. died and on 29 December 2008 the Municipal Court discontinued the proceedings against him.
On 19 February 2009 the Municipal Court, having held a hearing and read out S.K.’s statement of 26 January 2006 before the parties, found the applicants guilty. The first applicant was sentenced to an effective prison term of six months while the second applicant was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment, suspended for a period of two years. In its reasoning the court primarily relied on S.K.’s statement of 26 January 2006. No evidence different from that admitted during the first trial was introduced during the retrial.
On 29 July 2009 the District Court upheld this judgment on appeal, and on 7 October 2010 the Supreme Court rejected the applicants’ further appeal on points of law (zahtev za ispitivanje zakonitosti pravosnažne presude).
In the meantime, on 11 September 2009, the applicants lodged a constitutional appeal with the Constitutional Court, alleging that their conviction had been based on the testimony of a person whom they had never had a chance to cross-examine and who had, in any event, revoked it subsequently.
On 14 October 2010 the Constitutional Court rejected the applicants’ appeal as manifestly ill-founded, adding that ‒ as a consequence of the death of S.K. ‒ the lower courts had had no choice but to accept his prior statement given to the police and, clearly, could no longer accommodate the applicants’ objection regarding his cross-examination.
Article 226 § 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakonik o krivičnom postupku, published in the Official Gazette of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia – OG FRY – no. 70/01, amendments published in OG FRY no. 68/02 and in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia nos. 58/04, 85/05, 115/05, 49/07 and 122/08), provides that a statement given by a suspect in a police station in the presence of his lawyer may be used as evidence in a subsequent criminal trial against him. While this provision further requires that the public prosecutor be invited to attend this interrogation, there is no additional obligation to invite any co-defendants or their counsel.
Article 337 § 1 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides, inter alia, that statements given by “co-indicted persons” (od strane saoptuženih) may be read out in court, and hence admitted as evidence, if the person concerned has died in the meantime.
Any such statements given in a non-judicial context (van krivičnog postupka), as well as those given to a court of law prior to a remittal, may not be taken into account (see Komentar Zakonika o krivičnom postupku, Prof. dr Tihomir Vasiljević and Prof. dr Momčilo Grubač, IDP Justinijan, Belgrade, 2005, p. 555, paragraph 1; see, also, the Federal Court’s ruling Kzs. 2/79 of 19 January 1979).