The case originated in an application (no. 38094/05) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Rudolfovich Siyrak (“the applicant”), on 14 September 2005.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the legal assistance provided by State-appointed counsel had been ineffective.
On 26 February 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Segezha, in the Republic of Karelia.
On 27 September 2004 the applicant and three other men - L., Ls. and Pc. - visited the flat belonging to Bs. They met three women there, D., I. and Kh. All of them gathered in the kitchen and started drinking heavily. At some point, as was established later in the course of the trial, the applicant took D. against her will to another room and raped her.
On 28 September 2004 the applicant was arrested. On 30 September 2004 the Segezha Town Court authorised his detention pending investigation and trial. Mr B., appointed as the applicant’s counsel, and the applicant attended the hearing. Neither of them appealed against the court order of 30 September 2004.
On 1 December 2004 the Segezha Town Court fixed the first trial hearing for 14 December 2004. Ms P., who was an attorney at the time, was appointed to represent the applicant during the trial.
On 1 March 2005 the Segezha Town Court held the last court hearing. According to the applicant, he was not notified in advance of the hearing which prevented him from preparing for it. The court found the applicant guilty of rape and sentenced him to eight years’ imprisonment. The applicant and his lawyer were present. The court based its findings, inter alia, on the testimonies provided by D., I., Bs., Kh. and Ls., and on physical and forensic evidence. D. testified that the applicant had pulled her out of the kitchen where they all had been drinking and taken her to another room where he had threatened, slapped and raped her. The other witnesses submitted that they had been drunk at the relevant time and could not provide an accurate account of the events of 27 September 2004. According to the forensic biological report, the traces of body fluids found on D.’s underwear could have belonged to the applicant. The applicant, but not his counsel, appealed.
In the statement of appeal, the applicant claimed that the trial court had failed to study all the materials in the case file; had erroneously dismissed his request for additional forensic expert examinations; had failed to question certain witnesses and had not properly assessed the witnesses’ testimonies. He further alleged that the trial transcript had not been accurate or complete.
On 24 March 2005 the Segezha Town Court informed the applicant and his counsel of the date and time of the appeal hearing.
On 25 April 2005 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Karelia upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal. As it follows from the text of the judgment, the applicant took part in the hearing by video link. Ms P. did not appear. The court proceeded with the hearing in her absence. It heard submissions from the judge rapporteur, the applicant and the prosecutor.
The Constitution of the Russian Federation guarantees a defendant in criminal proceedings the right to qualified legal assistance (Article 48) and to a determination of the criminal charge against him in accordance with the principles of adversarial proceedings and equality of arms (Article 123).
Article 51 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (the “CCP”, in force from 1 July 2002) provides for mandatory legal representation if, inter alia, the accused has not waived his right to legal representation in accordance with Article 53 of the CCP. Unless counsel is retained by the accused, it is the responsibility of the investigator, prosecutor or the court to appoint a lawyer to represent him.
As provided for in Article 52 of the CCP, the accused may refuse legal assistance at any stage of criminal proceedings. Such a waiver may only be accepted if made on the accused’s own initiative. The waiver must be filed in writing and recorded in the official record of the relevant procedural act. The investigator, prosecutor or the court may decide not to accept the waiver. The accused does not forfeit the right to subsequently ask for the appointment of a lawyer to represent him in the criminal proceedings.
Article 373 of the CCP (in force at the relevant time) provides that the appeal court’s role is to review a conviction with a view to verifying its lawfulness, validity and fairness. Under Article 377 of the CCP (in force at the relevant time), the appeal court may examine evidence, including additional material submitted by the parties, directly.
Article 413 of the CCP, setting out the procedure for the reopening of criminal cases, reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1.  Court judgments and decisions which have become final must be quashed and proceedings in a criminal case reopened if there are new or newly discovered circumstances.
...
New circumstances are:
...
(2)  a violation of a provision of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms committed by a court of the Russian Federation during examination of a criminal case and established by the European Court of Human Rights, pertaining to:
(a)  application of a federal law which runs contrary to provisions of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
(b)  other violations of provisions of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
(c)  other new circumstances.”
In a case in which it examined the compatibility of Article 51 of the Code of Criminal Procedure with the Constitution, the Constitutional Court ruled as follows (decision no. 497-O of 18 December 2003):
“Article 51 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which defines the circumstances in which the representation by defence counsel is mandatory, does not contain any indication that its requirements are not applicable in appeal proceedings or that the convicted person’s right to legal assistance in such proceedings may be restricted.”
That view was subsequently confirmed and expanded upon in seven decisions delivered by the Constitutional Court on 8 February 2007. It found that free legal assistance for the purpose of appellate proceedings should be provided under the same conditions as during the earlier stages in the proceedings and was mandatory in the situations listed in Article 51. It further underlined the obligation of the courts to secure the representation by defence counsel in appeal proceedings.
When interpreting the CCP provisions concerning the appeal proceedings (decision no. 253-O-P of 8 February 2007), the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation reasoned as follows:
“... the appeal court must ensure equality of arms for the parties to the [criminal] proceedings, including hearing representations from the parties as regards the possibility of holding an appeal hearing in the absence of his legal counsel ...”