The case originated in an application (no. 38891/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Russian nationals, whose names and dates of birth are listed in the Appendix, on 25 June 2008.
The applicants were represented by lawyers from the Memorial Human Rights Centre. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M.  Galperin.
On 16 May 2012 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
Hizb ut-Tahrir al-Islami (The Party of Islamic Liberation – hereinafter “Hizb ut-Tahrir”) is an international Islamic organisation with branches in many parts of the world, including the Middle East and Europe. It advocates the overthrow of governments and their replacement by an Islamic State in the form of a recreated Caliphate. Hizb ut-Tahrir first emerged among Palestinians in Jordan in the early 1950s. It has achieved a small, but highly committed following in a number of Middle Eastern states and has also gained in popularity among Muslims in western Europe and Indonesia. It began working in Central Asia in the mid-1990s and has developed a committed following inside Uzbekistan, and to a lesser extent in neighbouring Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Kazakhstan.
On 14 February 2003 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation found fifteen organisations, including Hizb ut-Tahrir, to be terrorist organisations and prohibited their activity in the territory of Russia. It held a hearing in camera which was attended by a representative of the Prosecutor General’s office, but not the organisations’ representatives.
On 28 July 2006 a list of organisations declared to be terrorist organisations by the Russian courts was for the first time published in the official periodical Rossiyskaya Gazeta. The list included, among others, the organisations declared to be terrorist organisations by the Supreme Court’s decision of 14 February 2003, such as Hizb ut-Tahrir.
On 6 December 2006 the Russian Federal Security Service instituted criminal proceedings against the applicants on suspicion of their membership of Hizb ut-Tahrir. They were subsequently charged with inciting hatred or enmity and humiliation of human dignity committed by an organised group (an offence under Articles 282 § 2 (c) of the Criminal Code) and membership of an organisation banned by the final court decision on account of its extremist activity (an offence under Article 282.2 § 2 of the Criminal Code).
During the trial before the Leninskiy District Court of Cheboksary the applicants pleaded not guilty and denied being members of Hizb ut-Tahrir.
The District Court called and examined more than thirty witnesses both on behalf of the prosecution and defence. A number of the witnesses confirmed that the applicants had held regular secret meetings in which those witnesses had participated. During the meetings the applicants had said that they were members of Hizb ut-Tahrir, had explained Hizb utTahrir’s aims and methods of achieving those aims and supplied the participants with Hizb ut-Tahrir literature. In particular, the applicants had told the witnesses that it was necessary to create the Caliphate in Russia by destroying the Constitution and adopting a life on the basis of Koran and Sharia laws. To achieve that aim it would be necessary to sow disunity between the people and the State, and to lead jihad against those who would not accept the Caliphate. The witnesses also stated that the applicants had invited them to try to persuade others to share ideas of Hizb ut-Tahrir. At the same time, they had warned the witnesses that Hizb ut-Tahrir was banned in Russia and that they should not show anyone the literature provided to them by the applicants.
Several witnesses also stated to the District Court that the applicants had given them Hizb ut-Tahrir leaflets near a mosque. In particular, three witnesses stated that they had been given leaflets by the first and the third applicants. Two other witnesses stated that they had seen the second, fourth and fifth applicants to distribute leaflets. Those two latter witnesses requested, and were granted, anonymity because they feared for their safety. They were nicknamed “Makarov” and “Medvedev” and were crossexamined at the hearing while unseen by the applicants, their lawyers and other participants to the hearing. Their voices were also mechanically distorted by special equipment. The second applicant’s lawyer then requested the trial court to order that the identity of witnesses “Makarov” and “Medvedev” be disclosed, as he doubted the accuracy of their statements. The District Court rejected that request stating that the lawyer had not advanced any convincing arguments for disclosure of those witnesses’ identity and that it had no grounds to question the accuracy of their statements made at the hearing.
The District Court then examined audio and video records of the meetings of the applicants among themselves and with a number of witnesses in their case, during which they had discussed questions related to Hizb ut-Tahrir’s activities.
The District Court also had regard to a number of expert reports by specialists in political sciences submitted by the prosecution. The expert reports stated that the literature, including leaflets, found as a result of searches at the applicants’ flats contained aggressive Islamist propaganda combined with intolerance towards other religions and declared the organisation’s aim to sow discord in the society. They were aimed at inciting hatred and enmity, humiliation of the dignity of a person, people, country, a group of countries on the grounds of ethnicity, religion, ethnoreligious and political-ideological self-identification and origin; they called the Muslims to violence and physical extermination of people, to disobedience to the laws of the existing States, including Russia, and to a breach of the territorial integrity of Russia.
During the hearing the third applicant requested the District Court to order another expert examination of the found material. The prosecuting party objected stating that, when studying the reports on the expert examinations carried out at the pre-trial stage, neither the applicants nor their lawyers had challenged the expert conclusions or requested additional expert examinations. The District Court then rejected the third applicant’s request.
On 19 September 2007 the Leninskiy District Court convicted the applicants as charged. It relied on the evidence described above and found that it was admissible, coherent and convincing. In particular, the court found that it had no grounds to question the findings of the expert examinations, as they had been carried out by competent specialists who had thoroughly studied the material in question and reached founded and reasoned conclusions.
The trial court found it established that, despite being aware that Hizb ut-Tahrir was banned in Russia, each of the applicants had joined that organisation and had been its active member from 2004 to 2006. In particular, they had kept at home literature relating to Hizb ut-Tahrir, had secretly met with each other and the witnesses in the case in order to study that literature and to promote that extremist organisation’s ideas. Thereby, in the trial court’s opinion, the applicants had imposed those extremist ideas on the witnesses and instigated them to search for new followers. The trial court found that those actions amounted to membership of an organisation banned by the final court decision on account of its extremist activity, an offence under Article 282.2 § 2 of the Criminal Code.
The court further fount it established that each of the applicants had also distributed Hizb ut-Tahrir’s leaflets near or inside mosques, that is at places with high concentration of people. Those leaflets incited hatred and enmity, humiliation of the dignity or a person and a group of persons on the grounds of their attitude towards religion. It held that the distribution by the applicants, who had acted as an organised group, of Hizb ut-Tahrir’s leaflets had constituted a separate offence of inciting hatred and enmity and humiliating the dignity of a person or a group of persons on the grounds of their attitude towards religion committed publicly by an organised group, an offence punishable under Articles 282 § 2 (c) of the Russian Criminal Code.
The District Court imposed a separate sentence in respect of the two offences on each of the applicants and then combined them to arrive to a cumulative sentence ranging between four years and three months’ imprisonment and four years and four years and six months’ imprisonment.
On 28 December 2007 the Supreme Court of the Chuvash Republic upheld the conviction on appeal. It rejected the applicants’ lawyers’ complaint that the identity of witnesses nicknamed “Makarov” and “Medvedev” had not been disclosed at the trial hearing and that during their cross-examination they had remained unseen by the other participants to the criminal proceedings. The appellate court stated that such an arrangement had been necessary to secure those two witnesses’ safety and that the trial court had provided detailed reasons for its decision to that end. It also stated that the expert examinations of the literature found at the applicants’ domicile had been carried out by competent experts who had thoroughly examined the adduced materials. In such circumstances, the appellate court stated that it had no reasons to doubt the expert conclusions and that there had been no need to carry out any additional expert examinations, as was suggested by the applicants.