The case originated in an application (no. 39544/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Zagrebačka banka d.d. (“the applicant bank”), a company incorporated under Croatian law, on 13 October 2005.
The applicant bank was represented by Ms D. Rose Q.C. of Blackstone Chambers, a barrister practising in London, Mr B. Porobija of Law Firm Porobija & Porobija, an advocate practising in Zagreb, and Mr A. Walls and Ms J. Masterson of Linklaters Solicitors, solicitors practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant bank alleged, in particular, that the enforcement proceedings leading to the seizure of a substantial amount of money from its account had been unfair, and that the seizure itself and/or the subsequent distribution of the sum seized in the bankruptcy proceedings opened against the enforcement creditor had entailed a violation of its right to peacefully enjoy its possessions.
On 12 November 2007 and 8 September 2009 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 13 January 2011 the Chamber decided to adjourn the examination of the application awaiting the outcome of the case of Kotov v. Russia (no. 54522/00), that was pending before the Grand Chamber at the time.
On 19 November 2013 the Chamber decided to dispense with a hearing.
The applicant bank, Zagrebačka banka d.d., is a joint stock company incorporated under Croatian law which has its registered office in Zagreb.
The applicant bank was founded on the basis of a “self-management agreement” (samoupravni sporazum, hereafter “the founding agreement”) concluded on 8 July 1986 between several companies (at the time called “organisations of associated labour”). One of the parties to the agreement, company Textil, contributed, as a founder, some eleven billion Yugoslav dinars (hereafter “the establishment sum”).
It appears that on 24 June 1992 Textil notified the applicant bank of the termination of the above agreement and requested repayment of the establishment sum. As the applicant bank refused to repay, in 1992 Textil brought a civil action in the  (Trgovački sud u Zagrebu) seeking the refund, plus statutory default interest (zakonska zatezna kamata). The applicant bank replied that during its transformation into a joint stock company in November 1989 it had made the plaintiff its shareholder and assigned to it a certain number of shares corresponding to the establishment sum.
On 7 June 1995 the court delivered a judgment (hereafter “the original judgment”), ruling for the plaintiff. It ordered the applicant bank to pay the plaintiff the principal amount of 1,100 Croatian kunas (HRK) plus statutory default interest. The operative part of that judgment read as follows:
“I. The defendant ZAGREBAČKA BANKA d.d., Zagreb, Paromlinska 2, is ordered to pay the plaintiff TEXTIL import-export d.d. from Zagreb, Šoštarićeva 10, the amount of HRK 1,100 plus statutory default interest in accordance with the applicable regulations stipulating the interest rate and the Interest Rate Act, accruable from 15 September 1986 until the date of payment, as well as the costs of the proceedings in the amount of HRK 900, all within eight days.
The alternative claim, for 12,272 shares with the pertaining outstanding dividends, is dismissed.”
The court held that the applicant bank had not been entitled to transform the funds received into shares without Textil’s consent. Thus, Textil had been entitled to terminate the 1986 agreement and request repayment. The applicant bank appealed.
On 31 October 1995 the  (Visoki trgovački sud Republike Hrvatske) dismissed the appeal and upheld the first-instance judgment, endorsing the reasons given therein. The original judgment thus became final.
It appears that the applicant bank did not attempt to lodge an appeal on points of law (revizija) with the Supreme Court against the second-instance judgment, nor did it lodge a constitutional complaint with the .
On 5 January 2000 the applicant bank filed a petition for reopening of the proceedings with the , seeking to have the above first- and second-instance judgments set aside. It argued that Textil had already ceased to exist as a legal entity by 15 March 1994, and therefore after that date did not have standing to sue in the above civil proceedings. In its petition the applicant bank relied on the extract from the register of commercial companies (sudski registar) of 6 December 1999 according to which Textil had been deleted from that register on 15 March 1994 following its incorporation into company Turist Trip d.o.o.
On 13 April 2004 the  allowed the applicant bank’s petition and set aside its judgment of 7 June 1995 and the judgment of the High Commercial Court of 31 October 1995.
Following an appeal by the plaintiff, on 22 October 2004 the  quashed the first-instance decision and remitted the case.
In the resumed proceedings, on 8 February 2006 the  declared the applicant bank’s petition for reopening inadmissible as belated. In particular, the court established that the applicant bank had already become aware of the facts on which it had based its petition for reopening by 23 December 1998, whereas it had filed that petition on 5 January 2000, that is, outside the statutory time-limit of thirty days. In the absence of appeals that decision became final on 27 February 2006.
Meanwhile, on 18 December 1995 Textil, as the original judgment’s creditor, concluded an assignment contract (ugovor o cesiji) by which it assigned its claim against the applicant bank to company Texhol d.o.o. The signatures of the directors of the two companies on the assignment contract were certified by a notary public. The majority stockholder of Textil and the sole shareholder of Texhol (as well as of Turist Trip) was a certain Mr A.K.
The applicant bank disputed the validity of that assignment contract, claiming that on 15 March 1994 Textil had ceased to exist as a legal entity following its incorporation into Turist Trip company (see paragraph 14 above). On 4 May 1998 it instituted separate civil proceedings for that contract to be declared non-existent, and eventually, on 16 October 2007, obtained a final judgment in its favour (see paragraphs 88-94 below).
In the meantime, on 15 January 1996 Texhol applied to the Zagreb Commercial Court for enforcement of the original judgment.
On 26 January 1996 that court issued a writ of execution (rješenje o izvršenju). It ordered the financial institution operating the applicant bank’s account, which was at the time the Domestic Payment Transfer Agency (Zavod za platni promet subsequently renamed Financijska agencija – hereafter “ZAP” or “FINA”), to collect the amount corresponding to the judgment debt and transfer it to Texhol’s account. The writ read as follows:
“I. The debtor is ordered to pay the creditor’s claim in the amount of HRK 1,100 plus statutory default interest in accordance with the applicable regulations stipulating the interest rate and the Interest Rate Act, accruable from 15 September 1986 until the date of payment, as well as the costs of the [civil] proceedings in the amount of HRK 900.
The debtor is ordered to reimburse the creditor the costs of these [enforcement] proceedings, as well as to pay statutory default interest on the amount of those costs accruable from the date of the issuance of the writ of execution until satisfaction of the creditor following the service of the writ.
In order to satisfy the creditor’s claim referred to under paragraph I. of this writ of execution
t h e e n f o r c e m e n t i s a l l o w e d
to the debit of the account of the debtor ZAGREBAČKA BANKA d.d. held with ZAP , giro account no. [...], and to the credit of the creditor TEXHOL, giro account no. [...] held [also] with ZAP , and in accordance with the assignment agreement between TEXTIL import-export d.d. and TEXHOL d.o.o. of 18 December 1995.
ZAP is ordered to carry out this writ by transferring the funds from the debtor’s giro account no. [...] with ZAP Zagreb to the creditor’s giro account no. [...] with ZAP Zagreb.
Should there be no funds in the debtor’s giro account, ZAP shall freeze the account and effect the payment as soon as funds are available.”
On 31 January 1996 the applicant bank objected (prigovor) to the writ. In its objection the applicant bank disputed the validity of the assignment contract between Textil and Texhol of 18 December 1995, claiming that on 15 March 1994 Textil had ceased to exist as a legal entity following its incorporation into company Turist Trip d.o.o. (see paragraph 19 above). As the writ of execution was not based solely on the original judgment as the enforcement title (izvršna isprava), but also on the assignment contract designated as the supplementary enforcement title (dopunska izvršna isprava), the applicant bank argued that Texhol was not entitled to seek enforcement of the original judgment.
On 8 February 1996 the  dismissed the applicant bank’s objection. Relying on section 22(1) of the Enforcement Proceedings Act, the court held that because the assignment contract had been certified by a notary public the applicant bank’s argument that the judgment debt had not been validly transferred to Texhol could not be accepted until proven otherwise by a final court judgment (see paragraph 146 below). The applicant bank appealed against that decision.
On 12 March 1996 the  dismissed the applicant bank’s appeal and upheld the first-instance decision, endorsing the reasons given therein.
The calculation of statutory default interest on the principal amount of HRK 1,100 made by ZAP in the execution of the writ gave a total amount of HRK 5,416,078.56. On 12 February 1996 ZAP seized that amount from the applicant bank’s account and transferred it to Texhol’s account.
On an unspecified date in February 1996 Texhol’s advocate wrote to ZAP complaining that the interest for the period between 9 December 1988 and 6 October 1989 had been calculated incorrectly because the “revaluation interest” had not been taken into consideration.
In its reply of 26 February 1996 ZAP responded that the interest had been calculated correctly. It explained:
“In your complaint you requested the application of another type of interest, namely revaluation interest, the rate of which is different from statutory interest, and which was not expressly stipulated in the writ of execution, so we cannot calculate it.”
On 6 March 1996 Texhol applied to the , asking it to continue the enforcement because ZAP had miscalculated the amount of statutory default interest due. Texhol argued that ZAP had used the simple instead of the compound method and that it had not taken “revaluation interest” into account.
On 9 June 1997 the court issued a decision ruling for Texhol. It ordered ZAP to recalculate the statutory default interest by taking revaluation interest into consideration and by using the compound method, and thereafter to satisfy the remainder of Texhol’s claim. The applicant bank appealed, arguing that it had not been informed of Texhol’s application to continue the enforcement nor of the resultant decision of the .
On 23 December 1997 a panel of the , composed of judges Z.J., R.S. and L.Ć., dismissed the appeal and upheld the first-instance decision. On 9 March 1998 the State Attorney lodged a request for protection of legality (zahtjev za zaštitu zakonitosti) to the Supreme Court against the second-instance decision.
On 9 September 1998 the Supreme Court allowed the request, quashed the lower courts’ decisions for procedural errors, and remitted the case to the first-instance court. It held that the principle of adversarial hearing had been breached because the applicant bank had not been given the opportunity to comment on Texhol’s application to continue the enforcement. It also instructed the lower courts to establish the type of statutory default interest (depending whether the founding agreement constituted a contract of a commercial or non-commercial nature) as well as its rate and method of calculation (simple or compound) in the resumed proceedings. The relevant part of that decision read as follows:
“The enforcement court should have decided on the amount of interest claimed, that is, on the type of the statutory default interest, the rate and the method of calculation of the statutory default interest.
...
Texhol do.o. is entitled to conduct the enforcement proceedings, which follows from the enclosed written assignment contract in which the signatures of the parties were certified by a notary public. [T]that document is a document certified in accordance with the law within the meaning of section 22 of the Enforcement Procedure Act, which entitles the assignee to [act as an enforcement creditor in] the enforcement proceedings ...
Until the entry into force of the [1989] Amendments to the Obligations Act, which entered into force on 7 October 1989, the default interest rate accruable on claims arising from the [legal] relationships between persons performing an economic activity was prescribed by decisions on the statutory default interest rate, pursuant to section 277(2) of the Obligations Act, whereas the [statutory default] interest rate on other claims for payment of a sum of money was determined by inter-bank self-management agreements, pursuant to section 277(1) of the Obligations Act.
In the resumed proceedings it is necessary for the court to decide on the type of default interest up to 7 October 1989, taking into account the [legal] relationship between the parties, because the type of statutory default interest was not specified in the enforcement proceedings, then on the rate of the statutory default interest from 15 September 1986 onwards, as well as on the method of calculation of the default interest.”
On 28 September 1999 Texhol d.o.o. was renamed Retag d.o.o.
In the resumed proceedings, on 5 November 1999 the  decided to obtain the opinion of a financial expert, and on 12 November 1999 instructed the expert to calculate the statutory default interest, bearing in mind that, in the court’s view, the founding agreement was to be qualified as commercial.
On 11 January 2000 the court delivered a decision ordering ZAP to transfer from the applicant bank’s account the remaining amount of the creditor’s claim of HRK 263,077,597.48 plus statutory default interest accruable from 24 November 1999 until payment. The court dismissed the applicant bank’s arguments that the creditor’s claim had already been satisfied in full on 12 February 1996 and that the assignment contract of 18 December 1995 was not valid.
On 14 February 2000 the applicant bank appealed against that decision to the , at the same time asking for the enforcement to be postponed. Three days later the applicant bank submitted a motion for judges Z.J., R.S. and L.Ć. to withdraw, because they had sat in the panel of that court which, on 23 December 1997, had dismissed its previous appeal (see paragraph 30 above). It also requested withdrawal of the High Commercial Court’s president N.Š. On 19 April 2000 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant bank’s motion for withdrawal of the High Commercial Court’s president, N.Š., whereupon, on 2 May 2000, he dismissed the motion for withdrawal of judges Z.J., R.S. and L.Ć.
In addition, on 6 March 2000 the applicant bank lodged a constitutional complaint against the first-instance decision of 11 January 2000, at the same time asking the  to issue an interim measure that would postpone the enforcement.
On 3 March 2000 the Commercial Court allowed the applicant bank’s motion and postponed the enforcement. However, on 16 May 2000 a panel of the High Commercial Court, composed of judges Z.J., N.Š. and R.S., allowed Retag’s appeal and reversed the first-instance decision by dismissing the applicant bank’s motion for postponement.
On the same day the same panel of the High Commercial Court also dismissed the applicant bank’s appeal against the Commercial Court’s decision of 11 January 2000 (see paragraphs 34-35 above).
On 23 May 2000 the applicant bank lodged a constitutional complaint against that second-instance decision, alleging violations of its constitutional rights to appeal, fair hearing, equality before the law and of ownership.
On the same day the Constitutional Court allowed the motion for an interim measure submitted on 6 March 2000 and postponed the enforcement until it had decided on the applicant bank’s constitutional complaint of 23 May 2000.
On 13 December 2000 the Constitutional Court allowed that constitutional complaint and quashed the decision of the Zagreb Commercial Court of 11 January 2000 (see paragraph 34 above) and the decision of the High Commercial Court of 16 May 2000 (see paragraph 38 above). It found violations of the applicant bank’s constitutional rights to appeal, fair hearing and equality before the law, but not of its constitutional right of ownership. The case was remitted to the  for the second time.
Continuation of the enforcement: third attempt
In the resumed proceedings, on 10 July 2003 the  issued an instruction (zaključak) inviting the parties to lodge written submissions. By another instruction, of 1 September 2003, the court forwarded Retag’s submissions of 23 July 2003 to the applicant bank and scheduled a hearing for 23 September 2003. The applicant bank submitted that these instructions were never served on it and that consequently neither of its two representatives in the proceedings (a corporate lawyer and an advocate) attended the hearing.
The hearing was nevertheless held as scheduled, in their absence. The judge appointed to hear the case noted in the record of the hearing that receipt of the letter containing summons for the applicant bank’s corporate lawyer I.T. had not been acknowledged, whereas the same letter sent to the applicant bank’s advocate D.J. had been returned with an “out of office” stamp. The judge also recorded in the record that the day before the hearing he had telephoned the advocate’s office and left a message with an employee that the hearing was scheduled for the following day.
On 3 October 2003 the  issued a decision, the relevant part of which read as follows:
“III. On the basis of a ... decision of this court. ... of 26 January 1996 ... the Croatian National Bank is ordered to calculate the creditor’s claim in the amount of HRK 1,100, together with the following interest:
- for the period from 15 September 1986 to 6 October 1989, interest at the rate [usually] paid at the place of performance on time savings deposits with no established purpose and with a term longer than one year, pursuant to section 277(1) of the Obligations Act;
When calculating the interest the Croatian National Bank is required to deduct from the sum arrived at on 12 February 1996 the amount of HRK 5,416,078 ...
The remaining amount shall be seized by the Croatian National Bank without delay from the debtor’s account no. [...], held with the Croatian National Bank, and paid into the account of the creditor no. [...], held with Karlovačka banka d.d., and shall inform the court thereof.”
In deciding the above the court took into consideration the creditor’s written pleadings of 25 July 2003, as well as the written pleadings of the applicant bank of 26 September 2003. It stressed that the issue of which interest rate was to be applied was of a legal rather than a technical nature. It qualified the founding agreement as a non-commercial contract, thereby effectively sidestepping the contestation as to the applicability of “revaluation interest” (see paragraphs 26-29 above), because that interest could only potentially be applied to claims arising out of commercial contracts. However, the court did not indicate the exact rate to be applied, but merely stated that it was the “interest at the rate paid at the place of performance on time savings deposits with no established purpose and with a term longer than one year” (kamatu po stopi koja se u mjestu ispunjenja plaća na štedne uloge oročene bez utvrđene namjene preko godinu dana). Nor did the court indicate the method of calculation of statutory default interest (simple or compound). Nonetheless, the court stated that in the period between 15 September 1986 and 6 October 1989 the statutory default interest rate stipulated in section 277(1) of the 1978 Obligations Act as in force at that period (see paragraph 126 below) had been calculated pursuant to the Inter-Bank Interest Rate Policy Self-Management Agreement (see paragraphs 133-137 below).
On 14 October 2003 the applicant bank appealed to the  against that decision, asking at the same time for its execution to be postponed. In requesting postponement of enforcement the applicant bank argued that Retag’s claim against it had been extinguished by offsetting (prijeboj) the applicant bank’s claim against Textil for payment of HRK 14,921,617.82, together with interest on that amount calculated from 1 March 1993. It explained that over a number of years it had lent substantial sums of money to Textil, which had later been unable to repay those loans. Given that Textil had been incorporated into Turist Trip company on 15 March 1994, and that it had, on 18 December 1995, assigned the claim against the applicant bank to Texhol (later named Retag), the applicant bank had been entitled to offset its claim against Textil with Retag’s claim against the applicant bank, pursuant to section 440(2) of the 1978 Obligations Act, which entitled the debtor in the event of assignment to offset its debt against a claim existing at the time of assignment against either the assignor or the assignee (see paragraph 130 below). The applicant bank also requested that judges R.S., Z.J. and L.Ć., as well as the President of the , N.Š., withdraw. In so doing the applicant bank merely stated that those judges had previously been involved in decision-making in the case, and that it had lodged several criminal complaints against them, which had not been decided on to that date. For that reason the applicant bank argued that it had cause to doubt their impartiality.
Retag, for its part, also appealed against the first-instance decision of 3 October 2003, insisting on the application of “revaluation interest” and the compound method.
On 13 October 2003 the applicant bank also lodged, and on 14 and 29 October 2003 supplemented, a constitutional complaint against the first-instance decision, asking at the same time for postponement of enforcement.
On 27 October 2003 the Zagreb Commercial Court dismissed the applicant bank’s motion of 14 October 2003 for postponement of enforcement (see paragraph 46 above). At the same time the court also instructed the applicant bank to institute separate civil proceedings for the enforcement to be declared inadmissible (parnica za proglašenje ovrhe nedopuštenom), given that in its appeal of the same date the applicant bank argued, inter alia, that the continuation of enforcement of the original judgment was inadmissible because Retag’s claim against it had been extinguished by the offset of its claim against Retag. The applicant bank instituted those proceedings on 11 November 2003 (see paragraphs 113-116 below). The relevant part of that decision reads as follows:
“The motion for postponement of enforcement is based on the [enforcement] debtor’s argument that the [enforcement] creditor’s claim was extinguished by an offset, which does not constitute a ground for postponing the enforcement.
Moreover, the [enforcement] debtor’s mere contention that it has a larger claim against the [enforcement] creditor does not constitute significant damage, as has been established by the case-law of the [domestic] courts.
Apart from the fact that the [enforcement] creditor’s claim is based on an enforcement title, whereas the [enforcement] debtor does not possess any decision in its favour, it has to be noted that the [enforcement] debtor could have relied on such a defence earlier, during the [principal] civil proceedings.
In this court’s view, no one should benefit from evident abuse of process during proceedings. Therefore, the motion for postponement of enforcement must be dismissed.”
On 8 December 2003 the President of the Commercial Court declared the applicant bank’s motion for withdrawal of judges N.Š., R.S., Z.J. and L.Ć. of 14 October 2003 inadmissible (see paragraph 46 above). In so doing she relied on section 73 of the Civil Procedure Act (according to which once a court has decided on a motion for withdrawal, any subsequent motions for withdrawal of the same judges in the same proceedings are to be declared inadmissible, see paragraph 145 below), and the fact that earlier in the same proceedings, on 19 April 2000, the Supreme Court had already dismissed a motion for withdrawal of Judge N.Š, and on 2 May 2000 the High Commercial Court had dismissed a motion for withdrawal of judges R.S., Z.J. and L.Ć (see paragraph 35 above).
On 6 April 2004 the , sitting in a panel composed of judges Z.M., R.S. and K.M., dismissed appeals against the first-instance decision of 3 October 2003, endorsing the reasons given therein. It also dismissed the applicant bank’s appeal against the first-instance decision of 27 October 2003 refusing its motion for postponement of enforcement. It held as follows:
“As a ground for postponement of enforcement the [enforcement] debtor states that it intends to lodge an appeal. However, no valid grounds for postponement of enforcement are discernible from the appeal ...
As regards the argument in the appeal concerning the lack of capacity to act as the [enforcement] creditor, the court finds that [Retag] is entitled to act in that capacity on the basis of the assignment contract [of 18 December 1995] until proven otherwise by a final judgment. ... [T]he case file contains a written assignment contract with the parties’ signatures, certified by a notary public. [T]hat document is a deed certified in accordance with the law within the meaning of section 22 of the Enforcement Procedure Act, which entitles the assignee to act [as the enforcement creditor] in the enforcement proceedings. [Since] enforcement proceedings are strictly formal, this court has full confidence in the certified notarial deed ...
It has to be noted that the first-instance court correctly found that the enforcement debtor had received from the enforcement creditor’s predecessor a sum which represented the equivalent of 56 million German marks, had used it from 1986 until the present day, and had refused to return it despite the final court judgments. Furthermore, the enforcement debtor claims that the payment of HRK 5,416,078, which represents about 3% of the value of the principal debt on the day the debt became due, had settled the debt in full.
During these enforcement proceedings seven first-instance decisions were rendered postponing enforcement in this case, as well as eleven decisions on motions for withdrawal of certain judges of the Commercial Court, the High Commercial Court and the Supreme Court.
The case file contains six decisions of the High Commercial Court, two decisions of the Supreme Court [and] two decisions of the Constitutional Court, neither of which concerns motions for withdrawal of judges. Despite all this the enforcement creditor has not managed to satisfy its claim [endorsed by a final court judgment].
It follows from all of the above that the enforcement debtor’s appeal is ill-founded and thus must be dismissed ...”
On 2 June 2004 the applicant bank lodged a constitutional complaint against that decision, alleging violations of its constitutional rights to appeal, fair hearing and equality before the law.
In addition, on 14 June 2004 the State Attorney lodged a request for protection of legality against the same decision.
On 4 October 2004 the  declared the State Attorney’s request inadmissible, finding that such a remedy no longer existed under the relevant legislation. On 18 January 2005 the  dismissed an appeal by the State Attorney and upheld the first-instance decision.
On 7 July 2005 the  declared the applicant bank’s constitutional complaint inadmissible, finding that the decision complained of was unrelated to the merits of the case.
Meanwhile, on 14 October 2003 the Croatian National Bank wrote to the Commercial Court explaining that it was unable to calculate the statutory default interest as indicated in that court’s decision of 3 October 2003 (see paragraphs 44-45 above) because it did not have the necessary information about interest rates on time savings deposits or the text of the Inter-Bank Interest Rate Policy Self-Management Agreement referred to in that decision. However, it had asked several banks to provide that information and notified the court that it would proceed with the execution of the court’s decision as soon as it had received the necessary data. The applicant bank submits that that letter was never served on it.
On 16 and 20 October 2003 Retag asked the  to expedite the proceedings and informed it that the Croatian National Bank had not yet transferred the funds from the applicant bank’s account.
On an unspecified date in October 2003 the judge of the Commercial Court appointed to hear the case wrote to ZAP (which had in the meantime been renamed the Financial Agency, or FINA) informing it of the Croatian National Bank’s inability to calculate the statutory default interest owing to the lack of necessary information concerning interest rates on time savings deposits. It requested FINA to provide that information and to calculate the statutory default interest as indicated in the Commercial Court’s decision of 3 October 2003.
On 27 October 2003 FINA made the calculation as requested and forwarded it to the . The calculation suggests that the simple interest method was used to calculate the statutory default interest in the period between 10 August 1986 and 31 December 1987, whereas the compound interest method was used in the period between 1 January 1988 and 27 October 2003. The amount was therefore determined at HRK 165,167,676.75.
The applicant bank submits that neither the Commercial Court’s request nor FINA’s calculation were ever served on it.
On 28 October 2003 the Commercial Court issued an instruction to the Croatian National Bank to transfer, pursuant to FINA’s calculation, the amount of HRK 165,167,676.75 from the applicant bank’s account to Retag’s account. The instruction was served on the applicant bank on 24 November 2003.
On 22 December 2003 the Croatian National Bank transferred the sum of HRK 168,618,419.60 pursuant to the instruction (the difference between the sum indicated in the instruction of 28 October 2003 and the sum transferred on 22 December 2003 is due to the accrued statutory default interest in the period between the date the instruction was issued and the date the sum was transferred).
On 2 December 2003 the applicant bank appealed against the instruction of 28 October 2003 to the High Commercial Court notwithstanding the fact that no appeal was available against such a decision under Croatian law (see section 8(7) of the 1978 Enforcement Procedure Act in paragraph 146 below). It appears that no formal decision (to declare it inadmissible) has ever been taken on that appeal. At the same time it again asked for postponement of enforcement and withdrawal of judges N.Š., R.S., Z.J. and L.Ć.
On 24 November 2003 the applicant bank also lodged, and on 2 and 18 December 2003 supplemented, a constitutional complaint against the instruction, asking at the same time for its enforcement to be postponed. On 14 April 2004 the Constitutional Court declared that complaint inadmissible, holding that the contested decision was unrelated to the merits of the case.
On 28 August 2008 the Zagreb Commercial Court issued a decision to discontinue the enforcement proceedings, given that the enforcement was completed and that Retag as the enforcement creditor had on 12 December 2007 ceased to exist as a legal entity (see paragraph 87 below).
Following an appeal by “the bankruptcy estate of Retag” (see paragraphs 87 and 155-156 below), on 14 October 2008 the High Commercial Court quashed the first-instance decision and instructed the lower court to stay the enforcement proceedings pursuant to section 212(4) of the Civil Procedure Act (see paragraph 145 below).
Meanwhile, on 6 November 2003 N.Š., a High Commercial Court, judge and its president in the period between 6 March 1995 and 6 March 2002, had been quoted in a newspaper article published by the daily Novi list in which he had made certain comments that, in the applicant bank’s view, were injudicious and hostile. The article, featuring a photo of Judge N.Š. and entitled ‘[N.Š]: ZABA has to pay at least 28 million euros pursuant to the writ of execution’, the relevant part of which read as follows:
 “‘The principal debt of 56 million German marks (28 million euros) is indisputable – the question is only how the interest should be calculated’, explains the former President and now judge of the High Commercial Court of the Republic of Croatia [N.Š.], against whom Zagrebačka banka has already brought criminal charges in 2001 in which it attempted to prove that [he] had abused his judicial authority in a case that may bring the bank to its knees due to enormous default interest accrued as a result of 11 years of court proceedings.
...
[N.Š.] however emphasises that the bank could have pre-empted all of this if it had [re]acted in time: ‘Enforcement has already been ordered three times, and each time the matter has been deliberately blurred by the amounts of principal debt and interest [being incorrect]. As far as I know, [the first-instance judge appointed to hear the case] last ordered the enforcement in the amount of 187 million kunas, whereas FINA calculated an amount several times higher due to the application of what is called the compound method of calculating interest. The bank itself calculates interest for its debtors in the same manner it complains against. I neither know, nor have I seen, let alone am connected to, the people from Textil. I have personally brought charges against an ‘anonymous person’ in Zaba. If the allegations in the criminal complaints [against me] were true, I can assure you that the State Attorney’s Office would have taken action against me’, Š. argues.”
On 24 March 2006 Judge N.Š. participated in the television programme ‘Kontraplan’ broadcast by Croatian Television. The relevant part of that programme was as follows:
“Narrator: Banks are bigger mafia than small and big criminal organisations, said N.Š., judge and former president, after failing to be elected President of the . As well as banks, N.Š. has also assailed the State Attorney’s Office, judges of the Supreme Court and politicians. He has accused J.C. of favouring his son I.C., who after having been an advocate of Zagrebačka banka, became the President of the Supreme Court. He has accused S.L. of putting pressure on the Court together with bankers, and B.G. of tearing up a Commercial Court judgment. In addition, N.Š. suspects State Attorney M.B. of keeping judges obedient by not dealing with numerous criminal complaints against them.
M. (host): N.Š.’s frontal attack on the pillars of Croatian banking, as well as the judicial and political system, has raised several important issues. Should one trust [his] thesis that the Croatian economy is a hostage to corrupt lobbies? Are the answers given by those mentioned convincing, and which institutions in  are going to assess them? Are N.Š.’s accusations confirmation to Eurocrats that  really has a corrupt judiciary? Is it all about a play of the untouchables, in which no one is going to face the consequences? Tonight’s guest on ‘Kontraplan’ is: Judge N.Š., who is in his office in the . Good evening, Mr Š.
...
M.: Most of the public has perceived N.Š.’s reactions and accusations as revenge for not being elected President of the . One of those mentioned, a former president of the , who has been accused by N.Š. of favouring one party in the case of Zagrebačka banka versus Retag, shares this opinion.
C. (former  President): Everything said about Zagrebačka banka is totally untrue. I had a rule, and this was also a rule at the , under which we always removed ourselves from every case in which a relative or someone else [connected with us] appeared in any role, such as that of an advocate. For example, my son was also a judge in the Supreme Court. Nevertheless these rulings also came to us and we always and in each case of this kind removed ourselves. No offence, but I think this is just dirt and one can only be disgusted by it. One can see this only as the cry of a desperate man who has failed in something, for example, here in becoming the President of the , and who thinks he can entangle people and involve them among those he has probably worked with.
M.: Mr Š., why does everybody, or most of the people, especially those who have been invited here, see your acts, that is your attacks, as the act of a desperate man who has lost all chance of getting a better position in the judiciary?
Š. (judge of the ): Well, I would not look at it in that way.
M.: I understand that.
Š.: Right at the beginning I would like to say that I was trying to talk about these issues while I was the president of the Court, however ...
...
M.: I am sorry but what did you say? What did you try to draw attention to in these public appearances?
Š. : I was trying to draw attention to the fact, and that was my point all along, that there is no independent judiciary, that the executive authority influenced it strongly; different lobbies influenced the operation of the courts. It was pretty obvious. I have written about it even today.
...
M.: ... I would like to go back now to the main case, for which Mr N.Š. has also been attacked very often, and that is the Retag versus Zagrebačka banka case or the 169,000,000 kunas enforcement. In tomorrow’s Večernji list, Mr N.Š., with reference to you, the newspaper claims that father and son [J. and I.] C. saved Zagrebačka banka from enforcement in the Retag case in one day. Allegedly, it happened on 23 May 2000 ... Why did you find this case interesting? Was it, perhaps, evidence of an efficient judiciary and a good advocate?
Š.: Well, a good advocate was also important, but the problem was the fact that Zagrebačka banka lost this case. It lost it at all levels, not only at the , but also at the Supreme Court. Therefore, it [i.e. the bank] had to execute it [i.e. the judgment]. However, [the director of Zagrebačka banka] Mr P.L. and Zagrebačka banka [itself] did not want that. Enforcement commenced which lasted about eleven years; it was the longest enforcement in our history. At the same time, Zagrebačka banka did not want to abide by the decision in any way and tried not to do so, which was its legal right, but ...
...
Š.: ...You see, Zagrebačka banka, for example, has calculated such interests to its depositors, debtors, customers, which it did not want to pay to its creditor. Therefore, two types of criteria [i.e. double standards] were applied here. One type of criteria was used when I was a creditor and the other when it was someone else. In addition to this, I would like to say one more thing.
M.: Of course.
Š.: In addition to this, through fiduciary contracts and security instruments for a debt in the amount of 100 kunas, for example, Zagrebačka banka used to take properties, the value of which was well above this amount. Therefore, we cannot say now that it was impeccable and that it did not take a significant part of the GDP in this way
...
Š.: First of all, ... I would like to say that I have never acted as judge in this case – so that you can get me right. I was only the president of the court and they have attacked me. Zagrebačka banka has attacked me according to the command responsibility, I guess, because I could have, they believe, influenced it.
M.: But, Mr N.Š., I have to interrupt, in tomorrow’s Večernji list you have attacked the relationship between J. and I.C, although, for example, J.C. was no longer at the [] at the time of the one-day postponement of enforcement. He was retired. Therefore, you, too, have to accept some things as a criterion. As the court president you could probably have influenced these things?
Š.: Well, I could [to] some [extent]. For example, as president I could talk to a judge to speed something up or not. You have to know that the whole system of commercial courts is complex, that there are, you know it yourself, many courts. Even I cannot know them all. Therefore, I cannot or could not know what was happening at a particular court. So, when it comes to that, I did get some information that I could not have influenced. When it comes to the relationship between Zagrebačka banka and courts, for example, the best example is the fact that Zagebačka banka has won 85% of its cases ...
...
M.: All right. Mr N.Š., let us go back to the Retag case. You have often been reproached for a connection with B.P., that is, with the man who has been connected with what has been called a ‘big criminal organisation’. What is your relationship with him? Does this have anything to do with the fact that you have awarded enforcement in the amount of 169,000,000 kunas to Retag?
Š.: Well, I have been constantly attacked. Allegedly, I have connections with B.P., then H.P., then ... I have served as a judge for thirty years. For thirty years I have been working in this commercial judiciary sector. I know a great many people. This is how I know B.P. and H.P. I know [the director of Zagrebačka banka] P.L., [the director of Privredna banka] B.P. and so many others, as well. Therefore, these are insinuations used only to exert pressure on the court, so that the court does not issue a ruling in favour of, that is, against ...
...
M.: All right... one more question. In tomorrow’s Večernji list it is stated, Mr N.Š., that you said, if this is true, you can deny it later, that you knew B.P., about whom we have talked, as a nephew of one of the judges of the High Commercial Court. Is this correct?
Š.: Who are you asking [that question]?
M.: You, Mr N.Š. So, is it true that you know B.P. as a nephew of one of the  judges?
Š.: Yes, I do ...
M.: What is the name of the judge?
Š.: Judge M., K.M.
M.: Has he ever decided in any of these court proceedings?
Š.: Never. As far as I know in none of them.”
Meanwhile, on 21 June 2000 the  (Trgovački sud u Karlovcu) decided to open bankruptcy proceedings against Retag. By the same decision the court appointed a bankruptcy administrator and invited Retag’s creditors to report their higher-ranking claims to him within twenty days of publication of the decision to open bankruptcy proceedings in the Official Gazette. The notice was published in the Official Gazette of 7 July 2000.
On 21 July 2000 the applicant bank, as a bankruptcy creditor (stečajni vjerovnik) reported to the bankruptcy administrator the claim against Retag of HRK 11,422,427.08 as a higher-ranking claim, which corresponds to the amount seized from it in the enforcement proceedings on 12 February 1996 (HRK 5,416,078.56) and the statutory default interest accrued on that amount up to the date of the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings (HRK 6,006,348.52).
At the verification hearing (ispitno ročište) held on 30 November 2001 the bankruptcy administrator contested that claim. The court therefore instructed the applicant bank to resume the civil proceedings it had instituted on 4 May 1998, in order to establish whether the claim was well-founded (see paragraphs 19 and 88-94 below).
On 22 February 2004 the bankruptcy administrator prepared the final distribution list (završni diobni popis).
By a decision of 12 March 2004 the bankruptcy judge approved the final distribution and scheduled the final (distribution) hearing (završno ročište) for 15 April 2004. The decision was published in the Official Gazette of 24 March 2004.
On 15 April 2004 the court held the final hearing to review the final distribution list. The applicant bank lodged an objection (prigovor) to the list, stating that unjust enrichment of the bankruptcy estate had occurred in the amount seized from it in the enforcement proceedings on 22 December 2003, and that a number of proceedings to contest the enforcement were still ongoing. The bankruptcy judge dismissed the applicant bank’s objection. However, that decision was subsequently quashed by the  and the case was remitted.
In the resumed proceedings, on 13 September 2004 the bankruptcy judge of the  issued a decision inviting Retag’s creditors to report their lower-ranking claims to the bankruptcy administrator within fifteen days of publication of the decision in the Official Gazette. The decision was published in the Official Gazette of 24 September 2004.
On 19 September 2004 the sole shareholder of Retag (who was also the sole shareholder of Turist Trip and the major stockholder of Textil), Mr A.K., died.
At the verification hearing for the lower-ranking claims held on 29 October 2004 the applicant bank, as a bankruptcy creditor, reported to the bankruptcy administrator two lower-ranking claims against Retag: (1) for payment of HRK 8,156,264.47, which corresponds to the statutory default interest on the amount seized from it in the enforcement proceedings on 12 February 1996, accrued in the period between the date of the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings and the date the claim was reported, and (2) for payment of HRK 610,610, corresponding to the costs of the bankruptcy proceedings incurred by the bank.
By a decision of 23 November 2004 the bankruptcy judge approved the new final distribution list, prepared by the bankruptcy administrator on 22 November 2004, and scheduled the final hearing for 23 December 2004. That decision was published in the Official Gazette of 1 December 2004.
On 22 December 2004 the applicant bank informed the bankruptcy administrator and the bankruptcy judge that it had on the same day brought a civil action for unjust enrichment against Retag in the Karlovac Commercial Court, seeking restitution of the HRK 168,618,419.60 (see paragraph 106 below) which had been seized from it a year ago and transferred to Retag’s account in the enforcement proceedings.
On 23 December 2004 the applicant bank raised an objection to the final distribution list. The applicant bank explained that it had a claim against the bankruptcy debtor for restitution of HRK 168,618,419.60 on account of unjust enrichment and that it had instituted civil proceedings to that end. Given that the seizure of the amount in question had taken place in the enforcement proceedings on 22 December 2003, that is, after the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings against Retag on 21 June 2000, the applicant bank had become a creditor of the bankruptcy estate (vjerovnik stečajne mase). Under the Bankruptcy Act claims of such creditors had precedence over bankruptcy creditors (stečajni vjerovnici), that is, those creditors whose claims against a bankruptcy debtor had arisen before the opening of bankruptcy proceedings. The applicant bank argued that its claim was well-founded because the enforcement proceedings and the resultant seizure of the above sum had been based on the non-existent assignment contract between Textil and Texhol of 18 December 1995, the validity of which was being contested in parallel civil proceedings. That being so, the applicant bank argued that the bankruptcy administrator should have reserved an amount corresponding to its claim, pursuant to section 87a of the Bankruptcy Act (see paragraph 155 below), and deposited it in a special account pending the outcome of the civil proceedings for unjust enrichment instituted on 22 December 2004, which were expected to end in the bank’s favour. Since the bankruptcy administrator had not (and, having been informed of the bank’s claim a month after he had prepared the final distribution list, could not have) done so, the applicant bank invited the bankruptcy judge to set aside the measures taken so far, take steps to protect the bank’s interests as a creditor of the bankruptcy estate, and fix another date for the final hearing.
On 23 December 2004 the bankruptcy judge of the  dismissed the applicant bank’s objection to the final distribution list. The relevant part of that decision reads as follows:
“At the final hearing held on 23 December 2004 the objection to the final [distribution] list was lodged by the creditor Zagrebačka banka d.d.
It was argued in the objection that the final [distribution] list did not take into account other obligations of the bankruptcy estate, which had precedence over the payment of bankruptcy creditors. In particular, that it [i.e. the final distribution list] did not take into account the claim of the creditor of the bankruptcy estate Zagrebačka banka d.d. for restitution of the funds acquired by unjust enrichment in the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60, which had been seized on 22 December 2003 in enforcement proceedings I-40/96 before the . Furthermore, that the decisions of the enforcement court in favour of the bankruptcy debtor were not final, that the creditor Zagrebačka banka d.d. had instituted civil proceedings P-270/03 before this court for declaring the enforcement inadmissible, that the Zagreb Commercial Court, in its decision P-4885/03 of 13 April 2004, had allowed the petition of the Zagrebačka banka d.d for reopening of proceedings, that the creditor of the bankruptcy estate Zagrebačka banka d.d had instituted civil proceedings P֊91/04 before the Karlovac Commercial Court against the bankruptcy debtor with a view to having the [supplementary] enforcement title declared non-existent and to recover what had been received by unjust enrichment. Furthermore, that by final decision Kv-208/04-2 of 22 March 2004 the Zagreb County Court had issued a provisional measure prohibiting payment of the [above] amount to the accused A.K, as the only shareholder of the company Retag d.o.o.
...
By a non-final decision, P-4885/03 of 13 April 2004, the  allowed reopening of the proceedings in that case, set aside [its] judgment P-15652/92 of 7 June 1995 and the judgment of the High Commercial Court of the Republic of Croatia Pž-3060/95 of 31 October 1995, and declared the action inadmissible.
It is correct that the bankruptcy creditor Zagrebačka banka d.d,. on 23 March 2003 brought an action [for unjust enrichment] arguing that unjust enrichment of the bankruptcy estate had occurred, which constituted [an]other obligation of the bankruptcy estate, whereby the plaintiff sought to have declared non-existent and without legal effects the judgment of the Zagreb Commercial Court P-15652/92 of 7 June 1995, as well as the judgment of the High Commercial Court of the Republic of Croatia Pž-3060/95-02 of 31 October 1995, and [asked] the court to order the bankruptcy debtor to pay the plaintiff from the bankruptcy estate the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60, together with the accrued statutory default interest. That action was declared inadmissible by a final decision of this court, P-91/04-7 of 2 April 2004.
In the case before this court, P֊270/03, the plaintiff’s action to have the continuation of enforcement ordered by the decision of the , I-40/96 of 3 October 2003 ... declared inadmissible was dismissed by a non-final judgment of this court of 24 February 2004.
Without calling into question the aforementioned non-final decisions (one of them was rendered in favour and two against the bankruptcy creditor Zagrebačka banka d.d), [the fact remains that] on 22 December 2003 the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60 was transferred into the account of the bankruptcy debtor pursuant to the final writ of execution, I-40/96 of 26 January 1996. The writ of execution was upheld on appeal by a decision of the High Commercial Court of the Republic Croatia, Pž-438/96 of 12 March 1998, and was not quashed or reversed by any subsequent final decision. ...
Taking that fact into account, this bankruptcy court cannot accept as well-founded the claim of the bankruptcy creditor Zagrebačka banka d.d that there had been unjust enrichment of the bankruptcy estate, and that there is [an]other obligation of the bankruptcy estate within the meaning of the fourth sub-paragraph of section 87(1) of the Bankruptcy Act, in the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60. [This is so] because the transfer of funds into the bankruptcy estate occurred on the basis of the aforementioned final writ of execution. The non-final decision I-40/96 of 8 October 2003, [only] specified the statutory default interest applicable in the case, but this does not affect the finality of the writ of execution.
Therefore, the legal basis for enrichment exists as described above. [Thus,] there was no need to reserve funds to meet other obligations of the bankruptcy estate, since under section 87a of the Bankruptcy Act, the funds are to be reserved to meet those obligations which it can legitimately be assumed would have to be settled in the future.
Since in this case it cannot legitimately be assumed that, on the basis of the unjust enrichment of the bankruptcy estate, there are other obligations of the bankruptcy estate, the bankruptcy administrator did not reserve the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60 in the final [distribution] list. [Therefore] the objection of the bankruptcy creditor Zagrebačka banka d.d to the final [distribution] list was dismissed as ill-founded.”
On 23 March 2005 the  dismissed an appeal by the applicant bank and upheld the first-instance decision. The relevant part of that decision reads as follows:
“The bankruptcy judge [of the first-instance court] when examining the [applicant bank’s] argument [raised] in the objection [to the final distribution list] that ... section 87a of the Bankruptcy Act have been breached ... correctly applied provisions of the Bankruptcy Act ...[T]he assessment of ... whether it could legitimately have been assumed that there existed an obligation of the bankruptcy estate on the ground of unjust enrichment to return ... the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60, was carried out on the basis of: the final decision of the Karlovac Commercial Court ... of 2 April 2004 to declare inadmissible the appellant’s action seeking that the bankruptcy debtor pay the plaintiff the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60, the final writ of execution of the Zagreb Commercial Court ... of 26 January 1996 and the [final] decision on the continuation of enforcement of 3 October 2003, ... [The bankruptcy judge of the first-instance court] therefore considered that, notwithstanding the appellant’s action for unjust enrichment brought on 22 December 2004 seeking to recover the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60, which is the amount paid in the enforcement proceedings, it could not legitimately be assumed that there existed ... an obligation of the bankruptcy estate on account of unjust enrichment, and that therefore the bankruptcy administrator had not reserved the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60 in the final [distribution] list. The appellant’s objection was therefore dismissed.
That decision [of the bankruptcy judge of the first-instance court] is ... based on the ... assessment that, having regard to the final court decisions rendered so far and the action brought on 22 December 2004, it could not legitimately be assumed that there existed an obligation of the [bankruptcy] estate on the basis of unjust enrichment to return ... the amount 168,618,419.60, HRK, and that the bankruptcy administrator was [therefore] not obliged to reserve that amount as an obligation which it could legitimately be assumed would have to be settled in the future, in accordance with the ... section 87a of the Bankruptcy Act.
According to the case file and documentation in the file, the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60 was transferred into the account of the bankruptcy debtor on 22 December 2003 on the basis of a final writ of execution of the Zagreb Commercial Court ... of 26 January 1996 and the final decision of 3 October 2003 on the continuation of the [enforcement] proceedings.
According to the case file and the claims of the appellant itself, it follows that the appellant brought its action, to which it refers, on 22 December 2004, which was 21 days after the publication in the Official Gazette on 1 December 2004 [of the notice] that a final hearing was to be held and the notice that according to the final distribution list all bankruptcy creditors were to be paid 100% of the amount of the acknowledged claim[s], after the service of the final list and after displaying the final statement of account in the office of the court on 13 December 2004, only a day before the final hearing. It is unclear how the bankruptcy administrator, in compiling the final [distribution] list ... could have foreseen that the appellant would again bring an action for [unjust enrichment seeking] payment of HRK 168,618,419.60 after the appellant’s [previous] action [for unjust enrichment], seeking .... that the bankruptcy debtor pay the plaintiff the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60 had already been declared inadmissible on 2 April 2004 in the proceedings before the . It is also unclear how, on the basis of this anticipation of a new action, the bankruptcy administrator could have legitimately assumed that the amount of the claim [sought by the action] not yet brought, would have to be settled in the future.
By the action brought on 22 December 2004 [the plaintiff] is again seeking that the amount of HRK 168,618,419.60 be paid on account of unjust enrichment of the bankruptcy estate. From the facts [adduced in support] of] of the claim it does not follow that there is a legitimate assumption that this amount would have to be paid in the future. [Therefore,] the assessment [made] by the bankruptcy judge [of the first-instance court] is correct.”
On 5 January 2005 the bankruptcy administrator reserved the amount of HRK 41,752,238.68 for the applicant bank and deposited it on a special account pending the final outcome of the civil proceedings the applicant bank had instituted on 4 May 1998 (see paragraphs 19 and 88-94 below).
On 18 April 2005 the applicant bank lodged a constitutional complaint against the second-instance decision, asking at the same time for the distribution of the bankruptcy estate to be postponed. The Constitutional Court took no action on the postponement motion but on 7 July 2005 declared the applicant bank’s constitutional complaint inadmissible.
On 15 April and 16 May 2005 the bankruptcy estate was distributed in accordance with the final distribution list. The applicant bank submitted that the creditors had received the total of HRK 4,452,789.64, whereas HRK 120,571,514.44 had been distributed to Retag’s shareholders, that is to three companies set up by Mr A.K.’s statutory heirs (his widow and three children) and the testamentary heir, a Mr B.P. As noted above (see paragraph 83), the sum of HRK 41,752,238.00 was reserved for the claims of the applicant bank. After the judgment of the Karlovac Commercial Court of 5 February 2010 rendered in the civil proceedings seeking declaration of the assignment contract between Textil and Texhol of 18 December 1995 non-existent became final (see paragraphs 93-94 below), the part of that sum, amounting to HRK 14,146,718.27, was on 14 January 2013 transferred to the applicant bank’s account.
On 29 March 2007 the  issued a decision closing the bankruptcy proceedings against Retag.
On 12 December 2007 the  issued a decision deleting Retag from the register of commercial companies. Retag thereby ceased to exist as a legal entity. It however continued to participate in various civil proceedings as “the bankruptcy estate of Retag” represented by its bankruptcy administrator (see paragraphs 155-156 below).
Meanwhile, on 4 May 1998 the applicant bank brought a civil action against Retag in the , seeking to have the assignment contract concluded on 18 December 1995 between Textil and Texhol (see paragraph 18 above) declared non-existent. The applicant bank disputed the existence of that assignment contract, claiming that on 15 March 1994 Textil had ceased to exist as a legal entity following its incorporation into company Turist Trip d.o.o. (see paragraph 19 above).
After the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings against Retag on 21 June 2000 the applicant bank also asked the court to establish that as a bankruptcy creditor it had against the defendant: (1) a well-founded higher-ranking claim for restitution of HRK 11,422,427.08 on account of unjust enrichment, which claim was reported in the above bankruptcy proceedings on 21 July 2001 (see paragraph 70 above), (2) two well-founded lower-ranking claims for payment of HRK 8,156,264.47 and HRK 610,610, reported in the above bankruptcy proceedings on 29 October 2004 (see paragraph 77 above).
On 18 January 2006 the  dismissed the applicant bank’s action in its entirety, finding that at the relevant time Textil did exist as a legal entity.
Following an appeal by the applicant bank, on 16 October 2007 the  reversed the first-instance judgment in part and found for the applicant, declaring the assignment contract of 18 December 1995 between Textil and Texhol non-existent. It found that at the relevant time Textil no longer existed as a legal entity, following its incorporation into company Turist Trip. At the same time the High Commercial Court quashed the first-instance decision in its part dismissing the applicant bank’s ensuing demands regarding validity of its claims reported in the bankruptcy proceedings, and remitted the case in that part.
On 15 July 2008 the Supreme Court declared inadmissible an appeal on points of law lodged against the second-instance decision by “the bankruptcy estate of Retag”.
In the resumed proceedings, by a judgment of 5 February 2010 the  found for the applicant bank in part. That court established that the applicant bank, as a bankruptcy creditor had against “the bankruptcy estate of Retag”: (1) a well-founded higher-ranking claim for recovery of HRK 9,824,115.39 (instead of the HRK 11,422,427.08 sought by the applicant bank) on account of unjust enrichment, (2) two well-founded lower-ranking claims for payment of HRK 3,866,945.08 (instead of HRK 8,156,264.47 sought by the applicant bank) and HRK 455,657.80 (instead of HRK 610,610.00), reported in the above bankruptcy proceedings on 29 October 2004. The claim for recovery of 9,824,115.39 corresponds to the amount seized from the applicant bank in the enforcement proceedings on 12 February 1996 (HRK 5,416,078.56) and the statutory default interest accrued on that amount up to the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings, the claim for payment of HRK 3,866,945.08 corresponds to the statutory default interest on the amount seized from the applicant bank in the enforcement proceedings on 12 February 1996 accrued in the period between the date of the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings and the date the claim, was reported, and HRK 455,657.80 corresponds to the costs of the bankruptcy proceedings incurred by the applicant bank.
Following appeals by both “the bankruptcy estate of Retag” and the applicant bank, on 31 October 2012 the  upheld the first-instance judgment but reduced the amount of costs of the bankruptcy proceedings awarded to the applicant bank to HRK 323.583,73.
On 14 November 2003 the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office (Županijsko državno odvjetništvo u Zagrebu) made a request to an investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) asking him to open an investigation against the majority (51%) shareholder of Textil and the sole shareholder of Retag (earlier Texhol), Mr A.K., on suspicion that he had committed criminal offences of abuse of office defined in Article 337 paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph  158 below).
On 18 November 2003 the investigating judge issued a provisional measure prohibiting the Croatian National Bank and other legal entities performing payment operations from making any payments to Retag, or a third person at Retag’s order, on the basis of the Commercial Court’s decision of 3 October 2003, that court’s instruction of 28 October 2003 or any future decision issued on the basis of the original judgment of 7 June 1995. Retag and A.K. appealed.
On 10 December 2003 a three-member panel of the  allowed the appeals and quashed the decision of the investigating judge of 18 November 2003. It held that it was not plausible that the suspect would dispose of the amount in respect of which the provisional measure had been imposed, because administration of Retag’s assets had since the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings been in the hands of the bankruptcy administrator and not of A.K. as the sole shareholder.
On 19 December 2003 the investigating judge decided to open an investigation in respect of A.K., and thereby commenced criminal proceedings against him. He found that there was a reasonable suspicion that A.K. had committed the above criminal offence by abusing his position as the majority stockholder of Textil and the sole shareholder of Retag, with a view to obtaining an unlawful pecuniary gain in that he had: (1) on 18 December 1995 ordered the directors of those companies to sign a fictitious assignment contract whereby Textil had assigned its claim against the applicant bank on the basis of the original judgment of 7 June 1995 to Retag (at the time named Texhol) even though he had known at that time that the applicant bank had an outstanding claim against Textil in the amount of HRK 196,982.42 together with interest running from 1 May 1992, and that Textil no longer existed as a legal entity, and (2) that he had later on obtained enforcement of the assigned claim in the enforcement proceedings in the total amount of HRK 170,583,755.31 to the benefit of Retag.
The applicant bank participated in these criminal proceedings as an injured party (oštećenik), and lodged a pecuniary claim seeking payment of at least HRK 170,583,755.31.
On 19 September 2004 A.K. died (see paragraph 76 above). Accordingly, the criminal proceedings against him were discontinued.
On 23 March 2004 the applicant bank brought a civil action for unjust enrichment against Retag in the Karlovac Commercial Court seeking: (a) to have declared non-existent and without legal effect the judgment of the Zagreb Commercial Court of 7 June 1995 and the judgment of the High Commercial Court of 31 October 1995, and (b) restitution of the amount seized from it on 22 December 2003.
On 2 April 2004 the  declared the applicant bank’s action inadmissible. It held that a civil action was not a remedy to contest final and valid court judgments, as they could be overturned only following an appeal on points of law or other extraordinary remedies (a petition for reopening, constitutional complaint).
On 10 November 2004 the  dismissed an appeal by the applicant bank and upheld the first-instance decision endorsing the reasons given by the first-instance court.
Following an appeal on points of law by the applicant bank, on 22 September 2010 the Supreme Court quashed the decisions of the lower courts in part and remitted the case to the first-instance court. The Supreme Court upheld the decisions of the lower courts to declare inadmissible the applicant bank’s demand to declare non-existent and without legal effect the judgment of the Zagreb Commercial Court of 7 June 1995 and the judgment of the High Commercial Court of 31 October 1995. At the same time the Supreme Court quashed the lower courts’ judgments, declaring inadmissible the applicant bank’s claim for restitution of the amount seized from it on 22 December 2003.
It would appear that the proceedings, currently pending before the , have been stayed since 2 February 2010, when the same court issued a decision to that effect, because Retag had on 12 December 2007 ceased to exist as a legal entity (see paragraph 87 above). They will remain stayed until the defendant’s legal successor takes over the proceedings or until the court at the initiative of the plaintiff invites the successor to do so (see paragraph 145 below).
On 22 December 2004 the applicant bank brought another action for unjust enrichment against Retag before the  seeking restitution of the amount seized from it on 22 December 2003. In so doing it argued, inter alia, that the assignment contract concluded on 18 December 1995 between Textil and Texhol had not been valid, because at that time Textil had no longer existed as a legal entity. Since that assignment contract had served as the supplementary enforcement title in the enforcement proceedings, the enforcement had been without legal basis. It followed that by receiving HRK 168,618,419.60 in those enforcement proceedings Retag had been enriched without cause (without a valid legal title). The applicant bank also argued that the amount sought also constituted proceeds of a criminal offence.
On 3 April 2007 the  dismissed the applicant bank’s action. It held that the applicant bank could have sought counter-enforcement (protuizvršenje) under section 59(1) of the 1978 Enforcement Procedure Act and thus, pursuant to paragraph 4 of that section, could not have brought an action for unjust enrichment before the expiry of the time-limit set forth in paragraph 3 of the same section (see paragraph 146 below).
The applicant bank appealed.
On 26 March 2008 the  returned the case to the  with an instruction to stay the proceedings because Retag had on 12 December 2007 ceased to exist as a legal entity (see paragraph 87 above).
On 30 June 2008 the  stayed the proceedings.
Following a request by the applicant bank of 30 June 2008 for the bankruptcy administrator to be invited to take over the proceedings, on 1 August 2008 the court did so and the proceedings thereby resumed.
On 24 October 2012 the  allowed an appeal by the applicant bank, quashed the first-instance judgment of 3 April 2007 and remitted the case. It would appear that the proceedings are currently again pending before the .
Meanwhile, on 11 November 2003 the applicant bank brought a civil action against Retag in the Karlovac Commercial Court, seeking that the continuation of enforcement of the original judgment in the enforcement proceedings (see paragraphs 42-66) be declared inadmissible (tužba za proglašenje ovrhe nedopuštenom). It argued that Retag’s claim against it had been extinguished by being offset against the applicant bank’s claim against Textil (see paragraph 46 above).
On 24 February 2004 the  dismissed the applicant bank’s action.
Following an appeal by the applicant bank, on 27 December 2007 the  quashed the first-instance judgment and remitted the case.
It would appear that the proceedings, currently pending before the Karlovac Commercial Court, have been stayed since 14 February 2008 when that court issued a decision to that effect, because Retag had on 12 December 2007 ceased to exist as a legal entity (see paragraph 87 above). They will remain stayed until the defendant’s legal successor takes over the proceedings or until the court at the initiative of the plaintiff invites the successor to do so (see paragraph 145 below).
In the meantime, on 9 February 2000 the applicant bank filed a petition for bankruptcy proceedings to be opened against the Turist Trip company, as the legal successor of Textil, before the .
On 21 June 2000 the  decided to open bankruptcy proceedings against Turist Trip. By the same decision the court appointed a bankruptcy administrator and invited the creditors to report their higher-ranking claims to him within twenty days of the publication of the decision to open bankruptcy proceedings in the Official Gazette. The notice was published in the Official Gazette of 7 July 2000.
The applicant bank, as a bankruptcy creditor, reported to the bankruptcy administrator the claim of HRK 675,367,324.72 (that is, HRK 14,921,617.82 together with the accrued interest from 1 March 1993 until the date of the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings, see paragraph 46 above).
At the verification hearing held on 30 November 2001 the bankruptcy administrator acknowledged the applicant bank’s claim in the amount of HRK 181,187.11, and contested the remaining amount.
On 17 September 2012 the  issued a decision to discontinue the bankruptcy proceedings, as the assets belonging to the bankruptcy estate were insufficient to meet all the estate’s obligations. Following appeals by the applicant bank and the State Attorney’s Office, on 8 January 2013 the  quashed that decision and remitted the case.
The Obligations Act (Zakon o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia nos. 29/78, 39/85 and 57/89, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia nos. 53/91, 73/91, 111/93, 3/94, 7/96, 91/96, 112/99 and 88/01 – “the 1978 Obligations Act”), which was in force between and 1 October 1978 and 31 December 2005, was the legislation governing contracts and torts.
Section 210 was the provision regulating unjust enrichment. It read as follows:
ENRICHMENT WITHOUT CAUSE
General rule
Section 210
“(1) When a part of the property of one person passes, by any means, into the property of another person, and that transfer has no basis in a legal transaction or a statute [that is, it is without cause], the beneficiary shall be bound to return that property. If restitution is not possible, he or she shall be bound to provide compensation for the value of the benefit received.
(2) ...
(3) The obligation to return the property or provide compensation for its value shall arise even when something is received on account of a cause which did not come into existence or which subsequently ceased to exist.”
Section 277 of the 1978 Obligations Act was the provision regulating default interest. It was amended twice.
The original text of section 277(1) and (2), in force in the period between 1 October 1978 and 2 August 1985, read as follows:
“(1) A debtor who fails to perform his or her obligation to pay a sum of money in time owes, in addition to the principal amount, interest at the rate paid at the place of performance on sight savings deposits.
(2) The Federal Government shall prescribe the default interest rate for obligations to pay a sum of money stemming from commercial contracts.”
Section 277 of the 1978 Obligations Act was amended the first time with the entry into force of the 1985 Amendments to the 1978 Obligations Act (Zakon o izmjenama i dopunama Zakona o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 39/85) on 3 August 1985. According to those amendments, which brought changes only to paragraph 1 of that section while paragraph 2 remained unaltered, the default interest rate for obligations to pay a sum of money stemming from non-commercial contracts was no longer linked to the sight savings deposits rate but the rate on time savings deposits with no established purpose and with a term longer than one year. In the period between 3 August 1985 and 6 October 1989 section 277 paragraph 1 of the 1978 Obligations Act read as follows:
“A debtor who fails to perform his or her obligation to pay a sum of money in time owes, in addition to the principal amount, interest at the rate paid at the place of performance on time savings deposits with no established purpose and with a term longer than one year.”
Section 277 of the 1978 Obligations Act was amended for the second time with the entry into force of the 1989 Amendments to the 1978 Obligations Act (Zakon o izmjenama Zakona o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 57/89) on 7 October 1989. Those amendments repealed paragraph 2 of that section and altered its paragraph 1 to provide that the default interest rate was to be determined by special legislation. In the period between 7 October 1989 and 31 December 2005 section 277 paragraph 1 of the 1978 Obligations Act read as follows:
“A debtor who fails to perform his or her obligation to pay a sum of money in time owes, in addition to the principal amount, interest at the rate prescribed by law.”
Section 278 of the 1978 Obligations Act read as follows:
Interest on interest
Section 279(1) and (2)
“(1)  Unless the law provides otherwise, default interest does not run [i.e. is not payable] on the unpaid accrued contractual or statutory default interest ...
(2)  Default interest on unpaid interest may be sought only from the moment the claim for its payment has been lodged with the court.”
Sections 360-393 of the 1978 Obligations Act regulated statutory limitation periods (zastara). The relevant provisions of that part of the 1978 Obligations Act read as follows:
Section 376
“(1)  A claim for damages shall become time-barred three years after the injured party learned of the damage and the identity of the person who caused it.
(2)  In any event that claim shall become time-barred five years after the damage occurred.
...”
Section 377
“(1)  Where the damage was caused by a criminal offence and the statutory limitation period for criminal prosecution is longer, the claim for damages against the person responsible becomes time-barred at the same time as the criminal prosecution.
(2)  The interruption of the statutory limitation period in respect of criminal prosecution entails the interruption of the statutory limitation period in respect of a claim for damages.
...”
...
Section 388
“[Running of] the statutory limitation period shall be interrupted by bringing of a civil action or by taking any other legal action by a creditor against a debtor before a court or other competent authority, with a view to determining, securing or enforcing the claim.”
Section 392
“...
(3)  Where the statutory limitation period has been interrupted by bringing of a civil action or other remedy ... it shall start to run again after the termination of the proceedings.
...”
Sections 436-445 of the 1978 Obligations Act regulated assignment of a claim by an agreement. In particular, section 440 read as follows:
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE ASSIGNEE AND THE DEBTOR
Section 440
“(1)  The assignee shall have all the rights the assignor had against the debtor up to the assignment.
(2)  The debtor may raise against the assignee, apart from any objections it may have against him or her, those objections he or she [i.e. the debtor] could have raised against the assignor up to the moment he or she [i.e. the debtor] learned of the assignment.”
The stance of the domestic courts as regards the specification (of the method and rate) of the statutory default interest rate is best expressed in the decision of the  (Županijski sud u Varaždinu) no. Gž-787/04-2 of 14 May 2004 (published on 2 January 2006 in the Supreme Court’s publication “Izbor odluka Vrhovnog suda Republike Hrvatske” [Selection of decisions of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Croatia], no. 1/2005.), where that court, in enforcement proceedings, dismissed an appeal lodged by the debtor and upheld the writ of execution issued by the first-instance court. In her appeal the debtor argued in particular that the first-instance court had not in its writ of execution specified the method of calculation of the statutory default interest. The relevant part of that decision read as follows:
“The debtor [the appellant] wrongly considers that the court has to specify the method of calculation of the statutory default interest in the writ of execution.
Rules on [statutory] default interest, provided in the Default Interest Act and the Default Interest Rate Regulation, are mandatory rules [jus cogens]. Thus, neither the court nor the parties are entitled to specify the method of calculation of the statutory default interest rate given that ... the payment of the default interest may be made only at the rate established by law.
The debtor is therefore to be informed that the calculation of the [statutory] default interest is provided in section 3 of the Default Interest Act, for which reason the first-instance court does not have to specify the calculation of the [statutory] default interest, as the debtor wrongly argues in [her] appeal.
...
Given that the statutory default interest [due] on the principal debt runs from the moment it [i.e. the principal debt] becomes due until payment, the first-instance court could not have made any calculation of the [statutory default] interest when issuing the writ of execution. For that reason, the first-instance court correctly ordered the legal entity performing payment operations [FINA] to transfer to the creditor the sum in respect of which the enforcement was ordered.
If FINA has, on the basis of the writ of execution, transferred a higher sum than the one specified in the writ of execution, as the debtor claims, because it misapplied the provisions of the Default Interest Act, the debtor shall have a claim for unjust enrichment against the creditor, and the legal entity who carried out the enforcement may be liable in damages if it is [subsequently] established that the creditor cannot return what was received contrary to the writ of execution or the mandatory rules of the Default Interest Act.”
The statutory default interest rate provided by section 277(1) of the 1978 Obligations Act, which was in force in the period between 3 August 1985 and 6 October 1989 (see paragraph 126 above) linked to the “rate paid at the place of performance on time savings deposits with no established purpose and with a term longer than one year”, was in that period in practice further specified, as regards interest rates, by reference to the Inter-Bank Interest Rate Self-Management Agreement (see paragraphs 133-137 below) of 18 June 1986 (amended on 8 October 1986) concluded under the auspices of the Association of Banks of Yugoslavia (Udruženje banaka Jugoslavije). For example, in judgment Rev 758-1990-2 of 24 May 1990 the Supreme Court held as follows:
“According to the amended provision of section 277(1) of the Obligations Act (Official Gazette of the SFRY nos. 39 and 46/85) which is relevant in this case, a debtor who fails to perform his or her obligation to pay a sum of money in time owes, in addition to the principal amount, interest at the rate paid at the place of performance on time savings deposits with no established purpose and with a term longer than one year. That means that after the conclusion of the main hearing the [statutory] default interest [rate] may be reduced in accordance with the Inter-Bank Interest Rate Policy Self-Management Agreement (from 7 October 1989 in accordance with federal legislation). Therefore, the calculation of the statutory default interest should be left to the enforcement proceedings (unless, of course, the debtor fulfils his obligation of his own will).”
The Inter-Bank Interest Rate Policy Self-Management Agreement (Samoupravni sporazum banaka o politici kamatnih stopa) of 18 June 1986 was concluded by the banks who were members of the Association of Banks of Yugoslavia and entered into force on 1 July 1986. It was amended on 8 October 1986, which amendments entered into force on 1 November 1986. The consolidated text of the Agreement was published in Jugoslovensko bankarstvo [Yugoslav Banking], no. 11 of November 1986, a periodical published by the Association of Banks of Yugoslavia. The relevant articles of that Agreement read as follows:
Article 4 paragraph 1 stipulated that the banks were to pay uniform interest calculated in accordance with the uniform interest rates established by that Agreement. Article 4 paragraph 2 stipulated that the banks were to pay a positive real interest rate on time deposits with no established purpose and with a term longer than one year.
Article 5 paragraph 2 stipulated that the positive real interest rate was equal to the marginal lending rate of the National Bank of .
Article 7 stipulated that the interest rate payable on time deposits in domestic currency with no established purpose and with a term longer than one year was to be determined by increasing the positive real interest rate by a certain number of percentage points, depending on the term during which the deposit could not be withdrawn. Accordingly, it further stipulated that the interest rate payable on time deposits with no established purpose and with a term longer than twenty-four months was to be calculated by increasing the positive real interest rate by three percentage points, whereas the interest rate payable on such deposits with a term longer than thirty-six months was to be calculated by increasing the positive real interest rate by five percentage points.
Article 11 stipulated that, after receiving the official data on the marginal lending rate of the National Bank of Yugoslavia, the secretary general of the Association of Banks of Yugoslavia had to determine the interest rate payable on time deposits with no established purpose, and had to inform the banks thereof in due time.
After the entry into force of the 1989 Amendments to the Obligations Act (see paragraph 127 above) from 7 October 1989 to 1 January 2008 statutory default interest was regulated by special legislation, following which the statutory interest rate was regulated by the new 2006 Obligations Act (Zakon o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette nos. 35/05, 41/08 and 125/11). The rates and method of calculation changed as follows:
On 30 April 2004 the Croatian Parliament adopted the Authentic Interpretation of Section 3(1) of the Default Interest Act (Vjerodostojno tumačenje članka 3. stavka 1. Zakona o zateznim kamatama, Official Gazette 28/96 of 7 May 2004), the relevant part of which reads as follows:
“Special legislation, the Default Interest Act, in section 3(1) sets out the prescribed method of calculating the default interest payable by applying the compound method for periods less than one year. It is clear and unambiguous that when calculating default interest for periods exceeding one year the compound method cannot be applied and that the simple method applies.”
The Dinar Value Change Act (Zakon o promjeni vrijednosti dinara, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 83/89), which entered into force on 1 January 1990, established the new value of the Yugoslav dinar (YUD) so that one new dinar corresponded to 10,000 old dinars.
By the Decision on the Introduction of the Croatian Dinar as the Currency on the Territory of the Republic of Croatia (Odluka o uvođenju hrvatskog dinara kao sredstva plaćanja na teritoriju Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 71/91), which entered into force on 23 December 1991, the Republic of Croatia introduced its own currency, the Croatian dinar (HRD). The Yugoslav dinar (YUD) was replaced by the Croatian dinar at an exchange rate of YUD 1 to HRD 1.
On 13 May 1994 the Decision on the Termination of the Validity of the Decision on the Introduction of the Croatian Dinar as the Currency of the Republic of Croatia and on the Manner and Time of Calculation of Sums Expressed in Croatian Dinars into Kunas and Lipas (Odluka o prestanku važenja Odluke o uvođenju hrvatskog dinara kao sredstva plaćanja na teritoriju Republike Hrvatske, te o načinu i vremenu preračunavanja iznosa izraženih u hrvatskim dinarima u kune i lipe, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 37/94) entered into force, introducing the Croatian kuna (HRK) as the currency of the Republic of Croatia. It provided that the Croatian dinar should be replaced by the Croatian kuna at an exchange rate of 1,000 dinars to one kuna.
Section 12 of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia nos. 4/77, 36/77 (corrigendum), 36/80, 69/82, 58/84, 74/1987, 57/89, 20/90, 27/1990 and 35/91 and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia nos. 53/91, 91/92, 58/93, 112/99, 88/01, 117/03, 88/05, 02/07, 84/08, 123/08, 57/11 and 148/11), which has been in force since 1 July 1977, provides as follows:
Section 12
“When the court’s decision depends on the prior resolution of an issue whether a certain right or legal relationship exists, and this issue has not yet been decided by a court or other competent authority (the preliminary issue), the court may settle that issue itself, unless special legislation provides otherwise.
The court’s decision on a preliminary issue shall have legal effect only in the civil proceedings in which that issue was settled.
In civil proceedings the court shall, as regards the existence of a criminal offence and the perpetrator’s criminal liability, be bound by the final judgment of the criminal court whereby the accused was found guilty.”
The Supreme Court has consistently held (see, for example, judgments nos. Rev-2563/1992-2 of 6 April 1993, Rev-48/01-2 of 23 July 2003, Rev-217/2005-2 of 20 October 2005, and Rev-x 20/08-2 of 25 November 2008, Rev-282/08-2 of 25 February 2009, and Rev 840/08-2 of 10 February 2010) that civil courts were entitled on the basis of section 12 of the Civil Procedure Act to decide whether a criminal offence had been committed for the purposes of applying longer statutory limitation periods provided in section 377 of the 1978 Obligations Act (see paragraph 129 above) only exceptionally, that is, only when criminal proceedings could not have been instituted or continued due to procedural impediments or because the suspect had died. The Supreme Court held in particular:
“The right of civil courts to establish whether the damage was caused by a criminal offence is an exception as they may do so only when there were procedural impediments preventing conduct of the criminal proceedings against the person responsible, for example, if that person died ... or was mentally incapacitated. In such cases civil courts are entitled to decide whether the damage was caused by a criminal offence as on a preliminary issue (section 12 of the Civil Procedure Act).”
Other relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
WITHDRAWAL OF JUDGES
Section 73
“The parties may only seek withdrawal of a judge sitting in the case or the president of the court who should decide on the motion for withdrawal.
A motion for withdrawal is inadmissible:
1)  if it vaguely seeks the withdrawal of all judges of a specific court or all judges who could sit in the case;
2)  if it has already been decided on;
3)  if no reason for seeking withdrawal has been given.
The motion referred to in paragraph 2 of this section shall be declared inadmissible by the single judge or the president of the panel before which the proceedings in relation to which the withdrawal is requested are pending.
No separate appeal is allowed against the decision referred to in paragraph 3 of this section.
If the motion for withdrawal referred to in paragraph 2 of this section is made in a legal remedy, it shall be declared inadmissible by the president of the first-instance court.
 ...
A party may request the withdrawal of a judge of a higher court in an appeal or a reply thereto.”
STAY, DISCONTINUATION AND SUSPENSION OF PROCEEDINGS
Section 212
“Proceedings shall be stayed:
1) ...
2) ...
3) ...
4) when a party which is a legal entity ceases to exist or when the relevant authority prohibits its operation by a final decision,
5) when the legal effects of the opening of bankruptcy proceedings occur,
6) ...
7) ...
8) ...”
...
Section 215(1)
“Proceedings stayed on grounds referred to in sub-paragraphs 1-5 of section 212 of this Act shall be resumed when ... the bankruptcy administrator or the legal successors of the legal entity take over the proceedings or when the court, at the request of the opposing party or of its own motion, invites them to do so.”
...
Section 215b
“Proceedings shall be discontinued when a party dies or ceases to exist in proceedings concerning rights which do not pass to that party’s heirs or legal successors.
In cases referred to in paragraph 1 of this section the court shall serve the decision to discontinue the proceedings on the opposing party and on the heirs or legal successors of the party after they have been determined [that is, after their identity has been established].
 ...
A decision to discontinue proceedings because a legal entity has ceased to exist shall be served on the opposing party and its legal successor after it has been determined. If a legal entity does not have a legal successor, the court shall, upon the proposal of the opposing party of its own motion, forward the decision on discontinuation to the state attorney.
...
...”
...
PROCEDURE IN COMMERCIAL MATTERS
Preparation of main hearing
Section 495(4)
“In urgent cases the president of the panel is authorised to schedule a hearing by telephone or telegraph.”
The relevant part of the Enforcement Procedure Act (Zakon o izvršnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, nos. 20/78, 6/82, 74/87, 57/89, 20/90, 27/90 and 35/91 and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia nos. 53/91 and 91/92), which was in force between 1 October 1978 and 10 August 1996, provided as follows:
Decisions and the composition of [enforcement] court
Section 7(2) and (3)
“In enforcement ... proceedings the court shall issue decisions [odluke] in the form of a decision [rješenje] or instruction [zaključak].
By an instruction the court shall order the bailiff to take certain actions in the proceedings and shall decide on other issues concerning the conduct of the proceedings.”
Legal remedies
Section 8(1) and (7)
“Unless otherwise provided by this Act, an appeal lies against a first-instance decision [rješenje].
...
 No remedy lies against an instruction [zaključak].”
Inadmissibility of an appeal on points of law or petition for reopening of proceedings
Section 9
“Appeals on points of law or petitions for reopening of proceedings are inadmissible against a final decision rendered in enforcement or security proceedings.”
Urgency and order of priority
Section 10(1)
Application of provisions of the Civil Procedure Act
Section 14
 “Unless otherwise provided by this Act or another statute, in enforcement ... proceedings the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act shall apply mutatis mutandis.”
Payment of default interest
Section 20a(1)
“If after the issuance of an enforcement title the default interest [rate] changes, the court shall, at the request of the enforcement creditor or debtor in the writ of execution, order payment of default interest at the new rate.”
...
Transfer of a claim or debt
Section 22(1)
“Enforcement shall also be ordered at the request of a person who is not designated as the creditor in an enforcement title if [that person] proves by a public deed or a deed certified in accordance with the law that the claim has been transferred or otherwise passed to him or her. In the event that that is not possible, the transfer of the claim shall be proved by a final decision rendered in civil proceedings.”
...
DEBTOR’S OBJECTION TO A WRIT OF EXECUTION
Objection as sole legal remedy
Section 48
“A debtor may contest a writ of execution [only] by an objection unless the debtor is only contesting a decision on costs.”
Competence
Section 49
“The court which issued the writ of execution shall decide on the debtor’s objection.”
Grounds for objection
Section 50
“An objection to a writ of execution may be lodged on grounds which prevent enforcement, and especially:
...
8)  ... if the [creditor’s] claim has been extinguished on the basis of a fact which occurred after the decision [the enforcement title] became enforceable, or before that but at a time when the debtor could not raise it in the proceedings from which the enforcement title originated ...
...
12)  if the claim has not been transferred to the [enforcement] creditor or the debt has not been transferred to the debtor;
- ...”
Objection after the expiry of the time-limit
Section 51
“An objection based on the fact concerning [that is, relevant for the existence or validity of] the claim (section 54 paragraph 1) may be lodged even after the time-limit of eight days has elapsed (section 8) if that fact occurs after the enforcement title has been adopted or at a time when it could no longer be raised in the proceedings from which the enforcement title originated.
An objection [of the type] referred to in paragraph 1 of the section may be lodged [at any time] before the conclusion of the enforcement proceedings.”
...
Instructions to the parties to institute civil or other proceedings
Section 54(1), (2) and (4)
“If a decision on an objection depends on the fact concerning [that is, relevant for the existence or validity of] the claim itself, and if it is disputed between the parties, the court shall instruct the debtor to institute civil or other proceedings within a certain time-limit in order for the enforcement to be declared inadmissible.
The debtor may institute civil or other proceedings referred to in paragraph 1 of this section even after the expiry of the time-limit fixed by the court, [but] before the conclusion of the enforcement proceedings, but in that case shall bear the costs incurred by exceeding that time-limit.
 ...
If the court gives a final decision finding that the enforcement was inadmissible, the [enforcement] court shall, at the request of the debtor, discontinue the enforcement and set aside the measures taken.”
...
COUNTER-ENFORCEMENT
Grounds for counter-enforcement
Section 59
“After enforcement has been carried out, the [enforcement] debtor may apply for counter-enforcement, asking the [enforcement] creditor to return what he has received by way of the enforcement:
1)  if the enforcement title has been quashed, reversed, annulled or set aside by a final decision,
2)  if he or she has satisfied the [enforcement] creditor’s claim during the enforcement proceedings,
3)  if the writ of execution has been quashed or reversed by a final decision,
4)  if enforcement by seizure and transfer of funds from the debtor’s account ...or by payment in cash, has been declared inadmissible.
An application for counter-enforcement may be lodged within thirty days of the day the [enforcement] debtor learns of the ground for counter-enforcement, and at the latest within a year following the conclusion of the enforcement proceedings.
Before the expiration of that time-limit the [enforcement] debtor may not pursue his or her claim in civil proceedings.”
...
Postponement of enforcement
At the request of the debtor
Section 63
“At the request of the debtor the court shall postpone enforcement entirely or in part if the debtor makes it plausible that he or she would sustain significant damage if the enforcement were to be carried out:
1)  if an extraordinary remedy has been lodged against the decision [i.e. the enforcement title] on the basis of which the enforcement was ordered;
2)  if a motion for restoring the proceedings into previous position [restitutio in integrum ob terminem elapsum] has been lodged in the proceedings that resulted in the decision [i.e. the enforcement title] on the basis of which the enforcement was ordered;
3)  if an action has been brought for annulment of the arbitral award on the basis of which the enforcement was ordered;
4)  if a request for the protection of legality has been lodged against the final decision adopted in the enforcement proceedings;
- if an action has been brought to set aside the [court] settlement on the basis of which the enforcement was ordered;
5)  if the debtor has lodged an objection or brought an action against the writ of execution;
6)  if the debtor has applied that the certificate of enforceability be set aside;
7)  if the enforcement depends on the reciprocal performance of some obligation by the creditor, and the debtor has refused to perform this obligation because the creditor has not performed his, and has not demonstrated willingness to perform it reciprocally;
8)  if the debtor or a participant in the proceedings has requested that irregularities committed while the enforcement was being carried out be removed;
The court may, at the request of the debtor, also postpone enforcement in other cases where there are particularly justified reasons [for doing so].
The court may, depending on the circumstances of the case, condition postponement of enforcement by giving of security.”
The relevant provision of the Enforcement Act (Ovršni zakon, Official Gazette, nos. 57/96, 29/99, 42/00, 173/03, 194/03, 151/04, 88/05, 121/05 and 67/08), which was in force between 11 August 1996 and 14 October 2012, read as follows:
Ongoing [enforcement] proceedings
Section 309
“Ongoing [enforcement] proceedings shall be concluded under the provisions of the legislation that was in force before this Act’s entry into force.”
The relevant part of the Bankruptcy Act (Stečajni zakon, Official Gazette, nos. 44/96, 29/99, 129/00, 123/03, 82/06, 116/10 and 25/12), which has been in force since 1 January 1997, provides as follows:
Principles of [bankruptcy] procedure
Section 7(2)
“Bankruptcy proceedings shall be urgent.”
...
Bankruptcy administrator’s liability
Section 28
“(1)  A bankruptcy administrator is bound to compensate any participant for damage if he or she wrongfully breaches any of his or her duties.
(2)  A bankruptcy administrator shall not be liable for damage caused by acts approved by a bankruptcy judge or by actions taken in the execution of an order or instruction of a bankruptcy judge, unless the order or instruction has been obtained fraudulently.
(3) ...
(4)  A bankruptcy administrator is bound to compensate a creditor of the bankruptcy estate for damage sustained by non-performance of an obligation undertaken by his or her legal act, unless the bankruptcy administrator could not have foreseen [at the time] that [the assets of] the bankruptcy estate would not be sufficient to satisfy that obligation.
(5)  The right to claim compensation for damage caused by a bankruptcy administrator’s breach of duty shall become time-barred upon the expiration of the three-year time-limit [which runs] from the moment the injured party learned of the damage and of the circumstances giving rise to the bankruptcy administrator’s liability. The right to claim compensation shall become time-barred at the latest upon the expiration of the three-year time-limit [which runs] from the moment the decision to close the bankruptcy proceedings becomes final. ...
(6)  After assuming his or her duties, the bankruptcy administrator shall take out insurance ... against the liability provided in this section, once the bankruptcy judge has determined the amount of the premium, having regard to the expected size of the bankruptcy estate and the complexity of the proceedings. Insurance costs are the costs of bankruptcy proceedings.
(7)  Claims for damages [brought] against the bankruptcy administrator shall be decided by a court in civil proceedings.”
The Bankruptcy Act distinguishes between several types of creditors and, accordingly, several types of obligations of a bankruptcy debtor. Creditors of the bankruptcy debtor (vjerovnici stečajnog dužnika) in the wider sense are: (a) secured creditors (razlučni vjerovnici), (b) bankruptcy creditors (stečajni vjerovnici) in the strict sense, and (c) creditors of the bankruptcy estate (vjerovnici stečajne mase).
Segregation creditors (izlučni vjerovnici) are not creditors of the bankruptcy debtor but persons who, on the basis of their right of ownership or other right, may lay claim to specific property which is in the possession of the bankruptcy debtor. Section 79 defines such creditors as persons who on the basis of a certain right in rem or a right ad personam can prove that a specific property does not belong to the bankruptcy estate because of that right. They are entitled to pursue their claims against the bankruptcy debtor outside bankruptcy proceedings, that is, in separate civil and/or enforcement proceedings.
Section 70 defines (ordinary, unsecured) bankruptcy creditors (stečajni vjerovnici) as personal creditors of the bankruptcy debtor who at the time bankruptcy proceedings were opened had a pecuniary claim against the debtor. Those creditors are required to report their claims to the bankruptcy administrator within the time-limit set forth in the decision to open bankruptcy proceedings (section 54(3)), and those claims are then examined at the verification hearing (ispitno ročište). The claims of creditors reported after the expiry of that time-limit may be reported at the latest within three months of the first verification hearing and examined at a separate verification hearing (posebno ispitno ročište) at the expense of those creditors (section 175(2)). Claims reported after the expiry of that additional time-limit are to be declared inadmissible.
Since creditors may, once bankruptcy proceedings have commenced, pursue their claims against the bankruptcy debtor only in those proceedings (section 96), civil or enforcement proceedings instituted to pursue those claims which are pending at the time of the opening of bankruptcy proceedings are stayed by the operation of law. If the bankruptcy administrator acknowledges at the verification hearing a claim of a bankruptcy creditor, the court will issue a decision to that effect (section 177). Once that decision becomes final the claim is considered finally determined as if it had been determined by a final court judgment in civil proceedings. Therefore, the stayed civil proceedings concerning the same claim become obsolete. On the other hand, if the bankruptcy administrator or another bankruptcy creditor disputes (contests), at the verification hearing, a bankruptcy creditor’s claim, the court shall instruct that party to institute separate debt determination civil proceedings or to resume the existing ones (section 178).
Section 70 places bankruptcy creditors in three categories. The creditors of a lower priority rank (subordinated creditors) may be satisfied only after the claims of higher-priority creditors have been satisfied in full. Creditors of the same rank are satisfied in proportion to the amount of their claims. The claims of the first higher rank are those of employees and former employees of the bankruptcy debtor which have been generated before the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings, severance pay and claims for damage sustained by a work-related injury or occupational disease. Claims of the second higher rank (also called general rank claims) are all claims not classified as the first higher rank or the lower rank claims. Claims of the lower rank are, for example, interest accrued on bankruptcy creditors’ claims after the opening of bankruptcy proceedings (section 72(1) sub-paragraph 1).
Secured creditors (razlučni vjerovnici) are those creditors who have a security interest (for example a pledge, mortgage or fiduciary ownership) on property belonging to the bankruptcy estate and who, on the basis of that security interest, are entitled to have their claims satisfied, as a matter of priority and separately from other creditors, from the value of that property (by, for example, selling it and satisfying their claims from the proceeds of the sale, sections 81-84). Those creditors are entitled to pursue their claims outside bankruptcy proceedings, in particular in enforcement proceedings (section 98(5)). They are not required to report their claims to the bankruptcy administrator, but merely to notify him of them (section 173(4)). However, they are entitled to act as bankruptcy creditors (stečajni vjerovnici) and to report their claims to the bankruptcy administrator if: (a) they waive their security, or (b) the property in respect of which they had the security interest was not sufficient to satisfy their claims in full (sections 84 and 173(4)).
Creditors of the bankruptcy estate (vjerovnici stečajne mase) are those creditors whose claims against the bankruptcy debtor arose after the opening of bankruptcy proceedings. They are preferential creditors whose claims are satisfied undiscounted and directly from the bankruptcy estate (unless the estate is unable to cover even these claims). Their claims correspond to the obligations of the bankruptcy estate (the costs of the bankruptcy proceedings and other obligations of the bankruptcy estate) as defined in sections 85 and 87 of the Bankruptcy Act. They are entitled to pursue their claims against the bankruptcy estate outside bankruptcy proceedings, that is, in separate civil or enforcement proceedings (see, for example, Supreme Court decision Revt-118/05-2 of 23 March 2006 and High Commercial Court decisions Pž-2523/02 of 22 October 2002 andPž-6172/01 of 16 April 2002). They are not required to report their claims to the bankruptcy administrator. However, in order to be able to participate in the distribution of funds from the bankruptcy estate, the bankruptcy administrator must learn of their claims at the latest at the relevant (interim or final) distribution hearing or, in the event of subsequent distribution, before the publication of the subsequent distribution list (see below, section 202 of the Bankruptcy Act). The relevant provisions of the Bankruptcy Act concerning the bankruptcy estate and the obligations of the bankruptcy estate read as follows:
The notion of the bankruptcy estate
Section 67
“(1)  The bankruptcy estate consists of the total assets of the [bankruptcy] debtor at the time of the opening of bankruptcy proceedings, and [any] assets it acquires during the bankruptcy proceedings.
(2)  The bankruptcy estate serves to cover the costs of the bankruptcy proceedings and to satisfy the claims of creditors of the bankruptcy debtor, as well as the claims whose satisfaction has been secured by security interests in the [bankruptcy] debtor’s assets [i.e. the claims of secured creditors].”
...
Obligations of the bankruptcy estate
Section 85
“(1)  The costs of bankruptcy proceedings and other obligations of the bankruptcy estate shall be settled first from the bankruptcy estate.
(2)  The obligations of the bankruptcy estate referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be settled by the bankruptcy administrator in the order [in which] they become due.”
...
Other obligations of the bankruptcy estate
Section 87(1)
“The other obligations of the bankruptcy estate include obligations:
arising from acts conducted by the bankruptcy administrator ...
...
...
arising from unjust enrichment of the estate,
claims of employees of the bankruptcy debtor that arose after the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings.”
Payment of the obligations of the bankruptcy estate
Section 87a
“(1)  Throughout the entire proceedings the bankruptcy administrator shall take care to ensure from the bankruptcy estate the funds necessary to settle the foreseeable obligations of the bankruptcy estate. While paying certain obligations of the bankruptcy estate he or she shall reserve the funds necessary to cover those obligations which it can legitimately be assumed would have to be settled in the future.
(2)  Before the conclusion of bankruptcy proceedings, the bankruptcy administrator shall, with the approval of the bankruptcy judge, deposit the part of the bankruptcy estate reserved [pursuant to] paragraph 1 of this section with the court or a notary public. After the conclusion of the bankruptcy proceedings, the bankruptcy judge shall decide on payments from the deposited sum at the request of individual creditors of the bankruptcy estate, [while] taking care of the need to ensure adequate funds to pay those creditors who do not yet have an enforcement title or other valid legal basis necessary to pursue [i.e. enforce] their claims.”
...
List of creditors
Section 151(1)
“The bankruptcy administrator shall be bound to compile a list of all creditors of the [bankruptcy] debtor of which he or she learned from [information in] the books and business records of the [bankruptcy] debtor, from other data [in the possession] of the [bankruptcy] debtor, from the claims the creditors reported, or in some other way.”
...
DISTRIBUTION
Satisfaction of bankruptcy creditors
Section 183(4)
“The bankruptcy administrator shall make the distributions. Before each distribution, he or she shall obtain the consent of the board of creditors, and if no board of creditors has been set up, the approval of the bankruptcy judge.”
Distribution list
Section 184
“(1)  Prior to a distribution, the bankruptcy administrator shall compile a list of claims which are to be taken into account during the distribution. ...
(2)  That list shall be displayed on the premises of the bankruptcy court for inspection by the participants [in the bankruptcy proceedings]. The bankruptcy administrator shall issue a public notice of the total amount of all claims and the amount available from the bankruptcy estate to be distributed to creditors.”
...
Final distribution
Section 192
“(1)  The final distribution may commence as soon as the realisation [i.e. liquidation] of [the assets pertaining to] the bankruptcy estate has been completed.
(2)  The final distribution may be undertaken only with the approval of the bankruptcy judge.”
Final hearing
Section 193(1) and (3)
“(1)  When giving approval for the final distribution, the judge shall schedule a final hearing of creditors. At that hearing:
...
objections to the final [distribution] list may be raised,
...
(2)  ...
(3)  At the final hearing the bankruptcy judge shall decide on [any] creditors’ objections referred to in sub-paragraph 2 of paragraph 1 of this section.”
Depositing reserved amounts
Section 194
“The bankruptcy administrator shall, with the consent of the bankruptcy judge, deposit with the court or the notary public, and on behalf of the persons concerned, the amounts reserved during the final distribution.”
Surplus after the final distribution
Section 195
“If, during the final distribution, all the bankruptcy creditors’ claims can be settled in full, the bankruptcy administrator shall give the surplus to the individual debtor. If the debtor is a legal entity, the bankruptcy administrator shall give each person holding a share in the debtor [company] the part of the surplus to which they would be entitled in the event of liquidation outside bankruptcy proceedings [such as in the event of winding up].”
CONCLUSION OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEEDINGS
Decision on the conclusion of bankruptcy proceedings
Section 196(1) and (3)
“(1)  The bankruptcy judge shall issue a decision on conclusion of the bankruptcy proceedings immediately after completion of the final distribution.
(2)  ...
(3)  The decision referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be forwarded to the court or other authority which keeps the register of the [bankruptcy] debtor as a legal entity... By being deleted from that register the [bankruptcy] debtor shall cease to exist as a legal entity ... ”
...
Subsequent distribution
Section 199
“(1)  The bankruptcy judge shall, at the request of the bankruptcy administrator, any of the creditors, or of his or her own motion, order the continuation of proceedings for the purposes of subsequent distribution if, after the final hearing:
the conditions for distribution of the reserved amounts to the creditors are met,
amounts that have been paid out of the bankruptcy estate have been returned to the estate,
[further] assets pertaining to the bankruptcy estate have been found.
(2)  ...
(3) ...
(4)  The assets referred to in paragraph 1 of this section are [those of] the bankruptcy estate, and the provisions of this Act on the debtor and its organs shall apply to them mutatis mutandis. Unless otherwise provided by this Act, civil proceedings may be pursued in the name and on behalf of that estate for the purpose of collecting assets that belong to it. After the completion of subsequent distribution the bankruptcy judge shall issue a decision on the conclusion of the bankruptcy proceedings”
...
Exclusion of creditors of the bankruptcy estate
Section 202
“Creditors of the bankruptcy estate of whose claims the bankruptcy administrator has learned:
...
during final distribution, after the final hearing,
during subsequent distribution, [but] after the publication of the list of that distribution,
may seek satisfaction [of their claims] only from the [residual] funds remaining after the distribution of the bankruptcy estate.”
In its decision Pž-6471/05-3 of 2 April 2007 the High Commercial Court, in interpreting section 199(4) of the Bankruptcy Act, held that while after the conclusion of the bankruptcy proceedings and deletion from the register of commercial companies the bankruptcy debtor no longer existed as a legal entity, its undistributed assets formed the bankruptcy estate, represented by the bankruptcy administrator, in the name and on behalf of which proceedings may be conducted. The relevant part of that decision read as follows:
“The plaintiff indicated the bankruptcy estate as the legal successor of the defendant. The first-instance court in its decision did not specify how it had established that the defendant had no assets pertaining to the estate ... Lack of funds to settle the plaintiff’s claim is not an obstacle to pursuing proceedings for payment [of a sum of money]. Potential impracticability of future satisfaction of the [plaintiff’s] claim is not an obstacle to the court’s deciding on [it] in adversarial proceedings. Whether the plaintiff may seek payment of damages and default interest from the bankruptcy debtor is a different matter. The powers of the bankruptcy administrator are not entirely extinguished with the conclusion of the bankruptcy proceedings. The [civil] proceedings pending at the moment of the conclusion of the bankruptcy proceedings continue in the name and on behalf of the bankruptcy estate of the bankruptcy debtor. The provisions of the Bankruptcy Act concerning the bankruptcy debtor and its organs (section 199 paragraph 4) apply to the bankruptcy estate mutatis mutandis. On [its] behalf proceedings to collect the assets pertaining to the bankruptcy estate may continue, and the bankruptcy administrator is still required to represent the bankruptcy estate in proceedings instituted by the bankruptcy creditors against the bankruptcy estate. These rules apply even where the funds have not been reserved on a special account, [in which case it is] for a creditor to assess whether he or she has [any] interest in pursuing such a suit.”
The relevant provisions of the Commercial Companies Act (Zakon o trgovačkim društvima, Official Gazette 111/93, 34/99, 121/99, 52/00, 118/03, 107/07, 146/08, 137/09, 152/11 and 111/12), which has been in force since 1 January 1995, read as follows:
Liability of a commercial company’s members
Section 10
(1)  Members of a general partnership and general partners in a limited partnership shall be liable personally, jointly and severally, and unlimitedly for the obligations of the company, with all their assets.
(2)  Unless provided otherwise by this Act, members [i.e. shareholders] of a limited liability company and stockholders of a joint stock company shall not be liable for the obligations of the company.
(3)  Anyone who abuses the fact that, as a company member, he or she is not liable for the obligations of the company, cannot claim that by law he or she is not liable for those obligations.
(4)  The requirement for liability of a company member referred to in paragraph 3 of this section shall be considered satisfied especially if he or she:
uses the company to achieve goals otherwise prohibited;
uses the company to damage creditors;
contrary to the law, manages the assets of the company as if they are his or her own;
reduces the assets of the company in his favour or in favour of another person although he or she knew or should have known that the company would not be able to meet its obligations.”
...
JOINT STOCK COMPANY
WINDING UP [LIQUIDATION]
The liquidator’s liability for damage
Section 383
“(1)  After the company has been deleted from the register of commercial companies, the actions of the liquidator may no longer be contested, but the creditors of the company may claim compensation from him or her for damage caused by his or her actions.
(2)  The liquidator shall be liable for damage caused in the course of liquidation up to five times the amount of the remuneration he or she received for his work. If that is not sufficient to compensate for the damage, all shareholders shall be jointly and severally liable for it [i.e. the damage] up to the value of the company’s [residual] assets paid to them ...”
The relevant part of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette nos. 110/97, 27/98 (corrigendum), 50/00, 129/00, 51/01, 111/03, 190/03, 105/04, 84/05, 71/06, 110/07, 152/08 and 57/11), which was between 1 January 1998 and 31 December 2012, read as follows:
Statutory limitation of criminal prosecution
Article 19
“(1)  Criminal prosecution ... cannot be undertaken after expiry of the following periods, calculated from the time the offence was committed:
-  ...
-  ...
-  ten years if the case concerns a criminal offence punishable by more than five years’ imprisonment,
...”
...
Running and interruption of the statutory limitation periods
Article 20
(1)  The limitation period shall start to run from the date on which the criminal offence was committed.
(2)   ...
(3)  The statutory limitation period shall be interrupted each time a procedural step aimed at the prosecution of the offence is taken.
...
(5)  The statutory limitation period shall start to run again after each interruption.
(6)  ...”
...
Abuse of office or official authority
Article 337
“(1)  An official or a person responsible who, with the aim of procuring for himself or herself or another individual or legal entity a non-pecuniary gain [non-pecuniary advantage], or to cause damage to another individual or legal entity, abuses his office or official authority, oversteps the limits of his or her official authority, or fails to perform his duty, shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to three years.
(2)  If the criminal offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article results in considerable damage or a serious breach of the rights of others, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of six months to five years.
(3)  If a pecuaniary gain [pecuniary advantage] is acquired by the criminal offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years.
(4)  If a pecuniary gain acquired by the criminal offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article is considerable or if it resulted in a damage of a large scale, and if the perpetrator acted with the aim of acquiring such a gain, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of one to ten years.”
Sections 139-140 of the Inheritance Act (Zakon o nasljeđivanju, Official Gazette nos. 48/03, 163/03 and 35/05), which has been in force since 3 October 2003, regulate heirs’ liability for the debts of the deceased. In particular, section 140 provides for the so-called separation of patrimonies (separatio bonorum), that is, an instrument for the protection of creditors allowing those creditors of the deceased who have a good reason to fear that their claims will not be met, to demand that the estate be separated from the property of the heirs until the claims of those creditors are paid out of the estate. The rationale behind separation of patrimonies is to prevent that the property forming the estate be confounded with the property of the heirs, and thus to shield it from the claims of the heirs’ creditors who would otherwise be entitled to satisfy their claims out of the estate. Those provisions read as follows:
HEIRS’ LIABILITY FOR THE DEBTS OF THE DECEASED
The extent of heirs’ liability for the debts
Section 139
“(1)  Heirs shall be liable for the debts of the deceased.
(2)  ...
(3)  An heir is liable for the debts of the deceased up to the value of the inherited property ...
(4)  Where there are several heirs they shall be jointly and severally liable for the debts of the deceased and so each up to the value of his or her share ...
(5)  Between heirs the debts shall be distributed in proportion to their respective shares, unless the testament stipulates otherwise.”
Separation of patrimonies
Section 140
(1)  Creditors of the deceased may within three months from the opening of the succession demand that the estate be separated from the property of the heirs if they make plausible the existence of their claim and the risk that without the separation they would not be able to satisfy their claim.
(2)  In that case heirs cannot dispose of [the assets] belonging to the estate, nor can their creditors satisfy their claims before the creditors who demanded separation satisfy theirs.
(3)  Creditors of the deceased who demanded separation may satisfy their claims only from the funds of the estate.
(4)  ...
(5)  ...
(6)  Creditors who demanded separation but do not have an enforcement title or have not yet instituted proceedings to pursue their claims, must institute [such] proceedings ... within the time-limit set forth by the court in the decision on separation of patrimonies. If [such] creditor does not [do so] within that time-limit, the court shall of its own motion set aside its decision on separation of patrimonies.
(7)  The court shall decide on the creditor’s application [for separation of patrimonies] by a decision in inheritance proceedings. An appeal against that decision does not suspend its execution.”