The case concerns the compensation due in relation to an expropriation, in respect of which the applicants claimed to have been discriminated against, as well as the alleged partiality of the Constitutional Court.
For details about the applicants, see the table in the annex. The applicants were represented by Dr E. Borg Costanzi and Dr P. Borg Costanzi, lawyers practising in Valletta.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Dr Peter Grech, Attorney General, and subsequently by their Agent Dr Victoria Buttiġieġ, State Attorney.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
By means of a Governor’s Declaration published in the Government Gazette in 1961, the applicants’ agricultural land in Safi (as well as other land not belonging to the applicants) was declared to be needed for a public purpose under the Land Acquisition (Public Purposes) Ordinance, Chapter 88 of the Laws of Malta (“the Ordinance”).
The Government took physical possession of the land in 1993 to construct a school (with its grounds) and roads.
A “notice to treat” was sent to the applicants on 14 January 2003, describing the land, measuring 665 square metres (“sq.m.”), as touching another property at its south-west side and a road on the east side. Compensation was offered on the basis of its status as agricultural land in 1961 i.e. 1,490 Maltese liri (MTL), approximately 3,471 euros (EUR). According to the valuation report of 5 December 2002, the land then formed part of the extension of the grounds to the school and had previously formed part of a larger surface and was therefore agricultural land in terms of the Ordinance.
The amount of compensation was refused by the applicants in February 2003, who considered that given the lapse of time they should be compensated on the basis of the value in 2003, when they considered it to be developable land since it was close to a school, and in view of its potential, was worth MTL 120,000, approximately EUR 279,525. Thus, in the same year, proceedings were initiated before the Land Arbitration Board (“LAB”), which, by a decision of 15 October 2009, established the compensation as being EUR 20,134 plus interest according to law, on the basis of a report by the experts, who visited the site, which designated the land as agricultural according to the Ordinance. The LAB noted that, the two experts having been unanimous, it was bound to adopt their findings according to Section 25 (5) of the Ordinance. It thus ordered the parties to proceed to conclude the contract transferring ownership.
During these proceedings the applicants had argued, based on documents they submitted to the LAB, that property in the vicinity had been expropriated at much higher values. In particular, in 2007 and 2003 respectively, A.Z. had been paid EUR 104,356 for land measuring 186 sq.m.; and family Z. had been paid EUR 64,757 (plus EUR 71,125.09 in interest calculated at 5 % from 4 February 1981) for only part of a piece of land measuring 615 sq.m.
The parties appealed before the Court of Appeal (consisting of three judges). The applicants complained primarily that the land had been valued as being agricultural, and secondly that, in any event, the price per square metre as calculated by the architect had been erroneous. They noted that the LAB had simply rubberstamped the experts’ report, which had not explained why the land was deemed to be agricultural and not developable. Indeed, the LAB had been bound by law to follow the experts, thus denying the owners an effective review by a court. Moreover, no consideration had been given to the passage of time when determining compensation, thus breaching the applicants’ property rights.
According to the Court of Appeal, the applicants, in particular, complained that the experts had not substantiated why the land was considered to be agricultural. In that regard the applicants argued that, given that another piece of land expropriated by the same declaration had been considered as being developable and that their land fell within a development scheme, both under the old law and the new one, the land had to be considered as developable land. They considered that the compensation awarded was ridiculous and that, even assuming it had to be considered as agricultural land, it had to attract higher compensation in the light of other factors such as the locality and the price of adjacent property. Furthermore, it had not been fair that compensation proceedings had started only forty years later and yet they were being compensated on the basis of a declaration of 1961, because in their case (unlike others) no new declaration (accompanied by a new valuation) had been issued in breach of their rights under Article 6 of the Convention in conjunction with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. They asked the Court of Appeal to revoke the valuation of the experts subject to, if necessary, a declaration as to the characterisation of the land and the criteria to be used; to quash the LAB’s decision and refer it back, and in the alternative, to vary the LAB’s decision augmenting the compensation awarded.
During these proceedings a request by the applicants for a constitutional reference in relation to claims under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, alone and in conjunction with Article 14 (concerning the compensation) and Article 6 (length of proceedings), was rejected by the Court of Appeal by means of an interlocutory decision of 6 May 2013. The Court of Appeal considered that the claims were frivolous and vexatious as the applicants had not yet exhausted ordinary remedies, namely the proceedings on appeal where their claims on the merits could still be accepted.
By a judgment of 29 November 2013 the Court of Appeal (in the main proceedings) rejected the applicants’ appeal and confirmed the firstinstance decision. It noted that the LAB’s decision being dated 15 October 2009 the applicable procedural law was the one before the amendments of 2009 (Act XXI of 2009 of 1 December 2009 amending various laws related to civil matters - in particular revoking the limitation on appeals which could previously be lodged solely on points of law); thus, that the applicants could only appeal on points of law (Section 25 (7) of the Ordinance [as stood before 2009]); and that the experts having been unanimous in their valuation, the Chairman of the LAB was bound by law to follow their findings.
The Court of Appeal considered that, in so far as this was a point of law, the lack of any reasoning by the experts as to the land being considered as agricultural did not vitiate the LAB’s decision, since the experts had been unanimous and the LAB had to follow their findings in accordance with the law. The Court of Appeal noted that the experts had stated in their report that the land was agricultural “according to the Ordinance”, and in the minutes of their site visit they had also stated that “they took account of the locality and considered other factors”. The Court of Appeal, noting that the law left such an evaluation in the hands of the experts, considered that it could not be said that their unanimous evaluation was arbitrary.
The Court of Appeal also considered that it could not deal with the pleas in relation to the lack of a proper evaluation by the experts; the higher compensation awarded to others; and the fact that they were being compensated at the value of 1961 despite proceedings being undertaken forty years later, as these were not pleas on points of law. However, on the last mentioned plea, it found it opportune to note that the Government having taken possession of the land at the time of the issuance of the declaration (sic.), it was understandable that compensation had to be calculated on the basis of its value then.
On 25 May 2013 the applicants instituted constitutional redress proceedings complaining under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, alone and in conjunction with Article 14 and Article 6 of the Convention, about the lack of access to court/length of proceedings (19612013). They argued that they had been severely prejudiced by the delay in payment of compensation, as a result of which the land had become developable when the notice to treat was issued. Yet they had been paid the price of the land (as agricultural) in 1961, while they considered that they should have been paid the price of the land in 2003 – the date of the notice to treat. In fact, adjacent land subject to the same circumstances had been revalued in the light of development potential, but not the applicants’, they had thus also been discriminated against (on political grounds).
During the proceedings the architect’s report of 5 December 2002, as well as the report of the LAB experts (see paragraphs 6 and 7 above), were submitted to the court and a Government employee also gave evidence. He considered that, as evident from the aerial photographs of 1957, the land was agricultural land, as it did not satisfy the requirements to be classified as developable land under Section 18 of the Ordinance in force at the date of the expropriation. In particular it had no frontage on a road, was not in a built up zone and it was not situated at less than 91.5 metres of a built up zone.
By a judgment of 10 October 2016 the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional competence found a violation of all the provisions relied on and awarded pecuniary damage in respect of the violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 in the amount of EUR 270,000 (based on a valuation dated 5 December 2014, by an expert appointed by the Commissioner of Land, of the land as it stood in 2013, plus interest from 2014 to date of contract). The Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional competence considered that the applicants had to be paid compensation on the basis of its designation as building land, as had been the case for others who had similar properties in the area and who had been subject to the same measure. It also awarded EUR 10,000 in nonpecuniary damage for the breaches of Articles 6 and 14 in conjunction with Article 1 of Protocol No 1. The applicants were to pay no costs.
In particular it found that the delay to issue the notice to treat – during which time the applicants had no access to court to pursue compensation proceedings – had breached the applicants’ rights under Article 6 of the Convention, as of 1987 i.e. the date of the introduction of individual petition in Malta. It also found that the compensation offered was not adequate and if paid, together with interest, for the expropriation, would breach the applicants’ property rights. In particular the court considered that in 2002 when the architect drew up the report for the notice to treat to be issued, the land was no longer agricultural but had become developable, satisfying the conditions stipulated in the law. It was therefore not just for the architect and later the LAB experts to award the value on the basis of it being agricultural land.
In relation to the complaint concerning discrimination the court considered that the applicants were not in the same situation as another family (A.Z.) who had been paid compensation in 2007 for land (measuring 187 sq.m.) which had been taken much later than 1961. The same could not be said about the situation of family Z. – in relation to a parcel of land (measuring 615 sq.m.) situated near that of the applicants and which had also been taken in 1961 at a time when it was agricultural land – whereby, despite being in an analogous situation, family Z. had been paid, in 2003, EUR 64,757 for 615 sq.m. of land while the applicant had been offered, in the same year, EUR 3,470 for 655 sq.m. (later valued at EUR 20,134 by the LAB). There had been a substantial difference in the values offered and no reasonable justification for such a difference in treatment.
The parties appealed to the Constitutional Court, consisting of the same three judges who had decided the applicants’ civil case on appeal. The applicants challenged the judges and requested their withdrawal, relying on Article 734 (1) (d) of the Code of Organisation and Civil Procedure (see paragraph 30 below).
By an interlocutory decree of 20 February 2017 the applicants’ challenge was rejected by the same judges on the basis that the first case had concerned civil issues while the current one concerned constitutional issues.
By a judgment of 26 January 2018 the Constitutional Court confirmed the violation of Article 6 and awarded EUR 7,500 in nonpecuniary compensation in this respect, but revoked the rest of the firstinstance judgment finding no violation of Article 14 (as the comparator was not in a similar situation – the latter’s property having been classified as building land for the purposes of compensation) and no violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, considering, however, that the compensation should be augmented to EUR 26,093 based on the guidelines set out in Schembri and Others v. Malta ((just satisfaction), no. 42583/06, 28 September 2010) to which had to be added interest, as provided by domestic law, on the date of transfer which was to be not later than three months from date of judgment.
In relation to the Article 14 complaint the Constitutional Court considered that the first-instance court should not have acted as a third instance court reversing the finding by the experts (who had considered that the land was agricultural) and therefore finding that the situations of the two cases were analogous. The applicants had not challenged the law by means of which their land was deemed to be agricultural, thus the LAB’s decision to that effect was binding. This was the case irrespective of the new valuation dated 5 December 2014 by the expert appointed by the Commissioner of Land. Moreover, the mere fact that the applicants’ land was in the same area, did not mean that both could be developed.
As to Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 the Constitutional Court noted that the applicants were not contesting the lawfulness of, or the public interest behind, the measure but its proportionality. The Constitutional Court disagreed with the applicants that they were to be paid the value of the land as developable since it had changed designation over the years, noting that it had not been contested that the land was agricultural in nature in 1961, nor had there been a challenge to the applicable law, the applicants’ argument being limited to the assessment by the experts which was final (res judicata following the LAB’s decision confirmed by the Court of Appeal). It considered that the European Court of Human Rights’ case-law made it clear that the value to be taken into account was that at the time of the taking of the land which had to be updated at the date of payment, and interest should be paid as from the date of taking, in line with the methodology provided by the Ordinance.
The applicants were made to pay half the costs of the entire proceedings, in view of their failed claims.
Following this judgment the applicants wrote to the authorities to receive the payment due, however only an acknowledgment was received and to date of submissions (2020) the applicants had not yet received any compensation.
The Land Acquisition (Public Purposes) Ordinance (Chapter 88 of the Laws of Malta), in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
Section 3
“The President of Malta may by declaration signed by him declare any land to be required for a public purpose.”
Prior to the amendments introduced in 2002, the Land Acquisition (Public Purposes) Ordinance provided that:
Section 12(1)
“...the competent authority shall give to the owner a notice ... by means of a judicial act, stating the amount of compensation, as shown in a valuation to be attached to the notice to treat.”
Section 13(1)
“The amount of compensation to be paid for any land required by a competent authority may be determined at any time by agreement between the competent authority and the owner (...).”
Section 17
“Any land which is not a building site shall be valued for the purpose of determining the compensation payable in the case of compulsory acquisition as rural land or as wasteland, as the case may be.”
Section 18
“(1) Land shall be deemed to be a building site for the purposes of this Ordinance if it has a frontage on an existing street and is situated within a built up area or, subject to sub section (2) of this section, within a distance of not more than ninety-one and a half metres of a built up area, measured along the axis of the street.
(2) In determining whether land is a building-site by reason of the fact that it is situated within a distance of not more than ninety-one and one half meters of a built up area regard shall be had to the probable immediate expansion of the built up area in the direction of the land in question.
(3) Land falling within the definition of subsection (1) or (2) of this section shall be deemed to be a building site to a maximum depth of twenty-five metres.”
Section 17 (as amended in 2006)
“Any land which is not a building site shall be valued for the purpose of determining the compensation payable in the case of compulsory acquisition as rural land or as wasteland, as the case may be;
Provided that in determining such compensation, consideration shall be given to the value of any structures existing thereon and whether such structures are covered by a permit according to law.”
Section 18 (as amended in 2006)
“(1) Land shall be deemed to be a building site if it falls within the limits of a building scheme or as indicated and approved for development in a Structure Plan or subsidiary plan which has been adopted for the time being in force under any law relating to planning.
(2) In determining the compensation due for a building site, consideration shall be given to the use or development that can be made thereof or thereon in accordance with the provisions of subarticle (1).”
Section 18A (introduced in 2006) concerning the valuation of land expropriated prior to 2003
“Notwithstanding the provisions of this or any other law, the value of any land –
(a) still in the course of acquisition on the 1st January 2005
(b) in respect of which a declaration under article 3 was issued before the 5th March 2003, and
(c) in respect of which a notice to treat was not issued before the 1st January 2005 under the provisions of this Ordinance as in force before the date mentioned in this paragraph,
shall, saving any interests due until payment is made under sub-article (3) of article 12 of this Ordinance, be its value as on the 1st January 2005.”
Section 22
“If the owner shall by a judicial act decline to accept the offer made by the competent authority, the matter shall be brought before the Board by an application to be made by the competent authority, and the Board shall give all necessary orders or directions in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.”
The amendments introduced in 2002 by means of Act XI of 2002, provided, in so far as relevant, that compensation should no longer be paid on the basis of the date of the ‘notice to treat’ but on the basis of the date of the ‘Presidential Declaration’. Its transitory provisions also provided that interest would be paid as from the date of the Presidential Declaration and:
“For the purposes of determining whether land is to be valued as a building site, agricultural or rural land or waste land for the purposes of this sub-article the relevant date shall be the date when the original Declaration was issued by the President before the coming into force of this article.”
Article 734 of the Code of Organisation and Civil Procedure concerning the grounds for challenge or abstention of a judge, reads as follows:
“(1) A judge may be challenged or abstain from sitting in a cause -
(a) if he is related by consanguinity or affinity in a direct line to any of the parties;
(b) if he is related by consanguinity in the degree of brother, uncle or nephew, grand-uncle or grandnephew or cousin, to any of the parties, or if he is related by affinity in the degree of brother, uncle, or nephew, to any of the parties;
(c) if he is the tutor, curator, or presumptive heir of any of the parties; if he is or has been the agent of any of the parties to the suit; if he is the administrator of any establishment or partnership involved in the suit, or if any of the parties is his presumptive heir;
(d) (i) if he had given advice, pleaded or written on the cause or on any other matter connected therewith or dependant thereon;
(ii) if he had previously taken cognizance of the cause as a judge or as an arbitrator:
Provided that this shall not apply to any decision delivered by the judge which did not definitely dispose of the merits in issue or to any judgment of non-suit of the plaintiff;
(iii) if he has made any disbursement in respect of the cause;
(iv) if he has given evidence or if any of the parties proposes to call him as a witness;
(e) if he, or his spouse, is directly or indirectly interested in the event of the suit;
(f) if the advocate or legal procurator pleading before a judge is the son or daughter, spouse or ascendant of the said judge;
(g) if the advocate or legal procurator pleading before a judge is the brother or sister of the said judge;
(h) if the judge or his spouse has a case pending against any of the parties to the suit of happens to be his creditor or debtor in such manner as may reasonably give rise to suspicion of a direct or indirect interest that may influence the outcome of the case.
(2) A judge may be challenged or abstain from sitting in a cause when he has previously taken cognizance of and expressed himself on the same merits of that cause when sitting as a judge in the Court of voluntary jurisdiction.”