The case originated in an application (no. 5945/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Login Arsenyevich Furman (“the applicant”), on 19 January 2004.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained about the non-enforcement of the final judgment in his favour and alleged a violation of his property rights.
On 30 March 2006 the Court communicated the application to the respondent Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1945 and lives in Bolshaya Markha in the  (Yakutiya).
In 1994 the applicant founded an individual enterprise “Pyramid” (Частное Индивидуальное Предприятие «Пирамида»).
On 15 March 1999 he signed an agreement with a State-owned maintenance company “Department of housing and communal services of ” according to which the applicant's company undertook to perform certain construction works for the company. Upon the completion of the works, the maintenance company refused to pay. Following a financial dispute, the parties signed a friendly settlement, according to which the maintenance company owed the applicant's company 43,517 RUR
This settlement was confirmed by a judgment of the Commercial Court of the  (Yakutiya) delivered on 11 June 2002, and became enforceable.
On 25 March 2003 the bailiffs informed the applicant about the impossibility to enforce the settlement because the maintenance company lacked funds. On 26 March 2003 they closed the enforcement proceedings.
The applicant contested the bailiffs' decision before the Commercial Court of the  but on 11 July 2003 his application was left without consideration due to the failure to comply with the procedural requirements.
Meanwhile the State-owned maintenance company changed its structure and became a municipal maintenance company (Муниципальное учреждение «Дирекция единого заказчика»).
In March 2004 the applicant retired, liquidated his enterprise and closed its accounts.