The case originated in an application (no. 35384/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Mate Tomljenović (“the applicant”), on 21 September 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Houška, a lawyer practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 2 May 2006 the Court decided to communicate the complaint concerning the length of the proceedings to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1934 and lives in .
The applicant was teaching biology and chemistry and was the headmaster of V.N. Elementary School in . By its decision of 22 December 1995 the Ministry of Education and Sport (Ministarstvo prosvjete i športa) relieved the applicant of his post of headmaster and dismissed him from work on account that he had reached the retirement age.
On 3 January 1996 the applicant brought an action in the  (Upravni sud Republike Hrvatske) against that decision.
On 9 October 1997 the  declined its jurisdiction in the matter, and on 6 May 1998 forwarded the case to the Zagreb Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Zagrebu).
On 4 September 1998 the Municipal Court invited the applicant to supplement his claim, which the applicant did within the time-limit indicated. The court held hearings on 20 November 2000 and 5 February 2001.
On 17 December 2001 the Municipal Court, considering that it lacked jurisdiction in the matter, made an application to the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) with a view to resolving the negative conflict of jurisdictions.
On 22 January 2002 the Supreme Court ruled that the  was competent to hear the applicant's case.
Following the transfer of the case back to the , on 31 October 2002 that court ruled in favour of the applicant. It quashed the impugned decision of 22 December 1995 and remitted the case to the Ministry.
Since the Ministry failed to give a new decision within the statutory time-limit of 30 days, on 5 November 2003 the applicant requested the  to do so (see paragraph 16 below). In their reply to his request, the Ministry submitted that it was no longer competent to issue such a decision owing to the change in legislation governing primary education. On 6 May 2004 the , acting as a court of full jurisdiction, issued a decision entirely substituting for that of the Ministry. It dismissed the applicant's request by accepting that the Ministry no longer had competence in the matter. However, it found that in those circumstances the Ministry should have forwarded the case-file to a body authorised under the new legislation to issue such a decision – the school board of the . The Ministry did so on 26 June 2006.
It appears that the case is currently pending before the school board.
“(1) The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint whether or not all legal remedies have been exhausted if the competent court fails to decide a claim concerning the individual's rights and obligations or a criminal charge against him or her within a reasonable time ...
(2) If a constitutional complaint ... under paragraph 1 of this section is upheld, the  shall set a time-limit within which the competent court must decide the case on the merits...
(3) In a decision issued under paragraph 2 of this section, the  shall assess appropriate compensation for the applicant for the violation of his or her constitutional rights ... The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date a request for payment is lodged.”
The Administrative Disputes Act