The case originated in two applications (nos. 54839/17 and 71093/17) against Montenegro lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Mihailo Madžarović (the first applicant), and two companies, Zetmont d.o.o. (the second applicant) and Bermont d.o.o. (the third applicant) on 25 July 2017 and 11 September 2017 respectively. The first applicant is a Slovenian national, and the second and third applicants are companies registered in Montenegro.
The applicants were represented by Mr R. Završek, a lawyer practising in Ljubljana, Slovenia. The Montenegrin Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms V. Pavličić.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their right of access to a court had been breached, and that they had been unlawfully deprived of their property.
On 13 December 2018 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning access to court and deprivation of property, and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
Notified under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (a) of the Rules of Court of their right to intervene in the present case, the Government of Slovenia expressed no wish to do so.
The first applicant was born in 1949 and lives in Ljubljana, Slovenia. The second and third applicants were founded in Montenegro in 2000.
The first applicant is the sole founder, executive director and owner of the second and third applicants. The second and third applicants were the founders and, at the relevant time, the sole shareholders of company T. The first applicant was a legal representative (zakonski zastupnik) of the second and third applicants, and company T.
On 28 December 2006 company T. (“the debtor”) took a loan of 7,500,000 euros (EUR) from Hypo Alpe-Adria-Bank International AG (“the creditor”), which was based in Austria. The loan agreement provided that the bank, as the creditor, had the right to unilaterally terminate the loan agreement before the expiry of the envisaged time-limit for repayment of the debt in the event that the debtor was more than thirty days late in paying the interest owed and/or an instalment. The creditor was also entitled to seek repayment by virtue of a pledge (da pristupi realizaciji sredstava obezbeđenja i naplati svoja potraživanja).
In November 2011 the debtor, represented by the first applicant, concluded three contracts of pledge (ugovor o zalozi) with the creditor, thereby securing the bank loan by a specified number of its shares which it held in another entity (the Joint Investment Fund “Trend”, hereafter “the Fund”).
On 10 October 2013, following an application on the part of the creditor to that effect, the Commercial Court (Privredni sud) in Podgorica established that the debtor had not honoured its obligations, and that the outstanding debt was EUR 3,459,273.81 in total (the main debt being EUR 3,254,604.59, and the rest of the sum made up of interest and costs). It further established that there were three legally valid contracts of pledge of November 2011, and it ordered the seizure and transfer (pljenidbom i predajom) of the shares specified therein to the creditor. In doing so, it relied on section 20 of the Pledge Act. The court noted that the first applicant, as the debtor’s legal representative, had sought that the hearing be adjourned so that the debtor and the creditor could establish the exact amount of the debt, “which undoubtedly existed in respect of the main debt, but ... the interest had not been properly calculated”.
On 25 November 2013 this decision was rectified in respect of the date when the said shares had been registered in the Central Depository Agency (Centralna Depozitarna Agencija – hereinafter “the CDA”) in Podgorica and the number of shares, so that they corresponded to the number of shares specified in the contracts of pledge.
The debtor appealed against both decisions on 2 and 24 December 2013 respectively. It submitted, in substance, that the court had not referred to any of the provisions of the Enforcement Act, only to the Pledge Act, that it had not had seen any of the originals of the contracts of pledge, and that the total debt had remained “legally undefined”, in particular given that the courts had had no mechanisms to establish the accuracy of the calculated interest. The appeals were substantially the same, and neither of them challenged the rectifications specified in the decision of 25 November 2013.
On 9 January 2014 the creditor sold the transferred shares to a company called O.B.
On 16 January 2014 the debtor’s new Board of Directors issued a decision on changes to the company officers. I.P. was appointed the new executive director, replacing the first applicant. On 20 January 2014 the Tax Administration – Companies Central Registry (Centralni registar privrednih subjekata – hereinafter the “CRPS”) issued a decision to register these changes. The applicants appealed against this decision.
On 5 February 2014 I.P., on behalf of the debtor, withdrew the debtor’s appeal lodged against the decision of 25 November 2013 and cancelled the power of attorney previously given to a lawyer by the first applicant. On the same date the applicants informed the court that they had appealed against the decision of 20 January 2014 on I.P.’s registration as the debtor’s executive director and that, pursuant to section 225 of the General Administrative Procedure Act, an appeal had suspensive effect.
Between 5 and 18 February 2014 the applicants addressed the Commercial Court and the Court of Appeal on several occasions, submitting that I.P. did not have standing to withdraw the debtor’s appeal and urging that it be examined on the merits.
On 18 February 2014 the Court of Appeal (Apelacioni sud) dismissed the debtor’s appeal against the decision of 10 October 2013. The court found that the parties had concluded three contracts of pledge and that the debtor had failed to meet the obligations arising from the bank loan, which had been secured by the pledges. In doing so the court relied on section 20 of the Pledge Act. It also found that the pledges had been lawful and duly registered. It was further noted that following an enforcement application on the part of the creditor, a hearing had been held only in order to establish if the pledge had been in order (perfektuirana) and if the debtor had failed to meet its obligations. It was up to the debtor to prove the opposite. The court observed that the debtor had not denied the creditor’s allegations but had rather asked for additional time to meet them. The court further considered that the debtor’s submissions as regards the exact amount of the debt were irrelevant at this stage of the proceedings, given the undisputed fact that the debtor had failed to meet the obligations arising from the loan agreement secured by the pledges. The debtor’s submission that the court had not seen any of the originals of the submitted evidence was adjudged to be unfounded, given that the authenticity thereof had not been disputed. The court considered other submissions but found them to be irrelevant (bez uticaja na donošenje drugačije odluke).
The same day the debtor’s appeal against the decision of 25 November 2013 was rejected as having been withdrawn.
On 7 March 2014 the Ministry of Finance annulled (poništava) the decision of 20 January 2014 (see paragraph 14 above) as the applicants had not been allowed to take part in the proceedings. On 23 April 2014 the CRPS terminated (obustavlja) the proceedings on company officers registration in the debtor owing to O.B.’s withdrawal of its request in that regard.
On 17 April 2014 the first applicant lodged a constitutional appeal on behalf of the debtor. He complained, in substance, of a lack of access to court given that an unauthorised person had withdrawn the appeal, a lack of an effective legal remedy, and a deprivation of property caused primarily “by abuses on the part of [the creditor’s] officials ... enabled by unlawful actions on the part of the courts”.
On 18 November 2016 the Constitutional Court dismissed the constitutional appeal. As regards access to court, the court held, inter alia, that the debtor had withdrawn its appeal on 5 February 2014 and at the same time had cancelled the power of attorney previously given to a lawyer, and that thus the appeal had been duly rejected (nedozovljena). As regards an effective domestic remedy the court found that the debtor had had at its disposal legal remedies which it had used. It also held that the proceedings in their entirety had been fair. The court did not deal with the debtor’s property rights. This decision was served on the first applicant on 6 February 2017.
In July 2010 the debtor, represented by the first applicant, concluded a contract of pledge with the creditor, thereby securing the bank loan by a specified number of its shares in the Fund.
On 8 November 2013, following an application by the creditor to that effect, the Commercial Court ordered the transfer of these shares to the creditor. Relying on section 20 of the Pledge Act the court found that the pledge was in order, and that the debtor had failed to meet the obligations arising from the loan agreement. The court noted that the first applicant, as the legal representative of the debtor, had acknowledged that the debtor had been late with payments, that it had made no payments as of May 2013, and that he had disputed the amount of interest calculated by the creditor, which had also increased the amount of the principal (iznos glavnice). The decision specified that an appeal did not have suspensive effect (žalba ne odlaže izvršenje).
On 26 November 2013 this decision was rectified in respect of the exact debtor’s name and certain registration codes.
The debtor appealed against both decisions on 2 and 24 December 2013 respectively.
On 9 January 2014 the creditor sold the transferred shares to the company O.B. This was followed by the registration of the changes of the company officers in the debtor on 20 January 2014, a decision against which the applicants appealed (see paragraph 14 above).
On 5 February 2014 I.P. filed a submission with the Commercial Court, withdrawing the debtor’s appeal against that court’s decision of 8 November 2013, and cancelling the power of attorney previously given to a lawyer by the first applicant.
Between 5 and 18 February 2014 the debtor and the applicants lodged several submissions with the Commercial Court and the Court of Appeal maintaining that I.P. did not have standing to withdraw the debtor’s appeal and urging it to rule on the merits. At the same time, they informed the courts that they had appealed against the decision of 20 January 2014.
On 18 February 2014 the Court of Appeal rejected the debtor’s appeal against the decision of 8 November 2013 as having been withdrawn. The same day it dismissed the appeal lodged against the decision of 26 November 2013, considering that the decision had been duly rectified in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act. It considered that it could not examine the rest of the submissions contained therein, as in substance they related to the decision of 8 November 2013.
On 7 March 2014 the Ministry of Finance annulled the decision of 20 January 2014. On 23 April 2014 the CRPS terminated the proceedings on company officers registration in the debtor owing to O.B.’s withdrawal of its request in that regard.
On 17 April 2014 the first applicant lodged a constitutional appeal on behalf of the debtor. It complained, in substance, of a lack of access to court given that an unauthorised person had withdrawn the appeal, lack of an effective domestic remedy and a deprivation of property caused by all these irregularities.
On 15 November 2016 the Constitutional Court dismissed the constitutional appeal. It found no violation of Article 13 as it had been found that the debtor had withdrawn its appeal on 5 February 2014 and had cancelled the power of attorney previously given to a lawyer, and that the appeal had been duly rejected. The court further found that the debtor had had at its disposal legal remedies which it had used. It also held that the proceedings in their entirety had been fair. The court did not deal with the debtor’s property rights. This decision was served on the first applicant on 13 March 2017.
On 16 July 2013 the creditor informed the debtor that it was unilaterally cancelling the bank loan as the latter had not been paying the instalments due, despite warnings and the additional time granted to it.
On 14 January 2014 the Commercial Court ordered the CDA to stay processing the transaction (da zastane sa postupkom saldiranja prodaje) until the applicants’ appeals were decided on. The same day the CDA transferred the shares to the buyer – it apparently received the court decision only after the transfer had already been completed. On 17 January 2014 the Securities Commission (Komisija za hartije od vrijednosti) issued a decision temporarily forbidding the buyer to dispose of the shares at issue (zabranila je raspolaganje akcijama), and the creditor to dispose of the proceeds obtained by the sale. On 26 February 2014 the Securities Commission found that company O.B. had unlawfully obtained the shares. Notably, in order to purchase more than 10% of shares it was necessary to obtain the prior consent of the Securities Commission, which had not been done in this case. O.B. was thus ordered to dispose of the shares beyond 10%.
On 28 January 2014 the debtor filed additional observations on its appeals (dopuna i pojašnjenje žalbe).
On 29 January 2014 the Commercial Court dismissed an application for rectifying irregularities (zahtjev za otklanjanje nepravilnosti) on the part of the debtor in the above proceedings. The debtor lodged objections (prigovor) against these decisions. They were dismissed by the Commercial Court on 21 July 2014 and 19 January 2015 respectively.
On 24 March 2014 the applicants lodged appeals on points of law (revizija), which were rejected by the Supreme Court on 16 May 2014 on the grounds that section 36 of the Enforcement Act provided for no appeal on points of law in the enforcement proceedings (u postupku izvršenja i obezbjeđenja).
On 29 April 2014 the CRPS issued a decision removing the first applicant as the debtor’s legal representative and registering Lj.A. instead. It would appear that, following appeals by the applicants in that regard, the procedure of registering Lj.A. in CRPS had not been finalised by June 2019.
On 19 February 2016 the Commercial Court stayed the proceedings (prekida se postupak) involving the debtor and another bank until the Ministry of Finance had terminated the proceedings relating to the changes of the debtor’s name and its company officers, which had taken place in November 2014. The court held that that decision was to resolve who was authorised to represent the debtor. The Commercial Court’s decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal on 5 May 2016.
Article 20 provides that everyone is entitled to a legal remedy against a decision on his or her rights or a legally based interest.
Section 20 of this Act provides, inter alia, that the pledgee (zalogoprimac) is entitled to get the possession of the object of the pledge when the debtor fails to fulfil his or her obligations. In such a case the pledgee is entitled to seek an enforcement order from the competent court on the basis of which the object of the pledge will be seized and given to him or her. The contract of pledge is an enforcement title (izvršna isprava). Following an application by the pledgee the court will hold a hearing in which it will establish only if the contractual pledge is in order and if the debtor failed to fulfil his or her obligations arising from the contract that was secured by the pledge. If the pledgee claims that these two conditions have been met it is up to the debtor to prove the opposite.
If it decides in favour of the pledgee the court will issue a decision in which it will, inter alia, order that the object of the pledge be taken from the debtor and given to the pledgee.
The court must decide within three days on the pledgee’s application. It is possible to lodge an appeal against a decision allowing the pledgee’s application within eight days. The appeal does not have suspensive effect with regard to the execution of the enforcement decision.
Section 20 further provides, inter alia, that after having lawfully obtained possession, the pledgee can sell, lease or in another way dispose of the object of the pledge. This can be done through a public competition (javnim nadmetanjem) or through a direct arrangement (neposrednom pogodbom). The pledgee has to inform the debtor of the time and place of the sale. The debtor can retrieve the property which is the object of the pledge when he or she pays all the debts secured by the pledge and reasonable costs. This can be done until the pledgee has disposed of the object of the pledge. If the pledgee has acted contrary to this statute the court can, pursuant to the debtor’s application to that effect, restrict or prohibit disposal of the object of the pledge (ograničiti pravo ili zabraniti raspolaganje). If the pledgee has already disposed of it, the debtor has the right to seek compensation from the pledgee for any loss caused by the pledgee’s non-compliance with these provisions (ima pravo da se naplati od zalogoprimca za svaki gubitak prouzrokovan neispunjenjem uslova iz odredaba ove glave).
Section 28(1)(3) of Companies Act provides that a joint stock company (akcionarsko društvo) must transmit to the CRPS documents and data relating to appointments and dismissals, and persons authorised to represent the company in relation to third parties.
Section 28(6) provides that there must be no inconsistencies between what is published (objavljeno) and what has been transmitted to the CRPS. If there is such an inconsistency the text in the CRPS’s possession is the valid one. The published text cannot be taken as valid in respect of third persons who trusted the text in the CRPS’s possession. Third persons can consider the published text as a valid one unless the relevant company can prove that they knew of the text transmitted to the CRPS.
Section 86(8) provides that the registration in the CRPS is done on the basis of the decision on registration. Section 86(11) provides for an appeal against the decision of the Tax Administration, which can be lodged with the Ministry of Finance.
Section 88 provides that the CRPS must ensure that the data contained in its index and other data in its database are identical to those transmitted to it for registration and that it must be assured for the public that these two sets of data are identical (može pouzdati u njihovu istovjetnost). Registration is only a confirmation that the articles of association (osnivačkoj dokumentaciji), on the basis of which the registration has been done, contain the data required by this Act. Registration is not a guarantee of the accuracy (nije potvrda istinitosti) of the data contained in the articles of association. Individuals doing business with registered companies bear the risk of establishing the accuracy of the data contained in its register.
This Act was in force until 1 January 2016.
Section 225(1) thereof provided that a decision could not be executed during the period in which an appeal could be lodged or while the appeal was pending.
Section 262(1) provided that by annulling a decision (poništavanjem rješenja) all the legal consequences caused thereby were also annulled. Quashing the decision (ukidanjem) did not annul the legal consequences already caused, but ensured that there were no further legal consequences.
Section 79 provides that during the entire proceedings the court must, on its own motion, ensure that the person appearing as a party can be a party to the proceedings, that he or she has standing to sue (parnično sposobno), that a party who does not have standing to sue (parnično nesposobnu stranku) is represented by his or her legal representative, and that any legal representative has a special power of attorney when needed.
Section 371(3) provides that an appeal is inadmissible (nedozvoljena) if it was lodged by a person who is not authorised to lodge an appeal or a person who has withdrawn an appeal or a person who has lodged an appeal has no legal interest to lodge an appeal.
Section 394 provides that an appeal submitted in time suspends the execution of a decision (zadržava izvršenje rješenja), unless otherwise provided by this Act.
Section 455 provides that in commercial disputes (u privrednim sporovima) the provisions of this Act must be applied, unless otherwise specified.
Section 14 provides that the Civil Procedure Act applies to enforcement proceedings unless provided otherwise by this or another Act.
Section 36 provides that no appeals on points of law are allowed against a final decision (protiv pravnosnažnog rješenja) in enforcement proceedings.
Section 49 provides that a debtor can lodge an objection against an enforcement order, which does not delay the execution of the order, unless otherwise specified.
Section 61 provides that the enforcement ordered on the basis of an enforceable title (na osnovu izvršne isprave) can be executed before the relevant enforcement decision becomes final, unless otherwise specified.
Section 139(6) provides that sections 90-101 of this Act are applied to estimations and sale of shares and the creditor’s reimbursement (namirenje) from the proceeds thus obtained. In particular, section 93 provides that the sale can be undertaken only after the enforcement decision is final, except in cases when the debtor proposes or agrees that the sale can be undertaken beforehand or if the object of sale can quickly deteriorate or there is a risk that its value can significantly decrease.
Section 276 provides that a contractual provision providing that an object of the pledge will become the property of the pledgee if his claim has not been paid when due, as well that in that case the pledgee can sell it for a price agreed in advance or keep it for her or himself, is null (ništava je). If the object of the pledge has an already set price, the contract parties can agree that the creditor can sell the object of the pledge for the agreed price or, for the same price, keep it for himself.
Section 283 provides, inter alia, that if the creditor’s claim was not paid when due, the creditor can request the court to sell the object at public auction (na javnoj prodaji), or for a current price (po tekućoj cijeni), when the object has a market or stock-exchange price.
Section 284 provides that when a guarantor is a company, the contract of pledge can provide that the pledgee has the right to sell the object of the pledge at a public out-of-court sale (na vansudskoj javnoj prodaji) if his claim has not been paid when due.
Sections 148 and 149 set out the different grounds for claiming compensation for both pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage. In particular, section 148(1) provides that whosoever causes somebody else damage is liable to pay compensation, unless he or she can prove that the damage caused was not his or her fault.
Sections 192-99 set out details regarding compensation in respect of pecuniary damage.