The case originated in an application (no. 28790/03) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Andrei Istrate (“the applicant”), on 29 August 2003.
The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr V. Pârlog.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that, by refusing to examine his appeal on points of law, the Supreme Court of Justice breached his right of access to court guaranteed by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 13 February 2006 the President of the Fourth Section of the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1937 and lives in Chişinău. He is a pensioner.
On an unspecified date he brought civil proceedings against the Straseni Local Council claiming compensation of 195,500 Moldovan lei (MDL) (approximately 14,000 euros (EUR)) for the alleged illegal confiscation by the Soviet authorities of his family’s house back in 1949.
On 26 December 2002, after having exempted the applicant from the duty to pay court fees, the Straseni District Court examined the merits of the case and dismissed it as manifestly ill-founded.
On 7 May 2003 the  dismissed the applicant’s appeal on the same grounds. It did so also after exempting the applicant from the duty to pay court fees.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law and requested, inter alia, to be exempted from the obligation to pay court fees, on account of his poor financial situation. He presented evidence showing that after the payment of all commodities, only MDL 2 were left from his monthly pension.
On 12 August 2003 the Supreme Court of Justice refused to examine the applicant’s appeal on points of law on the ground he had failed to pay court fees. It stated that exemption from the obligation to pay court fees was impossible at the stage of an appeal on points of law.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure read as follows:
“Section 85. Exemption from the payment of court fees
...
(4) Depending on his or her financial situation, the person may be exempted by the judge (the court) from payment of court fees entirely or in part.
Section 437. Content of the recourse request
...
(2) An appeal on points of law shall be accompanied by a proof of payment of the court fees; the provisions of Articles 85 ... do not apply.”
According to section 98 of the Code of Civil Procedure the losing party should pay the court fees.
According to Law No. 1216/92 on Court Fees, the court fees for a case similar to the present one are 3% of the value of the action. The court fee for the appeal is 75% of the initial fee and for the appeal on points of law is 50% of the initial fee.