PROCEDURE
“Under section 11 of the Law of 31 December 1987 reforming administrative proceedings, ‘an appeal on points of law to the Conseil d’Etat is first subjected to an admissibility procedure. Leave to appeal is refused by judicial decision if the appeal is inadmissible or not based on a genuine ground of appeal’.
In applying for the judgment of 20 October 1998 [of] the Court of Audit ... to be set aside, Mr Martinie submitted that the judgment had been given in breach of the provisions of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention ..., since he had neither been summoned to appear nor invited to submit his observations; he had not been aware of the date of the hearing fixed by the Court of Audit; and the reporting judge and counter-reporting judge had taken part in the deliberations of the Court of Audit. In his submission, the Court had misdirected itself in law in considering that only an executory resolution of the school’s board of governors could have constituted justification for the payment; the accountant could not be held liable for the expenditure paid by the [CNEA] prior to 21 February 1992, which was the date of his appointment as accountant of the ‘direct accounting department’ that had borne the irregular expenditure; and, lastly, the Court of Audit had further misdirected itself in law by ordering repayment of the sum in question to the Lycée René-Cassin.
None of these grounds justifies granting leave to appeal.”

Article 12
“Accountants are required:
...
B – in connection with expenditure, to check
that the authorising officer or his delegate has the requisite capacity to act;
that the funds are available;
that the expenditure is accurately attributed to the appropriate heads, in accordance with its nature or purpose;
that the claims are valid according to the terms set forth in Article 13 below;
that payment has been effected in accordance with the statutory conditions for discharging the debtor.
...”
Article 13
“With regard to the validity of the claims, accountants shall check
that the service has actually been rendered and the amounts accurately calculated;
that the statutory controls have been effected and the supporting documents produced.
In addition, in so far as provided by the rules specific to each public institution, public accountants shall check that the financial controllers’ stamp of approval has been affixed to the liabilities and payment authorisations issued by the main authorising officers.
Public accountants shall also check that the rules on limitation periods have been applied.”
Public accountants who have been found liable or whose liability is in issue may, in cases of force majeure, be fully or partly discharged from liability; they may also obtain remission, on a non-contentious application, in respect of amounts for which they remain liable (section 60-IX of Law no. 63-156). The Government indicated that decisions on this type of application were made by the Minister of Finance, who “differentiated between what was a personal failing and what was a case of force majeure or circumstances capable of mitigating the accountant’s liability (such as inadequacy of the resources attached to the post)”.
Judicial scrutiny of accounts rendered by public accountants of local authorities and their public institutions
The appeal is either lodged with the registry of the regional audit office, and an acknowledgment of receipt obtained, or sent to the registry by registered post with recorded delivery. Fifteen days after registration of the appeal, the Government Commissioner communicates it to the other persons having a right of appeal and simultaneously sends a copy to Principal State Counsel at the Court of Audit (Article R. 243-8 of the Financial Judicature Code). The parties have one month from the transmission of the appeal in which to consult all the documents annexed to the appeal at the registry of the regional audit office and to lodge defence pleadings. During the same period State Counsel (the Government Commissioner) can submit observations. A copy of the pleadings and observations is served by State Counsel on the appellant and the other parties, who may, within one month of transmission, lodge a reply, which is itself sent to the parties, and to which a rejoinder can be lodged within fifteen days. State Counsel may submit observations on the defence pleadings and replies lodged by the various parties. These observations are served on the interested parties (Article R. 243-9 of the Financial Judicature Code). If further documents are added to the file, the appellant and the other parties have fifteen days in which to inspect them and, if they wish, file their observations with the registry of the regional audit office (Article R. 243-10 of the Financial Judicature Code).
Once these time-limits have expired, State Counsel (the Government Commissioner) sends the appeal, a copy of the judgment, the documents produced by the appellant and the pleadings and documents produced by the other parties and the observations by State Counsel to Principal State Counsel at the Court of Audit (Article R. 243-11 of the Financial Judicature Code; since Decree no. 2002-1201 of 27 September 2002 came into force, the Government Commissioner notifies the appellant and the other parties that these documents have been sent to Principal State Counsel).
Principal State Counsel at the Court of Audit sends the appeal file to the Court of Audit (Article R. 112-8, paragraph 4, of the Financial Judicature Code) in a document which – the Government specify – “is customarily referred to as an ‘application’ but does not imply any personal initiative on the part of Principal State Counsel (Conseil d’Etat, 6 January 1995, Gouazé; 27 October 2000, Mme Desvignes)”.
Reports relating, inter alia, to surcharges and appeals against judgments delivered by regional audit offices have to be sent to Principal State Counsel, who makes written submissions on them (Article R. 112-8, paragraph 5, of the Financial Judicature Code); in doing so, he gives an opinion that the bench is free to follow or reject. He may attend the sessions of the divisions or sections and submit oral observations, but does not take part in the deliberations (Decree no. 2002-1201 of 27 September 2002, codified in Article R. 112-8 in fine of the Financial Judicature Code; the Government indicated that, prior to the entry into force of that decree, this principle had already been hallowed by usage).

In the light of the appeal file, the report and the submissions of Principal State Counsel, the counter-reporting judge – who, according to the Government, sits on the bench hearing the appeal – expresses orally, during the hearing, his opinion on the reporting judge’s proposals (Article R. 141-8 of the Financial Judicature Code).
Where the Court of Audit hears an appeal against a judgment of a regional audit office levying a surcharge against a public accountant, the hearings before it are not public and the parties are not informed in advance of the date of the appeal hearings (the converse situation applies where the Court of Audit gives a final ruling in a case concerning de facto management of public funds or the imposition of a fine – Articles R. 141-9 to R. 141-13 of the Financial Judicature Code, added to the Code by Decree no. 2002-1201 of 27 September 2002; Articles L. 131-2 and L. 131-13 of the Financial Judicature Code specify, moreover, that in the former case – de facto management – the judgments of the Court of Audit “are deliberated upon after hearing submissions, at their request, from the appellants and other interested parties” and that, in the latter case – imposition of a fine – the same applies in favour of the “persons concerned”).
The procedure to be followed at the hearing is set out in Article R. 141-8 of the Financial Judicature Code (as amended by Decree no. 2002-1201):
“The reporting judge shall present his report to the bench hearing the appeal. The counter-reporting judge shall express his view on each of the proposals submitted.
If the report has been sent to Principal State Counsel, the latter’s submissions shall be read out. Where Principal State Counsel, or one of the advocates-general, is present at the hearing, he shall make his submissions and take part in the proceedings.
The bench shall then deliberate. It shall give a decision on each proposal. If a vote has to be taken, the president shall ascertain, in turn, the opinion of the reporting judge, of each of the extraordinary senior members for cases they are empowered to hear under Article L. 112-5, then of each of the senior members in reverse order of seniority at that grade. The president states his opinion last. In the event of an equal number of votes, he shall have the casting vote.
However, in cases concerning de facto management or the imposition of a fine, the bench shall deliberate without the reporting judge being present.
...”
Case-law of the Conseil d’Etat on the applicability of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention to proceedings before the Court of Audit
Decree no. 2005-1586 of 19 December 2005 is worded as follows:
“...
Chapter II – Provisions relating to the appointment of Government 
Commissioners
Article 2
The first paragraph of Article R. 122-5 of the Code shall be replaced by the following paragraph:
Article 3
The first paragraph of Article R. 222-9 of the Code shall be replaced by the following paragraph:

Article 4
The first paragraph of Article R. 222-23 of the Code shall be replaced by the following paragraph:
Chapter III – Provisions relating to deliberations
Article 5
Title III of Book VII of the Code shall now be entitled ‘Conduct of the hearing and deliberations’.
Article 6
The following five Articles shall be inserted after Article R. 731-4 of the Code:
Article 7
The words ‘After deliberations without the parties being present, and’ shall be deleted from Article R. 741-1 of the Code.
Article 8
The following new paragraph shall be inserted after the third paragraph of Article R. 741-2 of the Code:
...”