The applicant company complained, in particular, that the quashing, upon an extraordinary appeal on points of law filed by the Prosecutor General, of a final and binding judgment in its favour was contrary to its rights under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
The applicant company has its registered seat in London (United Kingdom). It was represented by Mr P. Chrenko, a lawyer practising in Bratislava.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The Government of the United Kingdom, who had been invited to submit written observations on the case, did not express any wish to exercise that right (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1).
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2002, the Slovak Regulatory Office for Network Industries issued a series of decisions based on a new Regulation Act, by which it determined the maximum tariff for gas and electricity supply. The applicant company’s legal predecessor and some other companies challenged those decisions before the Constitutional Court, complaining that they had been issued prior to the adoption of a generally binding secondary regulation required by the above Act. By a judgment of 7 July 2006, the Constitutional Court allowed the complaint and quashed the impugned decisions.
In the meantime, on 20 February 2006 the applicant company’s legal predecessor filed an action for damages against the State based on the State Liability Act no. 58/1969, claiming that it had sustained inter alia a loss of profit due to the difference between the prices of energy before and after the impugned decisions of the Regulatory Office.
On 16 April 2009 the Bratislava II District Court (hereafter “the District Court”) issued an interlocutory judgment recognising the basis for the claim. Admitting that the conditions for lodging the action, i.e. quashing of the allegedly irregular decisions and filing of a preliminary request for damages with the State authority, had not been met at the time of opening of the proceedings, it considered decisive that both had been fulfilled in its course.
On 17 August 2009, the applicant company’s legal predecessor informed the District Court that it had transferred the above claim to the applicant company, and proposed that the latter enter the proceedings in its stead.
On 30 November 2009 the Bratislava Regional Court quashed the interlocutory judgment, given that the applicant company’s legal predecessor was no longer the right-holder at the time of the adoption of that judgment since it had transferred the claim to the applicant company with effect on 13 April 2009 at the latest.
On 16 August 2010, the District Court granted leave to the applicant company to enter the proceedings.
On 25 January 2013, the District Court issued a new interlocutory judgment recognising the basis for the claim brought henceforth by the applicant company. In its view it would be contrary to the Constitution if the latter could not claim damages on the ground that it had not participated to the original – irregular - proceedings having led to the unlawful decisions.
The State as a defendant appealed, contesting its legal standing (given that the Ministry of Finance did not supervise the Regulatory Office) and asserting that the District Court could not substitute itself to the Constitutional Court by ruling out a legal provision due to its alleged unconstitutionality.
By a judgment of 25 June 2013, the Regional Court upheld the decision of the District Court, sharing the latter’s opinion that it was not possible to deny the possibility to claim damages to those who could be affected by unlawful decisions without having been direct participants to the – irregular – proceedings having led to the issuance of such decisions.
On 18 March 2014, the Prosecutor General challenged the judgments dated 25 January 2013 and 25 June 2013 by way of an extraordinary appeal on points of law (mimoriadne dovolanie), being of the view that the conditions set by the State Liability Act had not been met in the present case. He mainly asserted that the impugned claim for damages was a fictive one since no real damage had not yet occurred, in particular because an unjust enrichment could be claimed from the companies which had been paid a higher price for energy and such claim prevailed over the damages claim, and that the unlawfulness of the conduct of the Regulatory Office was only of a formal, not material, character.
By a decision of 16 December 2015, the Supreme Court quashed the impugned judgments and remitted the matter to the District Court. It first considered that the Prosecutor General had been entitled to lodge an extraordinary appeal on points of law to protect the defendant’s rights, on the grounds that the courts’ decisions had breached the law and the State was at risk of sustaining a significant economic damage if held liable in the present case. The Supreme Court also observed that the defendant had had no other means of asserting its rights directly, in particular by way of an appeal on points of law.
As to the substance of the matter, the Supreme Court shared the Prosecutor General’s opinion that the courts had failed to determine whether the State’s liability should be engaged on account of an irregular decision or conduct, or on account of both, despite the fact that the conditions were set differently for the two grounds and that even an interlocutory judgment could not be issued without having ascertained that all those conditions had been met, which was not the case here.
The applicant company lodged a constitutional complaint, claiming that the judgment of the Supreme Court was arbitrary, that it did not at all reflect the Court’s relevant case-law and that it breached its rights under Article 6 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
By a decision of 28 June 2016 (III. ÚS 432/2016), the Constitutional Court dismissed the constitutional complaint mainly as manifestly-ill founded, referring mainly to the unifying opinion of its plenary no. PLz. ÚS 3/2015. The Constitutional Court considered that the Supreme Court’s assessment was correct since the defendant itself had not had at its disposal any remedy which it could have used to protect its rights. The fact that the applicant company did not share this view did not amount to a breach of its rights.
Consequently, the case was remitted back to the District Court for reexamination. The hearing having taken place on 5 June 2018 was adjourned sine die, on account of the present application brought before the Court.
The relevant domestic law and practice and European texts have been summarised in the Court’s judgments in, inter alia, the case of DRAFT - OVA a.s. v. Slovakia (no. 72493/10, §§ 39-56 and 58-61, 9 June 2015).
According to Article 237 of the Code of Civil Procedure, an appeal on points of law is admissible against any decision of the appellate court provided that (a) the courts decided in a matter outside their jurisdiction; (b) a person who acted as a party to the proceedings lacked legal capacity to be a party to court proceedings; (c) a party to the proceedings lacked capacity to act in court proceedings and was not duly represented; (d) the courts decided in a matter which had been res judicata or which had already been pending in another proceedings; (e) the proceedings could only commence by way of an action and no such action was actually filed; (f) the courts prevented a party to the proceedings from acting before them; and (g) the case was decided upon by an excluded judge or where the composition of the court was incorrect.