The case originated in an application (no. 32705/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Turkish nationals, Mr Hikmettin Attı and Mr Nevzat Tedik (“the applicants”), on 15 October 1999.
The applicants were represented by Mr Mesut Beştaş and Ms Meral Beştaş, lawyers practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had not been informed of the reasons for their arrest, that they had not been brought before a judge within a reasonable time, that their families had not been informed about their arrests and that they had not had the opportunity to challenge the lawfulness of their detention in police custody. They also alleged that the criminal proceedings against them had not been conducted fairly.
On 2 October 2007 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaints concerning the applicants' right to be informed promptly of the reasons for their arrest, their right to be brought promptly before a judge following their arrest, their right to take proceedings to challenge the lawfulness of their detention in police custody, their right to a fair trial, their right to legal assistance and their right to respect for their family life to the Government. It also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicants were born in 1979 and 1975 respectively and live in .
On 31 May 1999 the applicants were arrested at different locations in . It appears from the arrest report in respect of Mr Attı that he was arrested outside the university where he was a student. The reason for the arrest was the police officers' “suspicion of his appearance/condition” (durumundan şüphe ettiğimiz). He was taken into police custody for the “necessary investigation to be carried out”.
According to the arrest report in respect of Mr Tedik, he was arrested in a house and “in relation to an investigation”. Mr Tedik was also taken to the police station. The police officers who arrested Mr Tedik also searched the house and found a number of books and magazines in the Kurdish and Turkish languages. The books included a book of poems, a novel and a Kurdish grammar book.
The Diyarbakır Police Headquarters, where the applicants were being detained, wrote to the prosecutor's office at the  on 2 and 4 June 1999, and asked for permission to detain the applicants for a number of additional days. On 4 June 1999 the prosecutor granted permission to the police to detain the applicants until 10 June 1999.
Also on 4 June 1999 a number of police officers took the applicants to a number of locations where, the applicants claimed in two signed statements prepared the same day, they had carried out a number of activities on behalf of the PKK, including preparing and throwing Molotov cocktails.
The applicants were questioned by police officers on 8 June 1999. They stated that they were PKK sympathisers and also members of the Patriotic Youth Union (Yurtsever Gençlik Birliği).
On 9 June 1999 the applicants were released from police custody and brought before the prosecutor at the , who took statements from them. In their statements the applicants denied any connections with the PKK, and submitted that they had been forced to sign their police custody statements without having been allowed to read them first. The same day the applicants were brought before the duty judge, who remanded them in custody pending the introduction of criminal proceedings against them.
When questioned by police officers and subsequently by the prosecutor and the judge, the applicants were not represented by a lawyer.
On 14 June 1999 the prosecutor at the  filed an indictment with that court, charging the applicants and ten other persons with the offence of membership of an illegal organisation, an offence defined in Article 168 of the Criminal Code which was in force at the time.
The first hearing in the case was held on 22 June 1999 by the First Division of the . In the course of the trial, the applicants were represented by lawyers, and they repeatedly denied the accuracy of the contents of their police custody statements.
On 13 March 2001 the applicants were found guilty as charged and sentenced to twelve and a half years' imprisonment. In convicting the applicants the  relied on the statements taken from them in police custody.
The prosecutor at the Court of Cassation submitted his written observations to that court but they were not forwarded to the applicants or their lawyers. The applicants' convictions were upheld by the Court of Cassation on 11 October 2001.