The case originated in an application (no. 44581/98) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian national, Mr Franc Gerden (“the applicant”), on 12 October 1998.
The applicant was represented by Mr H. Đjurković, a lawyer practising in Koper. The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Bembič, State Attorney-General.
The applicant alleged under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that the length of the proceedings before the domestic courts to which he was a party was excessive. He also invoked Article 13 of the Convention, complaining about the lack of an effective domestic remedy in respect of the excessive length of the proceedings. He further alleged that the amendments to the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions violated his rights under Article 6 § 1 (unfair trial), Article 14, Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and Article 3 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention.
On 29 August 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the complaints concerning the length of the proceedings and the lack of remedies in this respect to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1934 and lives in Trebnje.
On 24 September 1946 the  (Divizijsko vojaško sodišče v Ljubljani) convicted the applicant’s uncle and legal predecessor, Mr A.Z., of the offence of collaboration with the “Black Hands” organisation during the Second World War. He was sentenced to 10 years’ deprivation of liberty with forced labour and forfeiture of property to the State. The applicant’s uncle lodged an appeal with the Military Court of the IVth Army (Vojaško sodišče IV. armije), which was dismissed on 25 October 1946. Following the conviction, the immovable assets belonging to the applicant’s uncle were expropriated by a ruling of the Grosuplje District Court (Okrajno sodišče v Grosupljem), rendered on 22 November 1946.
The applicant’s uncle died on 4 September 1949, bequeathing his movable assets to his sister, the applicant’s mother. She died in 1973, leaving her property to the applicant and his brother and sister.
In 1991, after the establishment of independence of the  and the change of the political regime, the applicant’s aunt requested the retrial of her brother, the applicant’s uncle. On 19 March 1993 the  Unit (Temeljno sodišče v Ljubljani, Enota v Ljubljani) acceded to her request and re-opened the criminal proceedings. Following the withdrawal of all charges by the Prosecutor General, on 2 September 1993 the court terminated the proceedings and quashed the conviction. The decision became final on 19 September 1993.
On 3 December 1993 the applicant initiated proceedings against the Grosuplje Municipality before the Ljubljana Basic Court, Grosuplje Unit (Temeljno sodišče v Ljubljani, Enota v Grosupljem), in order to obtain restitution of or compensation for the immovable assets forfeited by his uncle, invoking the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions. The forfeited property consisted of the following items: four houses, several plots of land, a hayrack and other farm outbuildings.
On 1 April 1994 the applicant modified his request and included the  as an additional defendant in the restitution proceedings. He also urged the court to start processing his case.
On 5 December 1994 the court cancelled a scheduled hearing and adjourned it sine die.
The applicant again modified his request and included the Municipality of Ivančna Gorica and the  among the defendants.
On 21 April 1995 the court held a hearing, at which it decided to appoint an expert in building construction and an expert in agriculture.
On 1 March 1996 the applicant again modified his request in order to include among the defendants also the Farmland and Forest Fund of the  (Sklad kmetijskih zemljišč in gozdov, “the Fund”). He also lodged a request for a temporary injunction, and urged the court to deal promptly with the case.
On 19 March 1996 the court held another hearing, at which it decided to grant the requested temporary injunction. It also ordered the Fund to return three plots of land to the applicant. The Fund appealed.
The court upheld the appeal and changed its decision of 19 March 1996. That decision became final on 31 May 1996.
On 9 August 1997 the Act on the Temporary Suspension of Certain Provisions of the Denationalisation Act and of the Act on the Implementation of Penal Sanctions entered into force. It had the effect of suspending extant restitution claims under these two acts, originally until 20 December 1997 and subsequently, under new legislation, until 31 March 1998. While those provisions were in abeyance, the Parliament passed the Act on Amendments and Supplements to the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions (see under “The Relevant Domestic Law and Practice”).
Between 10 September 1998 and 16 September 2003 the court held four hearings. At the hearing held on 10 September 1998 the court issued an order appointing an expert in building construction and an expert in agriculture. Neither the applicant nor his legal representative attended the hearing held on 12 September 2000. At the hearing held on 7 October 2002 the court decided to appoint another expert in building construction instead of the appointed one.
On 3 October 2003 the court terminated the restitution proceedings due to the withdrawal of all the applicant’s claims on 1 October 2003. The applicant subsequently recalled his withdrawal and lodged an appeal against the decision of the court of 3 October 2003.
On 4 November 2003 new claimants – further legal successors of the applicant’s uncle – requested to join the proceedings on the applicant’s side and appealed against the decision of the court of 3 October 2003 to terminate the proceedings. On 3 November 2004 the court quashed its decision of 3 October 2003 and decided to continue with the restitution proceedings.
On 21 April 2005 the re-named  (Okrajno sodišče v Grosupljem) awarded compensation in bonds of the Slovenian Compensation Society amounting to 179,225,156 Slovenian tolars (“SIT”) (EUR 747,838) to be divided among the heirs of the late A.Z., from whom the property had been forfeited in 1946. The judgment became final on 23 May 2005.
On 2 September 1996, on the basis of Sections 538 and 539 of the 1994 Act on Criminal Procedure, the applicant, his sister and his nephew lodged a formal request with the Ministry of Justice in order to secure their right to compensation for loss of profits amounting to 198,726,975.80 SIT.
On 9 December 1996, further to the failure of the Ministry to respond to their request within the prescribed period of three months, they commenced proceedings in the Ljubljana District Court (Okrožno sodišče v Ljubljani). At that time, the lost profits were estimated by the applicant and his relatives at 198,726,975.80 SIT, from lost rent and income from the cultivation of the land.
On 24 March 1998 the court cancelled the scheduled hearing sine die due to the sick leave of the acting judge.
On 3 June 1998 and 11 June 1998 the applicant urged the court to deal promptly with their case and to set the date for the first hearing.
On 6 July 1998 the court held a hearing, at which it decided to appoint an expert in building construction and an expert in agriculture. It further decided, with the consent of the parties, to adjourn the hearing until the  decided upon the applicant’s constitutional initiative challenging the amendments to the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions.
On 23 March 2000 the court released the expert from his duties and appointed another expert in building construction.
On 21 February 2003 the applicant lodged a supervisory appeal in order to accelerate the proceedings before the court. The acting judge reported that the court was waiting for the final decision in the restitution proceedings.
On 10 April 2003 the court held a hearing, at which the  requested the court to stay the proceedings until a final decision was taken in the restitution proceedings on the applicant’s right to restitution of the forfeited property. The court granted the request and on 5 May 2003 decided to await the decision in the restitution proceedings. According to the reasoning of the court, the issues dealt with in the restitution proceedings were of a preliminary nature for the court, since the amount of the compensation for loss of profits depended on the question whether the claimant was awarded the restitution of property in natura, or in the form of compensation for the forfeited property.
On 6 December 2005 the court held a hearing and rejected all the applicant’s claims. The applicant did not appeal, whereas his relatives did. As for the applicant, the judgment became final on 21 December 2005.
The following provisions of the 1991 Constitution (Ustava Republike Slovenije, Official Journal no. 33/91) are particularly relevant for the present case:
Article 23
“Everyone has the right to have any decision regarding his rights, duties and any charges brought against him made without undue delay by an independent, impartial court constituted by law.
Article 26
“Everyone shall have the right to compensation for damage caused by the unlawful acts of a person or body when performing a function or engaged in an activity on behalf of a state or local authority or as a holder of public office ...”
The Act on the Protection of the Right to a Trial without undue Delay (Zakon o varstvu pravice do sojenja brez nepotrebnega odlašanja, Official Journal, No. 49/2006) has been implemented since 1 January 2007. Under its Sections 1 and 2, the right to a trial within a reasonable time is guaranteed to a party to court proceedings, to a participant under the Act governing non-contentious proceedings and to an injured party in criminal proceedings.
Section 25 lays down the following transitional rules in relation to applications already pending before the Court:
Section 25 - Just satisfaction for damage sustained prior to implementation of this Act
“(1) In cases where a violation of the right to a trial without undue delay has already ceased and the party had filed a claim for just satisfaction with the international court before the date of implementation of this Act, the State Attorney’s Office shall offer the party a settlement on the amount of just satisfaction within four months after the date of receipt of the case referred by the international court for the settlement procedure. The party shall submit a settlement proposal to the State Attorney’s Office within two months of the date of receipt of the proposal of the State Attorney’s Office. The State Attorney’s Office shall decide on the proposal as soon as possible and within a period of four months at the latest. ...
(2) If the proposal for settlement referred to in paragraph 1 of this section is not acceded to or the State Attorney’s Office and the party fail to negotiate an agreement within four months after the date on which the party filed its proposal, the party may bring an action before the competent court under this Act. The party may bring an action within six months after receiving the State Attorney’s Office reply that the party’s proposal referred to in the previous paragraph was not acceded to, or after the expiry of the period fixed in the previous paragraph for the State Attorney’s Office to decide to proceed with settlement. Irrespective of the type or amount of the claim, the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act concerning small claims shall apply in proceedings before a court.”
The Denationalisation Act (Zakon o denacionalizaciji, Official Journal no. 27/91) forms the basis for restitution of property (or its value) that had passed into State ownership through previous legislation (agrarian reform, nationalisation, confiscation, etc.).
Section 3 provides that all natural persons whose property had passed into State ownership on the basis of the listed legislation adopted in the aftermath of the Second World War are entitled to denationalisation. Section 4 further specifies that all other natural persons whose property was nationalised by a legal act issued before 1963 are entitled to denationalisation.
The Denationalisation Act governs, inter alia, the form and scope of restitution, the restrictions on restitution and the valuation of property. In particular, it provides for several exceptions in which the property should not be returned in natura, for example if the property belongs to the natural or cultural heritage of the State (Section 17). Furthermore, in its Sections 2 and 42 to 44 it provides that, where property cannot be returned in its original form, compensation is payable (not in cash but in State bonds payable in instalments over 15 years).
In accordance with Section 92, the Denationalisation Act originally applied also to the restitution of property in cases where the property was forfeited by virtue of criminal judgments handed down before 31 December 1958. Since the restitution of property to a wrongfully convicted person is otherwise governed by the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions, which does not provide for the above-mentioned restrictions on the restitution of the forfeited property, Section 92 of the Denationalisation Act had an effect of introducing a less favourable restitution regime where the criminal judgment had been rendered before 31 December 1958. This provision was rescinded by the Constitutional Court on 5 November 1992, partly on the ground that it was retroactive and therefore violated Article 155 of the Slovenian Constitution (decision no. U-I-10/92, see below).
On 30 December 1995, the Act on Temporary, Partial Suspension of Restitution of Property (Official Journal no. 74/95) entered into force. It held in abeyance certain types of restitution proceedings for a period of three years.
On 9 August 1997 the Act on the Temporary Suspension of Certain Provisions of the Denationalisation Act and of the Act of Implementation of Penal Sanctions (Zakon o začasnem zadržanju izvajanja nekaterih določb zakona o denacionalizaciji in zakona o izvrševanju kazenskih sankcij, Official Journal no. 49/97) entered into force. Its Section 2 suspended, originally until 20 December 1997 and subsequently, under new legislation, until 31 March 1998, proceedings concerning claims for the restitution of or compensation for property, inter alia in cases where the property had been confiscated by virtue of criminal judgments handed down before 31 December 1958.
Prior to the 1998 amendments, the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions (Zakon o izvrševanju kazenskih sankcij, Official Journal no. 17/78, 8/90) applied also to the restitution of property forfeited by criminal judgments which had been handed down before 31 December 1958 and had later been quashed (see the ’s decision mentioned under “3. The Denationalisation Act”).
The 1998 Act on Amendments of, and Supplements to, the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions (Zakon o spremembah in dopolnitvah Zakona o izvrševanju kazenskih sankcij, Official Journal no. 10/98) added new Sections 145A and 145C to the Act. As far as claims for restitution of property forfeited by criminal judgments handed down before 31 December 1958 are concerned, Section 145A replaced Section 145 and referred back to the Denationalisation Act to govern the form and scope of restitution, the restrictions on restitution and the valuation of property, thus providing again for a less favourable restitution regime than that granted under the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions. Section 145C expressly removed the right to compensation for loss of profits due to the forfeiture of property during the period of forfeiture.
Section 3 made the change applicable also in non-contentious and contentious proceedings concerning the restitution of confiscated property when such proceedings had commenced before the Act came into force, but had not become final by that time.
In June 2002, further to the ’s ruling of 15 November 2001, Section 145C was amended again so that persons entitled under Section 145A may now claim compensation for loss of profits incurred throughout the period running from the quashing of the forfeiture of the property until the decision on its restitution becomes final.
On 5 November 1992 the Constitutional Court quashed Section 92 of the Denationalisation Act, which provided for the restitution of property forfeited by virtue of criminal judgments, which had been handed down before 31 December 1958 and later quashed on the basis of extraordinary legal remedies, to be governed by the Denationalisation Act (decision no. U-I-10/92). The court established that the challenged provisions interfered with the effect of final decisions on the quashing of the criminal judgments and retroactively affected the rights of wrongfully convicted persons. According to the court’s findings, the restitution of this type of property should instead be governed by the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions, which provided for a more favourable restitution regime.
On 13 February 1998 the  upheld in part a constitutional initiative challenging the provisions of the Act on the Temporary Suspension of Certain Provisions of the Denationalisation Act and of the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions (a joined decision U-I-200/97). It ruled, inter alia, that the legislator had not complied with the requirement of proportionality when it suspended the two Acts and had thus affected the human rights of all the claimants in restitution proceedings in order to revise the restitution regime applying to only some of them. The court established that there was a violation of the constitutional rights protected under Article 14 (right to equality before the law).
Following a constitutional initiative lodged by the applicant and some other individuals, the Constitutional Court was called on to rule on the constitutionality of Sections 145A and 145C of the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions, which refer to the Denationalisation Act to govern the restitution of property forfeited by criminal judgments handed down before 31 December 1958, and thus provide for a less favourable restitution regime. The court held that the challenged provisions did not conflict with the Constitution, because such interference with the constitutional rights granted under Articles 30 (right to rehabilitation and compensation in criminal proceedings) and 33 (right to own and inherit property) of the Constitution was indispensable for the protection of the rights of other claimants under the Denationalisation Act, who were similarly entitled to reparation for the wrongs perpetrated in the aftermath of the Second World War (a joined decision no. U-I-60/98 of 16 July 1998). The principle of the Welfare State empowered the legislator, with due consideration paid to the right of all citizens to social security, to have regard to the financial resources of the State and, in cases which were constitutionally admissible, also to restrict certain rights accordingly.
The Constitutional Court also added that, when deciding on 5 November 1992 to quash Section 92 of the Denationalisation Act and to consider the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanction as the appropriate basis to govern the restitution of property forfeited by criminal judgments rendered prior to 31 December 1958 (decision no. U-I-10/92), it had been unaware of the full extent of the property forfeited through criminal proceedings prior to 31 December 1958 and thus also of the financial obligations incumbent on the State.
The  further ruled that Article 3 of the Act on Amendments of, and Supplements to, the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions was in conformity with the Constitution, notwithstanding the fact that it retroactively interfered with acquired rights, because the retroactive effect of the Act was justified by the public interest.