The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 3 June 1999, within the three-month period laid down by former Articles 32 § 1 and 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (26297/95) against Austria lodged with the Commission under former Article 25 by Mr G.S., an Austrian national, on 9 December 1994. The applicant is represented by Mr M. Pochendorfer, a lawyer practising in Ried-im-Innkreis. The Government of Austria are represented by their Agent, Mr F. Cede, Ambassador, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The applicant asked the Court not to reveal his identity.
The Commission’s request referred to former Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby Austria had recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (former Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach of Article 6 § 1. 
On 7 July 1999 the Panel of the Grand Chamber decided, pursuant to Article 5 § 4 of Protocol No. 11 to the Convention and Rules 100 § 1 and 24 § 6 of the Rules of Court, that the application would be examined by one of the Sections. It was, thereupon, assigned to the Third Section.
The Chamber constituted with the Section included ex officio Mr W. Fuhrmann, the judge elected in respect of Austria (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 26 § 1 (a) of the Rules of Court) and Mr P. Kūris, Acting President of the Section (Rule 12). The other members designated by the latter to complete the Chamber were Mrs F. Tulkens, Mr K. Jungwiert, Mrs H.S. Greve, Mr K. Traja and Mr M. Ugrekhelidze.
In accordance with Rule 59 § 3 the President of the Chamber invited the parties to submit memorials on the issues in the application. The Registrar received the applicant’s memorial on 21 October 1999 and the Government’s memorial on 25 October 1999.
After consulting the Agent of the Government and the applicant, the Chamber decided not to hold a hearing in the case.
On 21 September 1988 the applicant applied to the Provincial Governor (Landeshauptmann) for Upper Austria for the grant of a licence to run a pharmacy in Ried-im-Innkreis.
On 23 May 1990 the Provincial Governor for Upper Austria dismissed the application. The Governor, having regard to observations filed by sixteen neighbouring municipalities and by the Upper Austrian Board of Pharmacists (Apothekerkammer), noted that two pharmacies existed already in the town concerned and a third licence had meanwhile been granted to another pharmacist, Ms. W.  Taking into account the population, no further licence could be granted.
On 22 June 1990 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Federal Ministry for Health, Sports and Consumer Protection (Bundesministerium für Gesundheit, Sport und Konsumentenschutz).
On 17 July 1990 the Provincial Governor dismissed the applicant's request to participate as a party in the proceedings regarding the licence which had been granted to another pharmacist.  His appeal to the Federal Ministry for Health, Sports and Consumer Protection was to no avail.
On 30 April 1991 the applicant lodged an application against the administration’s failure to decide (Säumnisbeschwerde) with the Administrative Court (Verwaltungsgerichtshof), complaining that the Ministry for Health, Sports and Consumer Protection had not decided on his appeal of 22 June 1990 within the statutory six-month time-limit.
On 12 June 1991 the Federal Ministry for Health, Sports and Consumer Protection dismissed the applicant's appeal against the decision of 23 May 1990.
On 30 July 1991 the applicant filed an appeal with the Austrian Administrative Court. On 16 October 1991 the Ministry for Health, Sports and Consumer Protection filed observations and, on 2 June 1992, Mrs W., who participated in the proceedings as an interested party (mitbeteiligte Partei) filed observations.
At some time after the introduction of his appeal with the Administrative Court, the applicant obtained a licence to run a pharmacy in Obernberg-am-Inn.
By letter of 5 December 1995, the applicant informed the Administrative Court that, following an agreement with the pharmacist Mrs W., he withdrew his appeal.  On 11 December 1995 the Administrative Court terminated the proceedings.
The relevant law is to be found in the Pharmacy Act (Apothekengesetz) 1907, RGBl. Nr. 5/1907 (Reichsgesetzblatt, Official Gazette of the Austrian Empire), as last amended in 1993, BGBl. Nr. 96/1993 (Bundesgesetzblatt, Federal Official Gazette).
As regards the running of pharmacies, the legislator considered that, on the one hand, pharmacies render medical services in the public interest and, on the other hand, they are commercial enterprises.  In order to avoid speculation in an open market, the legislator opted for a licensing system, based on need.
Section 10 of the Pharmacy Act provides as follows.
"1.	A licence to open a new pharmacy is to be granted upon request if
(1) a medical practitioner is permanently exercising his profession in the municipality where the new pharmacy is to be set up; and
(2) there is a need for a new pharmacy.
There is in particular no need for a new pharmacy if
(1)	the number of persons to be supplied by the pharmacy to be set up is less than 5,500, or
(2)	the distance between the new pharmacy to be set up and the nearest existing pharmacy is less than 500 meters, or
(3) the number of persons who continue to be supplied by one of the pharmacies existing in the vicinity will decrease as a result of the new pharmacy and drop below 5,500."
According to section 13, the owner of a pharmacy and the manager in charge are obliged to run the pharmacy without interruption.
Under section 19 § 1 (1), a licence to run a pharmacy may be revoked if the pharmacy has not become operational within one year of receipt of the licence.
Article 6 of the Austrian Basic Law (Staatsgrundgesetz) provides that all citizens have liberty of movement and the freedom to choose their place of residence, that they are entitled to acquire real estate of any kind and freely dispose of it, and that, in accordance with the relevant legislation, they can exercise any profession (Erwerbszweig).
The applicant applied to the Commission on 9 December 1994. He alleged a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention on account of the length of the proceedings concerning his request for a licence to run a pharmacy.
The Commission declared the application (no. 26297/95) admissible on 10 September 1997. In its report of 3 March 1999 (former Article 31 of the Convention), it expressed unanimously the opinion that there had been a breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
In their memorial, the Government asked the Court to find that Article 6 § 1 was not applicable to the proceedings at issue, or alternatively, that there was no violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The applicant requested the Court to find a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.