The case originated in nine applications against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by nine Russian nationals (“the applicants”). The application numbers and the dates on which they were lodged with the Court, as well as the applicants’ full names and dates of birth, are listed in the Appendix.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicants complained, in particular, that they had been denied an opportunity to appear in person before the court in the civil proceedings to which they were parties.
On 22 April 2016 the above complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The Court also informed the parties that it was considering the suitability of applying a pilot judgment procedure and requested the parties’ observations on the matter.
The facts of the cases, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants, who were detained at the material time in Russian penal facilities, were claimants in separate sets of civil proceedings. Most of the applicants were seeking compensation for various aspects of the conditions of their detention, for unlawful criminal prosecution, or for lack of adequate medical care.
None of the applicants were able to attend the hearings at which their claims were examined. The domestic courts at both levels of jurisdiction refused to allow them to be present. In most of the cases the courts held that there was no domestic legal provision for bringing detainees to court and referred to Article 77.1 of the Code on the Execution of Sentences and the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. They also noted that the applicants had had the opportunity to submit written pleadings and to retain counsel to represent them in court.
The applicants’ claims were refused at two levels of jurisdiction. The dates of the final judgments are set out in the appended table.
For relevant rules of Russian civil procedure and the practice of Russian courts, see Yevdokimov and Others v. Russia, nos. 27236/05 and 10 others, §§ 9-15, 16 February 2016.
The Code of Civil Procedure provides as follows:
“1.  Final judicial decisions may be re-examined in the light of newly discovered or new circumstances.
The grounds on which final judicial decisions can be re-examined are:
...
2)  new circumstances – the circumstances indicated in paragraph 4 of the present Article which have appeared after the adoption of a judicial decision and which are significant for the correct resolution of a case.
...
The new circumstances are:
...
4)  a finding by the European Court of Human Rights, after examination of a case in which the final decision has been the subject of an application before it, of a violation of the provisions of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.”
Ruling no. 31 of 11 December 2012 by the Plenary Supreme Court on the “Application of provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure for considering applications for re-examination of final judicial decisions in the light of newly discovered or new circumstances” established that the list of grounds for re-examination of a judicial decision in the light of new circumstances, as set out in Article 392 § 4, was exhaustive and that a judicial decision may be re-examined only if the new circumstances were “of substantial importance for the correct examination of the case” (point 8).
Ruling no. 21 of 27 June 2013 by the Plenary Supreme Court on the “Application of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November 1950 and its Protocols by the courts of general jurisdiction” specified that a judicial act should be re-examined if the applicant had continued to suffer from the negative consequences of such an act and the Court had established a violation of the Convention or its Protocols of a procedural nature that put in question the outcome of the proceedings (point 17; for more details about the ruling, see Davydov v. Russia, no. 18967/07, § 15, 30 October 2014).
By decision of 19 April 2017, the Presidium of the St Petersburg City Court rejected an application for the reopening of civil proceedings submitted by Ms Skorodumova, one of the applicants in the case of Melnikov and Others v. Russia (nos. 40869/06 and 8 others) whose applications had been struck out on 22 November 2016 by a decision of a Committee of the Third Section of the Court. The Presidium held that, in the absence of a Court judgment on the merits of the applicants’ complaints or a finding of a violation affecting the outcome of the civil proceedings to which Ms Skorodumova had been a party, the original judicial decision was not amenable to re-examination under Article 392 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
By an appeal decision of 4 October 2017, the Khabarovsk Regional Court quashed the first-instance court’s decision refusing an application for the reopening of civil proceedings submitted by Mr Resin, one of the applicants in the Yevdokimov and Others case (cited above) in which the Court had found a violation of Article 6 § 1 on account of the applicants’ absence from the civil proceedings. The Khabarovsk Regional Court pointed out that the procedural rights of parties to the proceedings could not be restricted in an arbitrary fashion and that Mr Resin’s exclusion had been incompatible with the position of the Constitutional Court. It ordered a reopening of the civil proceedings. By contrast, the appeal judgment by the Perm Regional Court of 31 May 2017 in case no. 33-5962 dismissed an application for the reopening of proceedings lodged by Mr Davydov, in respect of whom the Court found a similar violation (see Barkov and Others v. Russia, nos. 38054/05 and 8 others, 19 July 2016). The Perm Regional Court noted in particular that Mr Davydov had been a party to a dispute over a debt he had owed to another person, that the materials of the case had been destroyed, and that he had been awarded compensation by the Court for what had been an essentially procedural violation of his rights.