The case originated in an application on 9 January 2002 (no. 3501/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ms D. Rybczyńska and Mr T. Rybczyński.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz, the Plenipotentiary of the Minister of Foreign Affairs for cases and procedures before the European Court of Human Rights.
On 6 October 2005 the Court decided to communicate the application. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicants, Ms D. Rybczyński and Mr T. Rybczyński, brother and sister, are Polish nationals, who were born in 1969 and 1971 respectively and live in Przemyśl. They are represented before the Court by Mr J. Rybczyński, the applicants’ father.
On 27 April 1993 the applicants filed a civil action for damages with the  and at the same time requested an exemption from court fees. The proceedings concerned the devastation caused to the applicants’ flat by tenants.
On 18 May 1993 the court granted the applicants partial exemption from the fees. The applicants appealed and challenged the impartiality of all the judges of the court, since its President was a brother of the husband of one of the defendants. On 24 September 1993 the Rzeszów Court of Appeal exempted the applicants from the payment of court fees and subsequently two judges were excluded from the examination of their case.
On 15 November 1993 a hearing was held, but it was adjourned until 26 November 1993 upon the defendants’ request.
On 26 November 1993 the defendants replied to the claim. They stated that they had lived in the applicants’ flat from 1945 to 1992 as  claimants. They denied having devastated the flat and pointed out that the applicants had sued all of the other tenants. At the same time they requested the court to summon 5 witnesses. The hearing held on 26 November 1993 was adjourned upon the defendants’ representative’s motion.
Between 13 December 1993 and 14 February 1994 four hearings were held, during which the court heard 9 witnesses.
On 16 March 1994 the applicants extended their claim and demanded compensation for lost profits as a result of the devastation of their flat.
Between 23 March 1994 and 5 September 1994 three further hearings were held, during which, inter alia, the applicants requested the court to appoint an expert to assess the damage.
On 11 October 1994 the expert appointed by the Przemyśl Regional Court sent the case file back and stated that she was not able to prepare the opinion due to the applicants’ representative’s obstructive conduct. The case file was sent to another expert, who on 9 November 1994 returned it informing the court about his close personal relations with the husband of one of the defendants and with the applicants’ representative. On 30 November 1994 the court sent the case file to another expert and on 26 May 1995 the requested opinion was submitted. The applicants challenged it.
At a hearing on 19 July 1995 the court ordered a supplementary opinion and adjourned the hearing upon the defendants’ attorney’s request.
On 6 November 1995 the expert supplemented his previous opinion.
On 29 December 1995 a hearing was held at which the court heard the expert and, upon the defendants’ request, ordered another supplementary expert opinion and adjourned the hearing.
On 26 February 1996 the expert informed the court about his serious illness and asked to be relieved of the obligation to prepare the opinion. Consequently, on 21 March 1996 the case file was sent to another expert who was given a time-limit of 3 months to prepare the opinion. However, on 1 April 1996 he returned the case file informing the court about his close personal relations with the husband of one of the defendants and with the applicants’ representative. In consequence, on 25 April 1996 the case file was sent to another expert, who was ordered to prepare the opinion within 3 months. However, on 29 May 1996 he returned the case file pointing out that he did not have sufficient qualifications to prepare it. On 17 July 1996 the court sent the case file to another expert, who was given 3 months to prepare an opinion. It was submitted to the  on 31 October 1996.
On 26 November 1996 the applicants and the defendants lodged objections against the expert opinion.
Between 9 December 1996 and 17 December 1997 four hearings were held, during which the expert submitted his supplementary opinion, the applicants challenged it and both parties were heard by the court.
On 29 December 1997 the  gave a judgment, partly dismissing the applicants’ action. Both parties appealed.
By a judgment of 29 October 1998 the Rzeszów Court of Appeal partly allowed the applicants’ and dismissed the defendants’ appeal. The applicant lodged a cassation appeal.
On 10 July 2001 the Supreme Court refused to entertain the cassation appeal.
Articles 417 et seq. of the Civil Code (kodeks cywilny) provide for the State’s liability in tort.
In the version applicable until 1 September 2004, Article 417 § 1, which lays down a general rule, reads as follows:
“1.  The State Treasury shall be liable for damage caused by a State official in the course of carrying out the duties entrusted to him.”
Article 418 of the Civil Code, as applicable until 18 December 2001, provided for the following exception in cases where damage resulted from the issue of a decision or order:
“1.  If, in consequence of the issue of a decision or order, a State official has caused damage, the State Treasury shall be liable only if a breach of the law has been involved in the issue of the decision or order and if that breach is the subject of a prosecution under the criminal law or of a disciplinary investigation, and the guilt of the person who caused the damage in question has been established by a final conviction or has been admitted by the superior of that person.
The absence of the establishment of guilt by way of a criminal conviction or in a decision given in disciplinary proceedings shall not exclude the State Treasury’s liability for damage if such proceedings cannot be instituted in view of the [statutory] exception to prosecution or disciplinary actions.”
On 1 September 2004 the Law of 17 June 2004 on amendments to the Civil Code and other statutes (Ustawa o zmianie ustawy – kodeks cywilny oraz niektórych innych ustaw) (“the 2004 Amendment”) entered into force. While the relevant amendments have in essence been aimed at enlarging the scope of the State Treasury’s liability for tort under Article 417 of the Civil Code – which included adding a new Article 4171 and the institution of the State’s tortious liability for its omission to enact legislation (the so-called “legislative omission”; “zaniedbanie legislacyjne”) – they are also to be seen in the context of the operation of a new statute introducing remedies for the unreasonable length of judicial proceedings.
Following the 2004 Amendment, Article 4171, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“3.  If damage has been caused by failure to give a ruling (orzeczenie) or decision (decyzja) where there is a statutory duty to give them, reparation for [the damage] may be sought after it has been established in the relevant proceedings that the failure to give a ruling or decision was contrary to the law, unless otherwise provided for by other specific provisions.”
However, under the transitional provisions of Article 5 of the 2004 Amendment, Article 417 as applicable before 1 September 2004 shall apply to all events and legal situations that subsisted before that date.
On 4 December 2001 the  (Trybunał Konstytucyjny) dealt with two constitutional complaints in which the applicants challenged the constitutionality of Articles 417 and 418 of the Civil Code. They alleged, in particular, that those provisions were incompatible with Articles 64 and 77 § 1 of the Constitution.
On the same day the  gave judgment (no. SK 18/00) and held that Article 417 of the Civil Code was compatible with Article 77 § 1 of the Constitution in so far as it provided that the State Treasury was liable for damage caused by the unlawful action of a State official carried out in the course of performing his duties. It further held that even though Article 418 of the Civil Code was compatible with Article 64 of the Constitution, it was contrary to Article 77 § 1 since it linked the award of compensation for such damage with the personal culpability of the State official concerned, established in criminal or disciplinary proceedings.
On 18 December 2001, the date on which the ’s judgment took effect, Article 418 was repealed. The ’s opinion on the consequences of the repeal read, in so far as relevant:
“The elimination of Article 418 of the Civil Code from the legal system ... means that the State Treasury’s liability for an action of a public authority consisting in the issue of unlawful decisions or orders will flow from the general principles of the State liability laid down in Article 417 of the Civil Code. This, however, does not rule out the application in the present legal system of other, not necessarily only those listed in the Civil Code, principles of the State liability laid down in specific statutes.”
On 17 September 2004 the Law of 17 June 2004 on complaints about a breach of the right to a trial within a reasonable time (Ustawa o skardze na naruszenie prawa strony do rozpoznania sprawy w postępowaniu sądowym bez nieuzasadnionej zwłoki) (“the 2004 Act”) entered into force. It lays down various legal means designed to counteract and/or redress the undue length of judicial proceedings.
A party to pending proceedings may ask for the acceleration of those proceedings and/or just satisfaction for their unreasonable length under Article 2 read in conjunction with Article 5(1) of the 2004 Act.
Article 2, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“1.  Parties to proceedings may lodge a complaint that their right to a trial within a reasonable time has been breached [in the proceedings] if the proceedings in the case last longer than is necessary to examine the factual and legal circumstances of the case ... or longer than is necessary to conclude enforcement proceedings or other proceedings concerning the execution of a court decision (unreasonable length of proceedings).”
Article 5 provides, in so far as relevant:
“1.  A complaint about the unreasonable length of proceedings shall be lodged while the proceedings are pending. ...”
Article 16 refers to proceedings that have been terminated and that do not fall under the transitional provision of Article 18 in the following terms:
“A party which has not lodged a complaint about the unreasonable length of the proceedings under Article 5 (1) may claim – under Article 417 of the Civil Code ... – compensation for the damage which resulted from the unreasonable length of the proceedings after the proceedings concerning the merits of the case have ended.”
Article 442 of the Civil Code sets out limitation periods in respect of various claims based on tort. That provision applies to situations covered by Article 417 of the Civil Code. Article 442, in so far as relevant, reads:
“1.  A claim for compensation for damage caused by a tort shall lapse 3 years following the date on which the claimant learned of the damage and the persons liable for it. However, the claim shall in any case lapse 10 years following the date on which the event causing the damage had occurred.”
Article 18 of the 2004 Act lays down the following transitional rules in relation to the applications already pending before the Court:
“1.  Within six months after the date of entry into force of this law persons who, before that date, had lodged a complaint with the European Court of Human Rights ... complaining of a breach of the right to a trial within a reasonable time guaranteed by Article 6 (1) of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ..., may lodge a complaint about the unreasonable length of the proceedings on the basis of the provisions of this law if their complaint to the Court had been lodged in the course of the impugned proceedings and if the Court has not adopted a decision concerning the admissibility of their case.
A complaint lodged under subsection 1 shall indicate the date on which the application was lodged with the Court.
The relevant court shall immediately inform the Minister of Foreign Affairs of any complaints lodged under subsection 1.”