The case originated in an application (no. 63879/00) against the French Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Tunisian national, Mr Laïfa Ben Naceur (“the applicant”), on 13 September 2000.
The French Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr R. Abraham, and his successor, Ms E. Belliard, Director of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that the additional time granted to the Principal Public Prosecutor for appealing against a judgment of the Criminal Court amounted to a breach of the principle of equality of arms as enshrined in Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Second Section (Rule 52 § 1).
In a decision of 29 November 2005 the Chamber declared the application admissible.
Neither the Government nor the applicant filed further written observations on the merits of the case (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1951 and is currently detained in Muret Prison (Haute-Garonne).
On 22 February 1999 the Lyons Criminal Court sentenced the applicant, who had been represented by counsel at trial, to seven years’ imprisonment and ordered his permanent exclusion from French territory for drug trafficking while classified in law as a recidivist.
Neither the applicant nor the public prosecutor appealed against the judgment within the ten-day time-limit laid down in Article 498 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 8 March 1999 the public prosecutor asked the Principal Public Prosecutor at the Lyons Court of Appeal to lodge an appeal; the Principal Public Prosecutor did so in a notice of appeal served on 16 March 1999 in accordance with Article 505 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, by which the Principal Public Prosecutor has two months from the date of delivery of the Criminal Court judgment in which to lodge an appeal.
Before the Court of Appeal, the Principal Public Prosecutor – the only appellant – submitted that the applicant should be sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment and permanently excluded from French territory.
The applicant filed submissions urging the Court of Appeal to declare the appeal inadmissible for non-compliance with Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and the principle of equality of arms in that it had been lodged outside the time-limit applicable to the public prosecutor at the Criminal Court and to himself. He also challenged the finding as to his guilt.
On 1 July 1999 the Lyons Court of Appeal upheld the judgment as to the issue of guilt and the permanent exclusion from French territory, and increased the sentence to twelve years’ imprisonment, with a minimum term of two-thirds of the sentence. Addressing the applicant’s plea of inadmissibility, the Court of Appeal held:
“Under Article 505 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Principal Public Prosecutor may lodge an appeal within two months from the date of delivery of the judgment. This opportunity granted to the Principal Public Prosecutor is not at variance with the provisions of Article 6 of the aforementioned Convention where, as in this instance, the right of appeal is also available to the defendant. The appeal by the Principal Public Prosecutor must be declared admissible.”
The applicant appealed on points of law and filed additional submissions in which he reiterated his argument that Article 505 of the Code of Criminal Procedure did not comply with the principle of equality of arms enshrined in Article 6 of the Convention. He also relied on the case-law of the Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation, which had ruled that Article 546 of the Code of Criminal Procedure infringed Article 6 of the Convention in that it afforded only the Principal Public Prosecutor the right to appeal against certain judgments concerning petty offences (contraventions).
In a judgment of 15 March 2000 the Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal on points of law, holding as follows:
“In declaring the appeal by the Principal Public Prosecutor admissible, the Court of Appeal stated that the opportunity granted to the latter to lodge an appeal within two months from the date of delivery of the judgment, in accordance with Article 505 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, was not at variance with the provisions of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights where, as in this instance, the right of appeal was also available to the defendant.
In so holding, and in so far as Article 505 of the Code of Criminal Procedure does not deprive the defendant of a remedy that could be used by the Principal Public Prosecutor but simply subjects him to different formal conditions and time-limits from those applicable to the Principal Public Prosecutor, the judges applied the law correctly ...”
“An ordinary appeal may be lodged against judgments of the criminal courts. ...”
“The following persons have a right of appeal:
“Save in the case provided for in Article 505, an appeal shall be lodged within ten days from the delivery of a judgment given in the presence of both parties. ...”
“Where one of the parties appeals during the above-mentioned periods, the other parties shall have an additional five days in which to lodge an appeal.”
“The Principal Public Prosecutor shall lodge an appeal, by service either on the defendant or on the person civilly liable for the offence, within two months from the date on which judgment is delivered.”
“The case shall be referred to the Court of Appeal to the extent determined by the notice of appeal and by the applicant’s capacity as stated in Article 515 ...”
“The Court of Appeal, on an appeal by the prosecution authorities, may either uphold the judgment or overturn it entirely or in part, to the defendant’s advantage or disadvantage.
Where only the defendant, the person liable under civil law, the civil party or the assurer of one of the aforementioned persons has appealed, the court may not worsen the appellant’s situation ...”
In relation to judgments concerning petty offences, the Court of Cassation has held that Article 546 of the Code of Criminal Procedure infringed Article 6 of the Convention in that it afforded only the Principal Public Prosecutor the opportunity to appeal against any such judgments, whereas the defendant and the public prosecutor were entitled to do so in only three specific situations (see Court of Cassation, Criminal Division, 6 May 1997, Bull. crim. no. 170, Dalloz 1998, p. 223; 21 May 1997, Bull. crim. no. 191; and 17 June 1998, Bull. crim. no. 196). Law no. 99-515 of 23 June 1999 repealed the final paragraph of Article 546 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, abolishing the general right of appeal enjoyed by the Principal Public Prosecutor, who is now subject to the same restrictive conditions for appealing as the defendant and the public prosecutor .
Appeals in cases concerning intermediate criminal offences (délits) have the automatic effect of transferring all the factual and legal issues they raise to the Court of Appeal. Under Article 509 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the notice of appeal defines the scope of the case referred to the Court of Appeal, which may be restricted to certain parts of the judgment only. Where this is the case, a cross-appeal (Article 500 of the same Code) allows the other party to extend the scope of the case referred to the Court of Appeal beyond the points raised in the main appeal.
In assessing the compliance of Article 505 of the Code of Criminal Procedure with Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the Court of Cassation has confirmed the approach adopted in the present case in several subsequent judgments, holding that the additional time granted to the Principal Public Prosecutor for lodging an appeal was not in breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in so far as the defendant also had a right of appeal and sufficient time in which to make meaningful use of it (see Court of Cassation, Criminal Division, 27 June 2000, Bull. crim. no. 243; 24 October 2001; 9 January 2002; and 25 June 2003).
Where the Principal Public Prosecutor lodges an appeal within the two-month time-limit, no cross-appeal is available (Court of Cassation, Criminal Division, 29 February 2000, Bull. crim. no. 86). Nevertheless, even without having the status of appellant, the defendant may, as the respondent, submit arguments seeking to have the judgment convicting him at first instance overturned to his advantage, as provided by Article 515, paragraph 1, of the Code of Criminal Procedure. This principle was reiterated by the Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation in a judgment of 17 January 1996 (appeal no. 95-80854, published in Bull. crim.).
“... Functions of the public prosecutor
‘Public prosecutors’ are public authorities who, on behalf of society and in the public interest, ensure the application of the law where the breach of the law carries a criminal sanction, taking into account both the rights of the individual and the necessary effectiveness of the criminal justice system.
...”