The case originated in an application (no. 43316/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Daniel Kowalski (“the applicant”), on 28 August 2008.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz, succeeded by Ms J. Chrzanowska, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained, in particular, that he had been deprived of access to the Supreme Court.
On 13 January 2011 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
In accordance with Protocol No. 14, the application was allocated to a Committee.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in Łódź.
On 16 October 2007 the applicant was convicted by Sieradz District Court of extortion and sentenced to one year and six months imprisonment. On an unspecified date the applicant appealed against the first-instance judgment.
On 23 January 2008 the  dismissed the appeal. The judgment was sent to the applicant on 12 February 2008. On an unspecified date it was served on the applicant.
The applicant requested the District Court to appoint a legal-aid lawyer with a view to filing a cassation appeal. On 12 March 2008 his legalaid application was received by the .
On 18 March 2008 the  refused to examine the applicant’s request for the appointment of a legal-aid lawyer. The court stated that the time-limit for lodging a cassation appeal had expired on 14 March 2008. The court also informed the applicant that the refusal was final and could not be appealed against.
The cassation appeal in criminal proceedings in  is an extraordinary remedy that enables to challenge final judgments on the grounds of serious violations of law which might have affected the outcome of the proceedings. The cassation appeal may be lodged only if the different conditions defined by the Code of Criminal Proceedings (“the Code”) are met. It may be lodged not only by the parties but also by the Attorney General, the Ombudsman and, if the rights of a child were infringed, by the Ombusdman for Children. The aim of the cassation proceedings is to ensure a protection against the most serious violations of law. Under Polish law, a party to criminal proceedings has no subjective right to access a third instance court.
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning legal representation in cassation appeal criminal proceedings before the Supreme Court are stated in the Court’s judgment in the case of Wersel v. Poland, no. 30358/04, §§ 26-29, 13 September 2011.