The case originated in two applications (nos. 77209/16 and 77225/16) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Maltese nationals, Mr Michael Galea and Mr Edward Pavia (“the applicants”), on 9 December 2016.
The applicants were represented by Dr I. Refalo and the first applicant was also represented by Dr S. Grech, lawyers practising in Valletta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicants alleged that they had suffered a breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in relation to the length of the criminal and constitutional redress proceedings, and of Article 13 of the Convention concerning the lack of an effective remedy with regard to the length of proceedings complaint.
On 4 July 2017 the Chamber to which the case was allocated decided to join the applications and to give notice of the complaints concerning Article 6 § 1 (length of proceedings) alone and in conjunction with Article 13 to the respondent Government and declared the remainder of the applications inadmissible.
The applicant in the first case, Mr Michael Galea (the first applicant), is a Maltese national who was born in 1935 and lives in St Julian’s. The applicant in the second case, Mr Edward Pavia (the second applicant), is a Maltese national who was born in 1954 and lives in Tarxien.
In 1983 the first and second applicants were accused, together with other persons of several criminal offences. The charges against the first applicant included making false declarations on documents intended for the public authorities; using his position in public office to facilitate the evasion of customs duties; and acting as an accomplice in the use by third parties of false documents and goods illegally imported into the country. The second applicant was accused of falsification of documents, use of false documents and illegal importation of goods into Malta.
The case concerned several containers originating from Germany, their importation into Malta and the sale by a German company of their contents to a Maltese company. The second applicant was a director of the latter company. The containers allegedly contained alcoholic beverages but the customs declaration in Malta stated that they carried cheese. The investigation had started after cheap alcoholic beverages had appeared on the market, indicating that they had been imported illegally. Eventually, on 23 December 1983, the police found a large quantity of alcohol in a garage owned by a transport worker at the abovementioned Maltese company.
On 1 December 1994 the Court of Magistrates found the first applicant guilty of all the charges against him while the second applicant was found guilty of forging and using documents to import goods illegally into Malta. The court sentenced both applicants to two years’ imprisonment, suspended for four years, together with a fine of 403,430.23 Maltese liri (MTL – approximately 939,738 euros (EUR)).
The applicants and the other defendants appealed.
On 5 October 1998 the Court of Criminal Appeal reversed in part the judgment of the Court of Magistrates in connection with the first applicant, and upheld it in connection with the second applicant. It found the first applicant not guilty of complicity in falsifying documents, but upheld the guilty verdict in regard to complicity in the use of a false document. The court sentenced him to two years’ imprisonment suspended for two years (instead of four), together with a fine of MTL 403,430.23. The court also ordered that failure to pay the fine within one year would lead to it being converted into a term of imprisonment of eighteen months.
On 17 March 1999, the applicants, with two of the other accused (hereinafter jointly referred to as “the plaintiffs”), filed a constitutional claim before the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional competence. Invoking Article 6 of the Convention and Article 39 of the Constitution of Malta, they complained about the length of the criminal proceedings. They also alleged that the trial had not been fair because the court-appointed expert, X., had worked for the same department as the prosecution (the Department of Police) and had therefore lacked independence. The plaintiffs further alleged that the proceedings before the Court of Criminal Appeal had not been fair. The plaintiffs also invoked Article 3 of the Convention, alleging that the mental suffering and psychological trauma they had endured throughout the criminal proceeding had amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment.
The proceedings before the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional competence involved fortyfive hearings, including twentyfive where no actual proceedings took place. Approximately fifteen adjournments were either attributable to the Attorney General who was the defendant in the case, or the court, while nine others were attributable to the plaintiffs. On 27 November 2006 the case was adjourned for judgment. Three further adjournments for this purpose occurred throughout 2007. A period of inactivity occurred between 27 October 2008 and 2 February 2009 as a result of a request by the applicants to await a decision by the European Court of Human Rights which could have influenced the outcome of their case. On the latter date the plaintiffs requested the court to give judgment and the case was adjourned to 16 March 2009 for judgment. A further adjournment for this purpose ensued.
In a judgment of 29 September 2009 the court declined to exercise its constitutional powers and dismissed the case without evaluating its merits. It concluded that alternative remedies had been available to the plaintiffs, as established under Article 46 § 2 of the Constitution.
The plaintiffs appealed and on 28 May 2010 the Constitutional Court quashed the judgment of 29 September 2009. The case was referred back to the firstinstance court to be examined on the merits.
The procedure before the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional competence involved twenty-three hearings, including fifteen where no actual proceedings took place. Approximately five adjournments were attributable to the Attorney General or the court. Between 28 March 2011 and 20 November 2013 the proceedings remained at a standstill as the remaining plaintiffs were unable to notify the heirs of one of them who had died as the heirs had refused the inheritance.
On 24 June 2015 the Civil Court (First Hall), in its constitutional competence, found that the plaintiffs had suffered a violation of Article 6 in respect of the length of the proceedings and rejected the remainder of the complaints. It awarded the plaintiffs EUR 15,000 each, to be set off against the fine imposed by the criminal courts. Two-thirds of the costs of the proceedings were to be met by the plaintiffs and one third by the Attorney General.
In regard to the length of the proceedings, the court acknowledged that it had been excessive. The proceedings had begun in 1983, the Court of Magistrates had given judgment on 1 December 1995 and the Court of Criminal Appeal on 5 October 1998. The court authorities had been responsible for some of the delay, as had officials at the Department of Police in relation to their role of presenting evidence at certain hearings. While the case had not been simple, sixteen years for criminal proceedings was excessively lengthy.
The second applicant and the other plaintiffs lodged appeals with the Constitutional Court. The first applicant lodged a separate appeal; the Government also appealed. Nine hearings were held by the Constitutional Court, including four where no proceedings took place and which were adjourned, those adjournments being attributable to the Government or the court.
On 24 June 2016 the Constitutional Court upheld the findings of the firstinstance court. However, it reduced the compensation granted to each applicant for nonpecuniary damage from EUR 15,000 to EUR 5,000. The distribution of the costs of the firstinstance proceedings was to remain as established by the firstinstance court (see paragraph 16 in fine above), while the costs of the proceedings before the Constitutional Court were to be divided equally between the parties.
The Constitutional Court referred to local caselaw which established that when calculating a just amount of compensation, the court had to take into consideration the following: any unusually long and excessive delays; the nature of the relevant proceedings; the degree of the state of uncertainty, frustration and anxiety such delays necessarily caused to the accused; any lack of initiative by plaintiffs in expediting their case; and any contribution by plaintiffs to delays in the proceedings. Taking into account that the criminal proceedings had lasted sixteen years and the inevitable psychological effect that that would have had on the plaintiffs, the Constitutional Court concluded that it was clear that the final judgment regarding the criminal allegations could have been reached more quickly. Bearing those considerations in mind and taking into account compensation granted in similar cases, the Constitutional Court reduced the amount originally granted in respect of nonpecuniary damage to EUR 5,000 for each applicant.