The case originated in an application (no. 40199/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Finnish national, Mr Pentti Antton Kallio (“the applicant”), on 6 November 2002.
The applicant was represented by Mr J. Pelkonen, a lawyer practising in Kaarina. The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Arto Kosonen of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged a violation of Article 6 § 1 and § 3 (d) of the Convention on account of the lack of an oral hearing, the refusal to hear his evidence and that of four witnesses and the refusal to stay the proceedings.
On 25 April 2007 the President of the Fourth Section of the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29§ 3).
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Kaarina.
The applicant is the sole answerable partner in a limited partnership company called Porin West-Print Ky. At the material time its line of activities was, inter alia, car repair and painting services, restaurant services and metal work.
The National Bureau of Investigation carried out a pre-trial investigation into the business activities of Porin West-Print Ky. The applicant, who was questioned as a suspect in an alleged tax fraud, proclaimed his innocence. In his closing statement, he expressed the view that other companies, represented by two other named individuals, had carried out the business activities which were the subject of the investigation and were therefore liable to pay tax. The file does not disclose whether anyone was charged with and convicted of the alleged offence.
In 1999 the south-west Finland Tax Office carried out a tax inspection into Porin West-Print Ky. It found that during the period from July 1998 to 20 December 1999 over 840,000 Finnish marks (FIM) (approximately 141,278 euros (EUR)) had been credited to the company’s account. The money had been paid in by several companies but most of the funds had not been recorded in the company’s books as income.
Basing himself on those transactions, the tax inspector considered that there was evidence of a sub-contracting relationship between Porin West-Print Ky and another company, R. Porin West-Print Ky’s line of activities had to be considered to include the sale of sub-contracting services to R. Formally this activity had been carried out in the name of another company T./Porin  and company F. For this reason, the tax inspector considered that Porin West-Print Ky was liable for the deduction of tax and social-security contributions in respect of the salaries paid to identified and unidentified employees. The total amount of the salaries was estimated on the basis of a list of hours worked found in the book-keeping records of R. and the bank statements of Porin West-Print Ky and the applicant. The salaries paid to identified employees ran to FIM 324,681 for the year 1998 and 53,000 in 1999. An additional FIM 50,000 was added in respect of unidentified employees to the estimated salaries for 1998.
Based on this reassessment, the Tax Office increased the tax liability and ordered the payment of FIM 359,609 in respect of 1998 and FIM 59,913 in respect of 1999. The file does not disclose the amounts of the tax surcharges.
Following a rectification request, the first amount was reduced to FIM 354,952.
Porin West-Print Ky appealed to the Turku Administrative Court (hallinto-oikeus, förvaltningsdomstolen), requesting an oral hearing and that the court hear testimony from the applicant and four other persons, Mr E.N., Mr A.L., Mr M.V. and Mr H.S. Porin West-Print Ky also requested a stay of enforcement until the case had been examined. According to the application form lodged with the Court, the amount in dispute was by then equivalent to EUR 33,885.
Porin West-Print Ky argued that Mr H.S. or companies T. and F., both controlled by Mr H.S., were responsible for social-security contributions. Although he had given Mr H.S. use of the Porin West-Print Ky bank card, the applicant had had nothing to do with the sub-contracting activities of Mr H.S. and his companies. As the sub-contracting work had been invoiced using the names and business indexes of the companies of Mr H.S., Porin West-Print Ky could not be considered liable to taxation.
The  received the written statements of the Tax Office and the tax inspector and the observations of the Tax Ombudsman and Porin West-Print Ky. The latter requested a stay of proceedings until the alleged tax fraud had been examined by the District Court.
In its decision of 22 May 2002 the Administrative Court noted that the company had requested an oral hearing to hear testimony about its business activities, about the identity of the employer in the sub-contracting jobs, about the sub-contracting invoiced on behalf of companies T., E. and F. and about the negotiations and sub-contracting jobs for R. It found an oral hearing manifestly unnecessary having regard to the tax inspection report, the other documents on the file and the fact that the applicant and three of the witnesses proposed had made statements on these issues during the pre-trial investigation. It did not comment on the request for a stay of proceedings.
The  referred in evidence to, inter alia, the statements of the applicant and three of the witnesses proposed given during the pre-trial investigation and the tax inspection. It rejected the appeal and gave the following reasons:
“...
Conclusions
The  considers, in particular on the basis of the statements of Mr H.S. and Mr M.V., the use of the preliminary taxation register of company T. ... and the transactions on the bank account, that it has been shown that the applicant has operated actively within Porin West-Print Ky. Therefore, the allegation that he did not have knowledge of the sub-contracting invoicing but only functioned as an employee of the companies owned by Mr H.S. is not credible. The applicant, as the answerable partner, is responsible for those using the company’s bank account and for the purposes of this use. The fact that Mr H.S. has used the company’s bank card does not show how the money withdrawn has been used.
The  finds that Porin West-Print Ky has carried out sub-contracting jobs for R. and that the invoicing has gone through companies T. and F. as dummies, as explained by the applicant himself in his reply at the preparatory stage of the tax inspection. Therefore the company is, as an employer, liable for the deduction of the tax and social–security contributions in respect of the salaries paid to its employees. As the estimation of the amounts of the salaries has not been shown to be incorrect, there is no reason to amend the decision to order payment.”
Porin West-Print Ky appealed again, renewing at the same time its request either for an oral hearing in the  or for the case to be referred back to the lower court.
On 27 September 2002 the  refused leave to appeal. It reasoned:
“The question in this case is whether Porin West-Print Ky is to be considered responsible as an employer for the deduction of tax and social-security contributions in respect of the employees considered to have worked for it, that is, whether Porin West-Print Ky is rightly considered to be liable to pay for the sub-contracting jobs in respect of which the contract invoicing and salaries have gone through the company’s books and bank accounts. There is no reason to bring the case before the  in the interests of the application of the law in other, similar cases or the uniformity of legal practice. Nor has there been any manifest error in the examination of the case. There are likewise no pressing economic reasons to grant leave to appeal.”
Section 38(1) of the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act (hallintolainkäyttölaki, förvaltningsprocesslagen; as amended by Act no. 433/1999) provides that an oral hearing must be held if requested by a private party. An oral hearing may, however, be dispensed with if a party’s request is ruled inadmissible or immediately dismissed, or if an oral hearing is clearly unnecessary due to the nature of the case or other circumstances.
In this regard, the explanatory report of the Government Bill (no. 217/1995) for the enactment of the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act states that an oral hearing contributes to a focused and immediate procedure but since it does not always bring any added value, it is important that the flexibility and cost effectiveness of the administrative procedure is not undermined. An oral hearing is to be held when it is necessary for the clarification of the issues and the hearing can be considered beneficial for the case as whole.
During the period from 2000 to 2006 the  did not hold any oral hearings in tax matters. As to the eight administrative courts, appellants requested an oral hearing in a total of 603 cases. The courts held an oral hearing in 129 cases. There is no information as to how many of these taxation cases concerned the imposition of a tax surcharge. During the first six months of 2006, the administrative courts held a total of 20 oral hearings in tax matters.
Witnesses who have been called by a party or by the administrative authority that made the decision, or whose oral testimony the appellate body considers necessary, may be heard in an oral hearing. A party may be heard under oath concerning circumstances of special relevance to the resolution of the matter. Chapter 17, sections 18-39, of the Code of Judicial Procedure (oikeudenkäymiskaari, rättegångsbalken) apply to the hearing of witnesses (section 39 of the Administrative Judicial Procedure Act).
Testimony must be oral. A witness must not refer to a written statement. However, the witness may use written notes as a memory aid (Chapter 17, section 32(1)). A statement that a witness has previously given to the court, to the public prosecutor or to the police may be read out in connection with the hearing of the witness only if, in his or her testimony, the witness retracts his or her earlier statement, or explains that he or she cannot or will not testify (section 32(2)).
A written statement of a private nature, a pre-trial investigation record or a statement entered or stored in another document must not be admitted as evidence unless otherwise provided in an Act (Chapter 17, section 11(1), of the Code of Judicial Procedure; Act no. 690/1997). Section 11(2-3) lists exceptions to the prohibition on using written preliminary investigation material, For example, if a witness cannot be questioned in the main hearing or outside the main hearing, the court may allow the pre-trial investigation record or another document or statement to be taken into account in a hearing. The Administrative Judicial Procedure Act contains no restriction on the use of pre-trial investigation material in the consideration of a case.
The said Act provides that the statement of reasons must indicate which facts and evidence have affected the decision and on which legal grounds it is based (section 53).
The employer is responsible for the deduction of tax and the remittance of tax deducted and employer’s social-security contributions to the tax authority (section 14 of the Prepayment Act (ennakkoperintälaki, lagen om förskottsuppbörd; Act no. 1118/1996). If an employer has, in part or in full, failed to deduct tax from an employee’s income or to remit the amount deducted, the tax office must order payment of the amount not deducted or not remitted without prejudice to section 39 (section 38(1)). Deducted tax may be ordered to be paid at the maximum rate of 40 %, if the deduction has not been carried out in the case referred to in subsection 1 (section 38(2)). An order may be waived, if the failure to deduct has been insignificant as concerns the circumstances or the total amount unpaid. An order of payment may also be carried out by assessment on the grounds laid down in section 41 (section 39). An employer who has failed to deduct and to remit the deducted tax must also be ordered to pay, in addition to the amount unpaid, a tax surcharge as provided in section 3 of the Act on Tax Surcharges and Penalty Interest (laki veronlisäyksestä ja viivekorosta, lag om skattetillägg och förseningsränta; Act no. 1556/1995) (section 43(1)). A surcharge must be ordered to be paid even though the amount not deducted or remitted has subsequently been paid (section 3(2)). A surcharge is not imposed where the order of payment of the deducted tax is waived due to the insignificance of the amount (section 3(4)). The tax office may increase tax deduction liability twofold at most where the person responsible for carrying out the deduction has, due to gross negligence, failed to observe his obligation to provide the relevant information or has submitted a return or some other piece of information or document with essential inaccuracies (section 44). Where a return or some other piece of information or a document is not submitted, or is submitted with essential inaccuracies referred to in paragraph 1(4) for the purpose of fraud, the tax deduction liability must be increased by 50% at least and threefold at most (section 44(2)). A surcharge is imposed in respect of the tax deduction liability only as concerns the deficiencies in the information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 (section 44 (3)).
The Employer’s Social Security Contribution Act (laki työnantajan sosiaaliturvamaksusta, lagen om arbetsgivares socialskyddsavgift; Act no. 66/1963) provides that if an employer who is liable to pay the said contribution fails, in part or in full, to pay it, the provisions of the Prepayment Act are applicable to the redress and the recovery from the employer of the amount not paid (section 10).
In the Income Tax Act (tuloverolaki, inkomstskattelagen; Act no. 1535/1992), the term “business consortium” refers, inter alia, to a limited partnership company (section 4). A business consortium is not an independently taxable unit. However, a level of expected return is established for a consortium for its business activities and, deductions having been made to cover any losses sustained during previous fiscal years, the return is distributed to shareholders as revenue to be taxed according to the share they have in the revenue of the consortium (section 16). The answerable partner of a limited partnership company is equally responsible for paying the taxes imposed on the business liable to pay taxes and contributions as he or she is for paying his or her personal taxes (section 39(1) of the Taxation Act (veronkantolaki, lagen om skatteuppbörd; Act no. 609/2005).