The case originated in an application (no. 25782/11) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Zita Kardoš (“the applicant”), on 11 April 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Predovan, a lawyer practising in Zadar. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š.Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had been erroneously deprived of access to court and of an effective remedy, contrary to Article 6 § 1 and Article 13 of the Convention.
On 16 December 2013 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in Zagreb.
The applicant was a co-owner of a block of flats on the island of Vir.
On 2 and 23 March 2006 building inspectors of the Inspectorate of the Ministry of the Environment, Spatial Development and Construction (Ministarstvo zaštite okoliša, prostornog uređenja i graditeljstva, Uprava za inspekcijske poslove) carried out an on-site inspection of the block of flats in question.
On 31 March 2006 one of the building inspectors ordered that the block of flats be demolished within three days from the date of service of the decision.
The applicant lodged an appeal against the demolition order, submitting that the time-limit for compliance was too short and that the block of flats was not within the protected coastal area.
On 15 May 2006 the appeal section of the Legal Department at the Inspectorate (Odsjek za postupak u drugom stupnju – “the second-instance body”) dismissed the appeal, finding that the block of flats had been built without a building permit.
Meanwhile, on 4 May 2006 the building inspector issued an administrative enforcement order (zaključak o dozvoli izvršenja), stating that the demolition order of 31 March 2006 had become enforceable on 6 April 2006 and that the co-owners had not complied with it within the given time-limit. He therefore ordered that the demolition be carried out by a third party after 11 May 2006, at the expense of the co-owners.
The applicant lodged an appeal against the administrative enforcement order, submitting that it was not sufficiently reasoned and that the construction of the block of flats could be retrospectively approved.
On 23 May 2006 the second-instance body dismissed the appeal as ill-founded.
On 27 June 2006 the co-owners had the block of flats demolished.
Meanwhile, on 26 June 2006 the applicant lodged an administrative complaint with the Administrative Court, repeating the arguments made in her appeal and seeking damages for the demolition. Since it was not clear whether the applicant was complaining about the second-instance decision concerning the demolition order or the administrative enforcement, on 11 July 2006 the Administrative Court requested her to specify which she wished to contest.
On 30 August 2006 the applicant replied that she was seeking annulment of the second-instance decision of 15 May 2006 concerning the demolition order.
On 22 April 2010 the Administrative Court dismissed her complaint as ill-founded, but addressed it as if it had been about the second-instance decision of 23 May 2006 concerning the administrative enforcement.
On 13 July 2010 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint, alleging, inter alia, a violation of her right of access to court, on the ground that the Administrative Court had erroneously decided a matter which had not been the subject of her administrative complaint.
On 13 December 2010 the Constitutional Court declared the constitutional complaint inadmissible, on the grounds that the contested decision had not concerned the merits of the case and as such was not amenable to constitutional review. This decision was served on the applicant’s representative on 7 January 2011.
The relevant provision of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 56/1990 with subsequent amendments) reads as follows:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
The relevant provisions of the Constitutional Court Act of the Republic of Croatia (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 99/99 and 29/02) read as follows:
“Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that a decision (pojedinačni akt) of a State body, local or regional government or legal entity vested with public authority concerning his or her rights or obligations or the suspicion or accusation of a criminal offence, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms or the right to local or regional government guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter ‘constitutional right’) ...”
The relevant provisions of the Administrative Disputes Act (Zakon o upravnim sporovima, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 4/1977, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 53/91 with subsequent amendments), which was in force between 1 July 1977 and 31 December 2011, provided:
“(1) Proceedings concluded with a judgment or a ruling shall be reopened upon a party’s request if:
 (1) the party learns of new facts or discovers or gains the opportunity to use new evidence on the basis of which the dispute would have been resolved more favourably for [him or her] had these facts or evidence been presented or used in the previous proceedings;
 (2) the decision rendered is the result of a criminal offence being committed by a judge or court employee or a fraudulent act by a party’s representative, the opponent or the opponent’s representative, and the act constitutes a criminal offence;
 (3) the decision was based on a judgment adopted in a criminal or civil matter that was later set aside by another court decision;
 (4) the document on the basis of which the decision was adopted was false or fraudulently amended, or where a witness, expert witness or party gave false testimony in court and the court decision was based on that testimony;
 (5) the party finds or gains the opportunity to use a previous decision adopted in the same administrative dispute;
 (6) an interested party was not given the opportunity to participate in the administrative dispute.
(2) A reopening of the proceedings shall be allowed on the grounds set forth in subsections (1) and (5) only if the party was unable, through no fault of his or her own, to present these facts during the previous proceedings.”
“Where this Act does not contain provisions on proceedings in administrative disputes, the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act shall be applied in the appropriate manner.”
The relevant provision of the Administrative Disputes Act (Zakon o upravnim sporovima, Official Gazette no. 20/10 with subsequent amendments), which entered into force on 1 January 2012, provides:
“(1) The proceedings terminated by a judgment shall be reopened upon a petition of the party:
if, in a final judgment, the European Court of Human Rights has found a violation of fundamental rights and freedoms in a manner differing from the [Administrative Court’s] judgment, ...”
The relevant provision of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 4/77, with subsequent amendments, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 53/91, with subsequent amendments), as in force at the material time, provided:
“(1) Where a court has failed to decide all the complaints that should have been resolved by a judgment or has failed to decide part of a complaint, a party to the proceedings may, within fifteen days of receipt, ask the court to supplement the judgment.
...”