The case originated in an application (no. 22657/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Ms Lászlóné Tóth (“the applicant”), on 21 April 2004.
The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr L. Höltzl, Agent, Ministry of Justice and Law Enforcement.
On 2 October 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1944 and lives in .
On 4 March 1996 the applicant filed an action with the Debrecen District Court claiming compensation from the co-owners of a block of flats on whose plot of land she had been renting a commercial kiosk, because they had cut her establishment off from the water and electricity supply.
On 19 November 1996 District Court adopted a partial decision. On appeal, on 21 May 1997 the  quashed this decision and discontinued that part of the case.
Subsequently, in the period up to 3 June 2004, the District Court held hearings at regular intervals; however, the proceedings were repeatedly interrupted on account of the deaths and succession formalities of certain respondents. The court also obtained the opinion of an expert.
On 21 July 2004 the  dismissed the applicant's motion for bias, lodged because of the extreme protraction of the proceedings. The  observed that, procedurally, the case was very complicated, because there were more than 120 parties. Moreover, because of succession formalities in the meantime and unsuccessful attempts to serve the documents in the case on the parties, the chance of holding a hearing in due and proper form had been very slim, and the proceedings had been interrupted on account of the death of one of the respondents.
A first-instance decision was adopted on 15 February 2007. According to the information provided by the parties and the elements available in the case file to date, the case, currently involving 137 respondents, has not yet ended.