The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") and by the Government of the  ("the Government") on 7 July and 5 September 1994, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("the Convention").  It originated in an application (no. 15764/89) against  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by a Portuguese national, Mr Pedro Lobo Machado, on 2 November 1989.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46); the Government’s application referred to Article 48 (art. 48).  The object of the request and of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-1). 
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr M.A. Lopes Rocha, the elected judge of Portuguese nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)).  On 18 July 1994, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr N. Valticos, Mr S.K. Martens, Mrs E. Palm, Mr I. Foighel, Mr F. Bigi, Mr J. Makarczyk and Mr K. Jungwiert (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43).  Subsequently Mr A. Spielmann, substitute judge, replaced Mr Valticos, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rules 22 para. 1 and 24 para. 1).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38).  Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the applicant’s memorial on 18 November 1994 and the Government’s memorial on 21 November.  On 1 December the Secretary to the Commission informed the Registrar that the Delegate would submit his observations at the hearing.
On 2 February 1995 the President decided in the interests of the proper administration of justice that the instant case and the case of Vermeulen v.  (58/1994/505/587) should be heard on the same day.  Consequently, after consulting the Chamber, he decided to adjourn the hearing in the instant case from 20 March 1995, the date originally scheduled, to 30 August.
On 22 March 1995, under Rule 37 para. 2, the President decided to grant a request from the Belgian Government to submit written observations on certain aspects of the case.  In a letter received at the registry on 18 April 1995 counsel for the applicant made comments on questions concerning the scope of the aforementioned Government’s intervention as an amicus curiae. On 24 May 1995 the Registrar received the observations.
Likewise on 24 May 1995 the Chamber relinquished jurisdiction in favour of a Grand Chamber (Rule 51).  In accordance with Rule 51 para. 2 (a) and (b), the President and the Vice-President (Mr Ryssdal and Mr R. Bernhardt), together with the other members of the original Chamber, became members of the Grand Chamber.  On 8 June 1995, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the additional judges, namely Mr R. Macdonald, Mr R. Pekkanen, Mr A.N. Loizou, Mr J.M. Morenilla, Sir John Freeland, Mr L. Wildhaber, Mr D. Gotchev, Mr P. Kuris and Mr U. Lohmus.
In accordance with the decision of the President, who had given the applicant’s lawyer leave to address the Court in Portuguese (Rule 27 para. 3), the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 30 August 1995.  The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
(a) for the Government 
(b) for the Commission
(c) for the applicant 
The Court heard addresses by Mr Danelius, Mr Pires de Lima, Mr Lebre de Freitas, Mr Henriques Gaspar and Mr Castelo Paulo. 
Mr Pedro Lobo Machado is a Portuguese national who lives in .  In 1955 he joined the Sacor company as an engineer. Following its nationalisation in 1975, Sacor was absorbed into Petrogal-Petróleos de Portugal, EP ("Petrogal"), a State-owned concern.  On 4 April 1989 Petrogal became a public limited company, in which the State is still the majority shareholder. In the meantime, on 1 January 1980, the applicant had retired.
On 5 February 1986 Mr Lobo Machado brought proceedings against Petrogal in the  industrial tribunal; the company was represented by a lawyer appointed by the chairman of its board of directors.  Mr Lobo Machado sought recognition of the occupational grade of "director-general" instead of that of "director" which had been assigned to him by his employer.  As that classification had an effect on the amount of his retirement pension, he also sought payment of the sums that, under the collective labour agreement (acordo colectivo de trabalho), should have been paid him since 1980.
The  industrial tribunal dismissed his claims in a judgment of 7 October 1987.  That decision was upheld by the Lisbon Court of Appeal in a judgment of 1 June 1988.
The applicant appealed to the Supreme Court (Supremo Tribunal de Justiça).
After the parties had exchanged pleadings, the case file was sent to the representative of the Attorney-General’s department at the Supreme Court, a Deputy Attorney-General, on 20 February 1989.  On 28 February 1989 that representative delivered an opinion in which he recommended that the appeal should be dismissed, as follows:
On 19 May 1989 the Supreme Court, sitting in private, considered the appeal.  Three judges, a registrar and the member of the Attorney-General’s department were present at the deliberations.  The parties had not been asked to attend.  At the end of the deliberations the court adopted a judgment in which it dismissed the appeal and this was served on the applicant on 22 May 1989.
The independence and status of the Attorney-General’s department are similar to those of the judiciary.  In Article 221 paras. 1 and 2 of the Constitution its functions are laid down as follows:
Law no. 47/86 of 15 October 1986 defines the scope of the powers of the Attorney-General’s department and lays down the manner in which it is to intervene - as plaintiff or defendant or else in an "associated" (acessória) capacity - in judicial proceedings.  The following provisions are relevant to the instant case:
Section 1
"By law, the Attorney-General’s department is the body responsible for representing the State, acting as prosecuting authority and upholding the democratic legal order and the interests assigned to it by law."
Section 3 (1)
"It shall be the duty of the Attorney-General’s department in particular to: 
Section 5
... 
Section 6
Section 11 (2) 
"[The Attorney-General’s department] shall be represented [in the supreme courts] by Deputy Attorneys-General ..." 
Section 59
"The Minister of Justice may: 
..." 
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, which are also applicable to cases falling within the jurisdiction of the industrial tribunals, are the following:
Article 20
Article 709
Article 752 para. 1
"Where the Attorney-General’s department must intervene [in proceedings], the case file shall be sent to it [for observations] for a period of seven days, after which the file ... shall be sent to the reporting judge and the other non-presiding judges for the purposes of a final decision; the reporting judge may keep the file for fourteen days and the other judges for seven days." 
Under the Constitution and the Institutional Law governing the Attorney-General’s department, the latter must intervene in all proceedings in which the public interest (interesse público) is at stake.
In labour-law cases the practice of the Employment Division of the Supreme Court is for the representative of the Attorney-General’s department at that court (a Deputy Attorney-General) to be given the file so that he can express an opinion on the merits of the appeal.  As a general rule, that representative also takes part in the sitting held to consider the appeal. 
The Government cited the following provisions of the Code of Labour Procedure:
Article 8
"The representatives of the Attorney-General’s department must automatically represent: 
Article 10
"Where a legal representative is appointed, the automatic representation by the Attorney-General’s department shall cease, without prejudice to that department’s intervention in an `associated’ capacity." 
Mr Lobo Machado applied to the Commission on 2 November 1989.  Relying on Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention, he complained, firstly, that there had been no fresh assessment by the Court of Appeal of the evidence relating to facts held to have been established by the court of first instance and no public hearing in either the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court; he further complained of the role assigned to the Attorney-General’s department in the proceedings before the Supreme Court, which he said had infringed his right to a fair trial by an independent and impartial tribunal and had offended the principle of equality of arms.  He also alleged a breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-1) on account of the adverse financial consequences of the failure of his action.
On 29 November 1993 the Commission declared admissible the complaints relating to the participation of the Attorney-General’s department in the proceedings before the Supreme Court and the infringement of the applicant’s right to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions.  It declared the remainder of the application (no. 15764/89) inadmissible.  In its report of 19 May 1994 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the opinion by fourteen votes to nine that there had been a breach of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention and by twenty-two votes to one that no separate issue arose under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-1).  The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the three separate opinions contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment .
In their memorial the Government asked the Court "to hold that there had been no violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention".