The case originated in an application (no. 40947/11) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Artur Fridman (“the applicant”), on 9 June 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Onačko, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė.
The applicant alleged that he had not been duly notified of an oral hearing before the Court of Appeal, in breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 7 March 2016 the complaint concerning notification of the hearing was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in Vilnius.
On 5 March 2009 the applicant and his grandmother’s neighbour, 88year-old J.S., signed a contract on lifelong maintenance (išlaikymo iki gyvos galvos sutartis). Under that contract, J.S. transferred the rights to her apartment to the applicant, who undertook to take care of her until she died by providing her with food and medication, looking after her apartment, walking her dog, and providing any other necessary assistance.
In June 2009 J.S. lodged an application with a court to terminate the contract on the grounds that the applicant had not fulfilled his obligations and had not been taking proper care of her. The applicant objected to the termination and argued that he had complied with the terms of the contract. Relying on the testimony of several witnesses, on 29 January 2010 the Vilnius Regional Court, in an oral hearing at which both the applicant and J.S. were present, granted J.S.’s application and annulled the contract.
The applicant appealed, arguing that he had complied with the terms of the contract and that it should therefore not have been terminated. On 11 October 2010 the Court of Appeal held an oral hearing at which J.S.’s lawyer was present but the applicant and his lawyer were not. According to the Government, a notification letter was sent to the applicant on 21 September 2010. During the hearing the court noted that the applicant had been notified of the hearing (apie posėdį pranešta) and proceeded to examine the case in his absence. The Court of Appeal delivered its judgment on 22 October 2010, upholding the first-instance judgment in its entirety.
The applicant lodged a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court. He complained, inter alia, that he had not been duly notified of the hearing before the Court of Appeal and had thus been unable effectively to defend his interests. The applicant submitted that he had received the notification about the time and place of the hearing by standard (non-registered) post only on 14 October 2010, when he had found it in his letter box. However, on 4 November 2010 the Supreme Court refused to examine the applicant’s cassation appeal as raising no important legal questions. The applicant lodged two other cassation appeals, but on 6 December 2010 and 10 January 2011 the Supreme Court refused to examine them, citing the same grounds as previously.
At the material time, Article 117 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure provided that procedural documents could be served by registered post, bailiffs or couriers, or in other ways provided for in the Code. Procedural documents could be served via telecommunication devices in the cases provided for by law and with the consent of the parties to the proceedings.
Article 123 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that procedural documents are served on individuals in person (įteikiami asmeniškai).
Article 133 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure distinguishes between a summons (šaukimas) and a notification (pranešimas). It provides that after a party to the case has been duly informed by a summons, information about further court hearings can be served by notifications.
At the material time, the relevant parts of Article 124 of the Code of Civil Procedure read:
“1.  A court summons and a copy of a claim (an application, a complaint, a reply to a claim, a rejoinder) is served on the recipient upon signature by the latter. When a summons or copy of a claim is served by post or by a court courier or bailiff, the recipient must sign a receipt approved by the Minister of Justice, one part of which is given to the recipient and the other returned to the court with the recipient’s signature and the date of delivery. ...
A refusal to accept a summons or a copy of a claim or to confirm acceptance by signing constitutes proper delivery ...
...
Notifications and other procedural documents are delivered by the means and according to the order set out in this Code, without returning a receipt of delivery to the court. Employees of the post office, bailiffs or couriers must record delivery of the notification or other procedural document to the recipient in the relevant registers, indicating the recipient, the date of delivery, and the person who accepted the document and his or her relation to the recipient ... if the document was not served on the recipient himself or herself.
...”
Article 319 § 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that when an appellate court holds an oral hearing, the parties to the proceedings are notified of the time and place but failure to appear does not preclude the court from examining the case.
Article 246 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that when a defendant fails to appear at a hearing and he or she has not been duly notified of the time and place of the hearing and does not have a representative, the court must adjourn the hearing.
In a ruling of 27 April 2010 in civil case no. 3K-3-193/2010 the Supreme Court held:
“The Code of Civil Procedure ... establishes an obligation on an appellate court to notify the parties to the proceedings of the place and time of the hearing; it also provides that failure by the parties to attend an oral hearing does not preclude the court from examining the case. [T]he Code of Civil Procedure ... provides that once a summons has been duly served, information about subsequent court hearings is provided by sending written notifications. Accordingly, information about a hearing before an appellate court may be sent by a notification letter. When information about a court hearing has been sent by a notification and not a summons, there is no requirement to return a delivery report to the court with the person’s signature and the date of delivery. The sending of a notification constitutes service and it is considered that the person has been duly notified of the place and time of the hearing. When an appellate court examines a case in an oral hearing, the parties are notified of it, but their absence does not preclude examination of the case if they have been duly notified ... Such a legal requirement implies an obligation on the appellate court, before examining the case at the hearing, to examine whether a party to the proceedings has been duly notified ... The Supreme Court reiterates that a court cannot examine a case if any of the parties to the proceedings have not been duly notified of the place and time of the hearing, as to do so would be contrary to the right to be heard and the principles of equality of arms and adversarial proceedings ...”