The case originated in four applications (nos. 54957/09, 14242/10, 22161/10 and 53804/11) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Turkish nationals, Mr Burçin Yumuşak, Mr Kasım Artunç Kavalalı, Mr Emre Kırgöz and Mr Gürcan Gürsoy (“the applicants”), whose details are set out in the appendix.
The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 22 September 2015 the complaints concerning the alleged independence and impartiality of the Supreme Military Administrative Court, the fairness of the proceedings before that court on account of the applicants’ inability to access the classified documents submitted by the Ministry of Defence, and the non-communication of the written opinion of the public prosecutor were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicants were cadets in military schools or officers in the Army. Based on classified investigation reports, they were expelled from their schools or their contracts were terminated. None of the applicants had access to these classified reports. They all filed actions against the Ministry of Defence with the Supreme Military Administrative Court to have annulment of the impugned decisions.
Relying on the classified investigation reports, and the written opinions of the public prosecutors, which were not communicated to the applicants, the Supreme Military Administrative Court rejected the applicants’ cases and their subsequent requests for rectification. The details of the cases are shown in detail in the appendix.
A description of the domestic law at the material time can be found in Tanışma v. Turkey (no. 32219/05, §§ 29-47, 17 November 2015), and Yavuz v. Turkey ((dec.), no. 29870/96, 25 May 2000).