The case originated in an application (no. 13156/02) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Albert Ivanovich Ponomarenko (“the applicant”), on 29 June 2001.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms L. V. Opryshko, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev.
On 10 July 2003 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1930 and lives in the town of .
The applicant's relatives owned a house in the same town which stood on a plot of land belonging to the municipality. The applicant's relatives had a right to use this plot of land. The entrance to the plot was situated on the  and the house was registered at the address of .  By the decision of the Gola Prystan Town Council (“the Council”) of 10 December 1975, a part of this plot was allocated to a third party for construction of a house, which was completed in 1976. As a result, the original entrance was destroyed and the applicant's relatives ceased to have a direct access to their house from any neighbouring street.
In 1989 the applicant inherited his relatives' house. He also obtained the right to use the land on which it stood.
On an unspecified date, he requested the Council to designate a new passage and entrance to that land. On 12 December 1989 the Council decided that the new passage and entrance should be from the  through the yard of the neighbouring multi-storey apartment house. The address of the applicant's house () remained unchanged.
The applicant disagreed and lodged several complaints with the local authorities, alleging that he experienced difficulties in accessing his house. In particular, he argued that he could not bring large items to the land and that visitors encountered difficulties in locating his house at its actual address. By letter of 16 September 1994, the Council informed the applicant that he could freely pass through the neighbouring building's yard in order to enter his house and that he could request amendments to the address of the house, if he so wished.
In March 1991 the applicant lodged with the  a claim against the Council. He alleged that the latter had unlawfully reduced the size of the land on which his house stood and that he had difficulties in accessing his house. The applicant sought recovery of the part of land which had been taken away from his relatives in 1975.
On 18 April 1991 the court refused to consider the applicant's claim on the merits. It found that the applicant in fact contested the lawfulness of the Council's decision of 10 December 1975 and, thus, his claim was not to be considered by the courts since he had not exhausted non-judicial remedies available in 1975. Furthermore the applicant was not the owner of the land on which his house stood.
On 29 May 1991 the  upheld in cassation the ruling of the first instance court.
In 2001 the applicant lodged with the  a new claim against the Council. He again alleged that the latter had unlawfully taken away a part of the land on which his house stood in 1975 and that it had not paid compensation for the damage which the applicant's family had allegedly sustained as a result of this. The applicant also alleged that he experienced difficulties in accessing and using his house and that the Council unlawfully refused to resolve his problem. The applicant requested the court to order the Council to grant him an official right of passage over his neighbours' land and to set up a five-meter wide passage and entrance to his plot from the Kirova Street. The applicant also sought compensation.
On 20 February 2001 the court refused to consider the applicant's claim on the merits. It put forward the same reasons as in its ruling of 18 April 1991.
The applicant appealed in cassation, alleging that the first instance court had erred in establishing the subject-matter of his claim. On 11 April 2001 the  reiterated the findings of the first instance court and rejected the applicant's appeal in cassation.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
Article 8
“... The norms of the Constitution of Ukraine are norms of direct effect. Appeals to the court for protection of the constitutional rights and freedoms of the individual and citizen directly on the basis of the Constitution of Ukraine are guaranteed.”
Article 55
“Human and citizens' rights and freedoms are protected by the courts.
Everyone is guaranteed the right to challenge in court the decisions, actions or omissions of bodies of State power, bodies of local self-government, public servants...”
Article 124
“Justice in  is administered exclusively by the courts...
The jurisdiction of the courts extends to all legal relations that arise in the State.
Judicial proceedings are performed by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine and courts of general jurisdiction...”
The relevant provisions of Article 136 of the Code read as follows:
“... The judge shall refuse to accept a claim:
...
1) if it is not to be considered by the courts;
2) if the interested person who applied to the court did not have recourse to non-judicial means of settlement of the case established by the law...
3) if there is a final judgment of the court or its final decision allowing withdrawal of the claim or the friendly settlement in a case concerning the same subject-matter and between the same parties...”
The relevant extracts from the operative part of the 's judgment read as follows:
 “Article 55 § 2 of the Constitution shall be construed to guarantee everyone ... the right to challenge decisions, acts or inactivity of every public and municipal authority, public servant before the court...
Such complaints shall be considered directly by the courts, irrespective of whether the law enacted before [the Constitution] provided for a different procedure of their consideration...”
The relevant extracts from paragraph 2 of the Resolution read as follows:
“...The courts shall have jurisdiction over disputes which have relation to ownership titles to houses, in particular:
- concerning ... remedies for any interference with the ownership title [to a house or its part], even if such interferences were not connected with dispossession...
- concerning compensation for diminished value of a house caused by the activities of enterprises, organisations ...”
The relevant extracts from paragraph 8 of the Resolution read as follows:
“... Further to the provisions ... [of Article 124 of the Constitution], the courts shall have jurisdiction over all disputes concerning the citizens' rights and freedoms. The court shall not refuse to entertain a claim or a complaint on the sole ground that it can be examined in the course of a non-judicial procedure established by law.
Article 55 of the Constitution of Ukraine envisages that every person is guaranteed the right to challenge the actions or inactivity of the public authorities, local self-government or civil servants; ... the court cannot refuse to entertain a claim on the basis of a law that limits this right ...”
The relevant extracts from paragraph 2 of the Resolution read as follows:
“... [The] courts shall have jurisdiction over applications for, in particular:
...
- protection and restoration of the rights of land owners and tenants, removal of obstacles to use of lands...”