The case originated in two applications (nos. 56381/09 and 58738/09) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Macedonian nationals, Mr Goce Jakšovski (“the first applicant”) and Mr Miroslav Trifunovski (“the second applicant”), on 10 and 30 October 2009 respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Ms Z. Ivanoska, and the second applicant by Mr N. Trifunovski, lawyers practising in Skopje and Tetovo, respectively. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov.
Mirjana Lazarova Trajkovska, the judge elected in respect of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28). On 26 August 2014 the President of the Chamber decided to appoint Ksenija Turković to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29).
The applicants complained, inter alia, that they had been dismissed from the office of judge in proceedings that did not meet the standards of Article 6 of the Convention. In particular, they alleged that their cases had not been considered by “independent and impartial tribunals”.
On 18 February 2013 the applications were communicated to the Government. It was also decided to apply Rule 41 of the Rules of Court and grant priority treatment to the applications.
The applicants were born in 1959 and 1946, and live in Ohrid and Tetovo, respectively.
Following allegations raised by a lawyer (which were subsequently withdrawn), V.V., a member of the State Judicial Council (“the SJC”), a body vested with jurisdiction to decide, inter alia, on the dismissal of judges (see Amendment XXIX to the Constitution, paragraph 20 below), made enquiries through the President of the court in which the first applicant worked as a judge. A preliminary inquiry was carried out, and on 19 April 2008 V.V. requested, under sections 55 and 58 of the State Judicial Act of 2006 (“the 2006 Act”, see paragraph 21 below) and section 5 of the Rules governing professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge (“the Rules”, see paragraph 25 below), that the SJC initiate professional misconduct proceedings in respect of the first applicant. In the request V.V. claimed that the first applicant had not been diligent in conducting proceedings in a civil case. The first applicant responded in writing.
On 4 June 2008 the SJC set up, under section 58 of the 2006 Act (see paragraph 21 below), a Commission for determination of professional misconduct by a judge (Комисија за утврдување нестручно и несовесно вршење на судиската функција, hereinafter “the Commission”).
On the basis of V.V.’s request and the Commission’s report as to whether the request was justified, on 3 October 2008 the plenary of the SJC initiated proceedings for professional misconduct in respect of the first applicant.
On 12 November 2008 the Commission held a hearing at which it heard evidence from V.V. and the first applicant. It also took other evidence into account. On 1 December 2008 the Commission drew up, under section 55(6) of the 2006 Act, a report on the question whether the request for the first applicant’s dismissal had been justified. It submitted the report to the plenary of the SJC for consideration.
On 17 December 2008 the plenary of the SJC, the composition of which included V.V., dismissed the first applicant for professional misconduct.
The first applicant challenged that decision at second instance, namely before an Appeal Panel formed within the Supreme Court (“the Appeal Panel”). Such panels were set up on an ad hoc basis in each separate case. As specified under section 60 of the 2006 Act, they were composed of nine judges, of whom three were to be Supreme Court judges, four Appeal Court judges and two judges of the court of the applicant. On 24 September 2009 the Appeal Panel dismissed the first applicant’s appeal and upheld the SJC’s decision.
On 21 July 2008 R.P., a member of the SJC, applied to the SJC for professional misconduct proceedings to be instituted in respect of the second applicant. It had been alleged that, as an on-duty investigating judge, the second applicant had not been diligent in the investigation of an incident that had occurred in the Tetovo detention centre. Under section 8 of the Rules (see paragraph 25 below), the request was submitted to the second applicant for comments. He responded in writing.
On an unspecified date, the SJC set up, under section 58 of the 2006 Act, a five-member Commission in the second applicant’s case. On 12 December 2008 the Commission submitted a report to the SJC in which it sought that it initiate professional misconduct proceedings against the second applicant.
With two separate decisions delivered on 29 December 2008, the plenary of the SJC, including R.P., initiated professional misconduct proceedings in respect of the second applicant and ordered his temporary suspension. The decisions were not amenable to appeal.
On 20 January 2009 the Commission held a hearing at which R.P. and the second applicant presented their arguments and concluding remarks (завршни зборови). Evidence against the second applicant was also considered. On the same date, the Commission submitted a report to the SJC regarding the circumstances of the case.
On 12 February 2009 the plenary of the SJC, the composition of which included R.P., dismissed the second applicant for professional misconduct. The second applicant appealed against his dismissal to the Appeal Panel that had been formed in his case within the Supreme Court, arguing, inter alia, that he had not been given the opportunity to comment on the evidence against him when the request for his dismissal had been served on him. He also asked the Appeal Panel to inform him of the date of its session. At a hearing held in private on 5 May 2009, the Appeal Panel dismissed the second applicant’s appeal.
On 25 June 2009 the second applicant challenged his dismissal before the Administrative Court by means of an administrative-dispute action (тужба за управен спор). He complained, inter alia, about the alleged refusal of his request for exclusion of Judges N.I. and J.V. who had been parties to the decision of the Appeal Panel in his case. He had requested their withdrawal because Judge N.I. had applied at the relevant time to the SJC for the post of president of a first-instance court, and Judge J.V. allegedly had a close relationship with the public prosecutor involved in the case in respect of which he had been dismissed. On 6 October 2010 the Administrative Court rejected the second applicant’s action as inadmissible. That decision was upheld by the Higher Administrative Court.
The second applicant produced copies of articles published in local newspapers on 26 January and 13 February 2009 reporting on his case. The article published on 26 January 2009 cited the then President of the SJC as saying that the Commission was still dealing with the case and that no report had yet been submitted to the SJC for consideration. On 13 February 2009 the newspaper announced that the second applicant had been removed from office.
In December 2005 Parliament adopted several Amendments to the 1991 Constitution. The relevant provisions read as follows:
“1.  ... A judge can be dismissed from office:
- for a serious violation of disciplinary rules which renders him or her unsuitable to exercise the office of judge; and
- for exercising the office of judge in an unprofessional and unconscientious manner, under conditions stipulated by law.”
“... The State Judicial Council is composed of fifteen members. The President of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia and the Minister of Justice are ex officio members of the Council. Eight members of the Council are elected by judges from among their peers ... Three members of the Council are elected by Parliament ... Two members are proposed by the President of the Republic and elected by the Parliament ...”
“The State Judicial Council of the Republic of Macedonia:
- elects and dismisses judges and lay judges;
- establishes the termination of a judge’s office;
- elects and dismisses presidents of courts;
- monitors and evaluate the work of judges;
- decides on judges’ disciplinary responsibility;
- decides whether to strip judges of their immunity;
- proposes two judges of the Constitutional Court ...
...
The Council submits an annual report for its work to the Parliament. The form, contents and way of adoption (of the report) is regulated by law.”
Relevant provisions of the 2006 Act read as follows:
“The Judicial Council is an autonomous and independent judicial body. The Council is responsible to ensure and safeguards the autonomy and independence of the judiciary ...”
“The SJC is competent (inter alia) to:
- elect and dismiss judges;
- elect and dismiss presidents of courts;
- establish the termination of a judge’s office;
- elect and dismiss lay judges;
- monitor and evaluate the work of judges;
- decide on judges’ disciplinary responsibility;
- decide on the termination of a judge’s office for permanent lack of capacity to exercise the office of judge;
- decide whether to strip judges of their immunity;
- decide on a request for detention of a judge;
- decide on a judge’s temporary suspension from work;
- determine the number of judicial posts;
- assess reports concerning the work of courts;
- maintain the reputation of judges and public confidence in the judiciary;
- decide on complaints by citizens and legal entities regarding the work of courts ...”
“The SJC elects a first-instance court judge from the list of candidates submitted by the Academy for training of judges and prosecutors (from among candidates) that applied to a vacancy announcement ...”
“The SJC elects a judge in Appeal, Administrative and Supreme Courts from among candidates who applied to a vacancy announcement and fulfil the criteria specified by the Courts Act and this Act ...”
A judge can be dismissed for unprofessional and unconscientious exercise of the office of judge under conditions specified by law.”
“Disciplinary proceedings may be instituted by a member of the SJC, the president of the court of a judge whose dismissal is being sought, or the president of the higher court or plenary of the Supreme Court ...
Disciplinary proceedings are urgent and confidential. The public are excluded in the interests of the reputation and dignity of the judge concerned.
The SJC sets up a Disciplinary Commission composed of five of its members.
A judge against whom proceedings have been instituted may respond to the request for disciplinary proceedings in writing or orally within eight days of the date of service of that request.
A judge against whom proceedings have been instituted has the right to a legal representative.
When it receives a request, the Disciplinary Commission collects information and draws up a report, which it submits to the SJC to determine whether the request is justified. On the basis of that report the SJC may initiate or stay disciplinary proceedings.
...
The SJC adopts Rules regarding the proceedings.”
“On the basis of the report specified in section 55(6) of this Act and the deliberations, the SJC may:
- stay the disciplinary proceedings;
- issue an adequate disciplinary penalty; or
- dismiss the judge for gross violation of disciplinary rules (потешка дисциплинска повреда).”
“The SJC may impose the following disciplinary penalties:
- a written reprimand
- a public reprimand, and
- a salary reduction in the range of 15% to 30% of the monthly salary of a judge, for one to six months.”
“Proceedings for determination of professional misconduct by a judge shall be carried out under section 55 by a Commission for the determination of professional misconduct (“the Commission”).
The SJC sets up (the Commission) composed of five of its members.
...
On the basis of a report drawn up under section 55 (6) of the Act and the hearing held before the SJC, the latter may:
- stay the proceedings; or
- dismiss a judge for professional misconduct.”
“The judge concerned may challenge the SJC’s dismissal or disciplinary decision before a second-instance panel set up within the Supreme Court (“the Appeal Panel”) ...
The Appeal Panel is composed of nine members, of whom three are Supreme Court judges, four Appeal Court judges and two judges of the court of the judge against whom proceedings have been conducted.
The President of the Supreme Court may not be a member of the Appeal Panel.”
Section 400 of the 2005 Civil Proceedings Act provides for the possibility of reopening proceedings in respect of which the Court has found a violation of the Convention. In such reopened proceedings the domestic courts are required to comply with the provisions of the final judgment of the Court.
In February 2015 Parliament enacted new legislation providing for the creation of a Council for establishing facts and instituting proceedings to determine the responsibility of a judge (“the Council”). The new body’s role is to establish relevant facts in proceedings regulated by this Act and decide whether to apply for professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge (sections 2 and 49). It is composed of nine members (retired judges, prosecutors and lawyers, section 6) elected by all judges by direct and secret ballot (section 16). It can, inter alia, request the SJC to institute proceedings in order to determine the responsibility of a judge or president of a court (section 32). The Act became operational three months after its entry into force (section 53).
Until the decision of the Constitutional Court of 15 September 2010 took effect (see paragraph 26 below), professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge were regulated in detail by the Rules.
The relevant provisions of the Rules governing professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge read as follows:
“Professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge may be instituted by a member of the SJC, the president of the court [of a judge whose dismissal is being sought], the president of the higher court or plenary of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia [‘the complainant’].
A request for professional misconduct proceedings shall contain a description of the grounds for instituting professional misconduct proceedings.
The request shall be accompanied by supporting evidence.”
“The SJC decides whether a request for professional misconduct proceedings is timely, complete and admissible.
...
The SJC sets up a Commission for determination of professional misconduct (Комисија за утврдување нестручно и несовесно вршење на судиската функција) composed of five of its members.”
“The Commission communicates the request to the judge concerned.
The judge may respond in writing or give a verbal statement within eight days of the request being served on him or her.
The judge against whom the request is submitted has the right to a legal representative whom he or she invites to the hearing.
Together with the observations in reply to the request, the judge concerned submits all evidence in support of his or her response ...”
“The Commission seeks information and gathers evidence relevant for [the case].”
“On the basis of information and evidence gathered, the Commission submits a report to the SJC stating whether the request is justified.”
“The SJC examines the request and the Commission’s proposal and decides to institute or stay professional misconduct proceedings.
The SJC takes (this) decision by a majority vote of all its members ...”
“The decision specified in section 11 of the Rules is served on the complainant (подносител на барањето), the judge [whose dismissal is sought] and the president of that judge’s court, and the case file is forwarded to the Commission.”
“The complainant and the judge concerned are summoned to a hearing.
If they have been duly summoned and fail to attend without providing any justification, the hearing is held in their absence.”
“All evidence presented by the complainant, and the judge concerned and evidence obtained by the Commission is heard at the hearing.
The judge concerned can argue in relation to all evidence adduced at the hearing.”
“The record of the hearing is signed by the complainant, the judge concerned or his or her representative, the members of the Commission and the minute writer.”
“The Commission draws up a report for the SJC within fifteen days of the hearing with a proposal for (one of the) following decisions:
- that the proceedings be stayed or
- that the judge be dismissed for professional misconduct.”
“On the basis of the (Commission’s) report and after the hearing, the SJC may:
- stay the proceedings or
- dismiss the judge for professional misconduct.”
“The SJC takes the (dismissal) decision by a two-thirds majority vote of all its members.
...
A transcript of the decision is served on the judge, his or her representative, the complainant and the president of the court of the judge concerned or the president of the immediate higher court.”
By a decision of 15 September 2010 (U.br.56/2010), the Constitutional Court rejected as unconstitutional several provisions of the Rules regarding professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge. The court found that while the SJC was entitled to set out its rules of procedure in internal documents, it had no competence to define genuine procedural rules for which there was no statutory basis.
The relevant provisions of the Opinion read as follows:
“8.  The Council for the Judiciary is intended to safeguard both the independence of the judicial system and the independence of individual judges. The existence of independent and impartial courts is a structural requirement of a state governed by the rule of law.
C. 2. Discipline
The question of a judge’s responsibility was examined by the CCJE in Opinion No.3(2002). The recent experiences of some States show the need to protect judges from the temptation to broaden the scope of their responsibility in purely jurisdictional matters. The role of the Council for the Judiciary is to show that a judge cannot bear the same responsibilities as a member of another profession: he/she performs a public function and cannot refuse to adjudicate on disputes. Furthermore, if the judge is exposed to legal and disciplinary sanctions against his/her decisions, neither judicial independence nor the democratic balance of powers can be maintained. The Council for the Judiciary should, therefore, unequivocally condemn political projects designed to limit the judges’ freedom of decision-making. This does not diminish judges’ duty to respect the law.
A judge who neglects his/her cases through indolence or who is blatantly incompetent when dealing with them should face disciplinary sanctions. Even in such cases, as indicated by CCJE Opinion No.3(2002), it is important that judges enjoy the protection of a disciplinary proceeding guaranteeing the respect of the principle of independence of the judiciary and carried out before a body free from any political influence, on the basis of clearly defined disciplinary faults: a Head of State, Minister of Justice or any other representative of political authorities cannot take part in the disciplinary body.
The Council for the Judiciary is entrusted with ethical issues; it may furthermore address court users’ complaints. In order to avoid conflicts of interest, disciplinary procedures in first instance, when not addressed within the jurisdiction of a disciplinary court, should preferably be dealt with by a disciplinary commission composed of a substantial representation of judges elected by their peers, different from the members of the Council for the Judiciary, with provision of an appeal before a superior court.”
The relevant provisions of the Magna Carta of Judges read as follows:
“6.  Disciplinary proceedings shall take place before an independent body with the possibility of recourse before a court.”
“13.  To ensure independence of judges, each State shall create a Council for the Judiciary or another specific body, itself independent from legislative and executive powers, endowed with broad competences for all questions concerning their status as well as the organisation, the functioning and the image of judicial institutions. The Council shall be composed either of judges exclusively or of a substantial majority of judges elected by their peers. The Council for the Judiciary shall be accountable for its activities and decisions.”
“IV.  Conclusions
The following standards should be respected by states in order to ensure internal and external judicial independence:
...
Judicial councils, or disciplinary courts, should have a decisive influence in disciplinary proceedings. The possibility of an appeal to a court against decisions of disciplinary bodies should be provided for ...”