The case concerns alleged breaches of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention arising as a result of allegedly unreasoned decisions by the domestic courts to reject the applicant’s request for an order terminating his former family members’ rights to reside in his flat in exchange for compensation.
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Baku. He was represented by Mr F. Rahimov, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan.
The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 1991 the applicant and his wife, son and daughter (“the family members”) took up residence in a State-owned three-room flat on the basis of an occupancy voucher issued by the applicant’s employer, a State-owned company.
In 1994 the applicant privatised the flat in question and became its owner with the consent of his only family member who was an adult at the time (his wife), who waived any claims to ownership rights at the time of privatisation. All the family members, including the children, had residence rights in respect of the flat (“right of use”).
In 2007 the applicant and his wife divorced. After the divorce the applicant and his family members continued to reside in the same flat and had frequent domestic conflicts. According to the applicant, on certain occasions the family members either did not allow him into the flat or insulted him. Because of this situation, eventually the applicant had to move out and reside elsewhere.
On an unspecified date in 2008 the applicant’s former wife lodged a claim with the Narimanov District Court against the applicant, seeking a declaration that she had an ownership right to three-quarters of the flat.
On an unspecified date in 2008 the applicant lodged a counterclaim against the family members seeking termination of their right of use in relation to the flat, subject to his making a payment of compensation of 6,000 Azerbaijani manats (AZN) to each of them (AZN 18,000 in total). The applicant contended that the proposed amount would be sufficient for the family members to afford comparable alternative accommodation for a period of at least five years.
On 24 July 2008 the Narimanov District Court dismissed both the claim by the applicant’s former wife and the applicant’s counterclaim. As regards the applicant’s former wife’s claim, the first-instance court found that the flat did not constitute common property of the applicant and his former wife because it had not been acquired using their joint family income earned during the marriage, but had been allocated to the applicant from the State housing fund and subsequently privatised by him free of charge. At the time of the privatisation of the flat, the former wife had voluntarily waived any right to a share of ownership of the flat.
As regards the applicant’s counterclaim, the first-instance court’s reasoning began with a reference to Article 228.2 of the Civil Code, which provided for the possibility of terminating family members’ right of use on the basis of a court decision and subject to the payment of compensation. The court further referred to a decision of the Constitutional Court of 26 September 2007, which stated that such compensation should be sufficient for former family members to live in “suitable alternative accommodation on a continuous basis and for a certain period of time”. The court then held as follows:
“The amount of compensation proposed by [the applicant] cannot be used for the resolution of the present dispute because it does not correspond to a real market value and is contrary to the mentioned legal acts.”
The court did not specify the amount of compensation that would be sufficient. Referring to Articles 14.2, 217.3 and 217.4 of the Code of Civil Procedure (“the CCP”), it concluded as follows:
“[The claimant and counterclaimant] were unable to present any reliable evidence in support of their claims at the court hearing.
Having assessed the totality of the available evidence, the court considers that the claim and the counterclaim must be rejected as unsubstantiated.”
The applicant appealed, arguing that the first-instance court had failed to carry out an assessment of what would be an adequate sum of compensation to be paid in his case and had not provided any substantiated reasons for its finding that the proposed compensation was insufficient, in breach of his right to a reasoned decision both under the domestic law and under Article 6 of the Convention, as well as in breach of his property rights. He also argued that, if there was insufficient evidence of the “real market value” in order to determine the compensation, the court could have appointed an expert to carry out a relevant assessment.
It appears from the documents in the case file that, during the appellate proceedings, the applicant submitted to the appellate court a letter from an NGO called Property Market Participants, dated 20 September 2008, which stated that, according to their assessment, the current market value of the monthly rent for two rooms of the flat in question was 230 United States dollars (USD) (approximately AZN 187 at the relevant time).
On 14 October 2008 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the firstinstance judgment, reiterating the first-instance court’s reasoning and holding as follows:
“Having considered that the amount of compensation proposed by [the applicant] did not correspond to the real market value and was not sufficient for the defendants to afford suitable alternative accommodation on a continuous basis and for a certain period of time, the first-instance court dismissed the counterclaim.
The [appellate] court has also taken into consideration that the flat was originally allocated not only to [the applicant] but taking into account that he had a family of four, that the parties had resided in the flat from the time when it had been allocated, and that currently [the applicant’s former family members] have no other accommodation.
For these reasons, [the applicant’s appeal] must be dismissed.”
The Baku Court of Appeal’s judgment was silent as to the evidence submitted by the applicant (see paragraph 13 above).
The applicant lodged a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court, arguing that the lower courts’ judgments were unreasoned. He noted that neither lower court had provided reasons for finding that the proposed amount of compensation was insufficient, and the appellate court had failed to assess the evidence that he had submitted to it and had not provided any reasons for that failure in its judgment. He reiterated his submission that the amount that he had proposed was sufficient for his family members to reside in alternative accommodation in comparable conditions for at least five years.
On 24 February 2009 the Supreme Court upheld the lower courts’ judgments, briefly reiterating their finding on insufficiency of the compensation, without expressly responding to the applicant’s abovementioned arguments. In its decision, the Supreme Court referred to Article 228.2 of the Civil Code and the Constitutional Court’s decision of 26 September 2007. It then added:
“Before [the applicant] privatised the flat, all of his family members ... had shared housing rights to it. When they consented to the privatisation of the flat by [the applicant], they retained their rights of use in respect of the flat. In such circumstances, termination of their rights in exchange for compensation is possible only with their agreement.”
Article 123 of the Housing Code of 8 July 1982 (“the 1982 Housing Code”), as in force at the material time, and in so far as relevant, provided as follows:
“The family members of the owner of a residential property who have been moved into that property by the owner have a right of use in relation to the residential space of the property in common with the owner, unless any other rights were reserved at the time of their moving in. ... Those persons’ right of use of the residential space shall persist in the event of the termination of family relations with the owner of the residential house.
Disputes between the owner and their family members about the manner of use of the residential space and sharing of the expenses shall be decided by the courts.”
Article 30.4 of the Housing Code of 1 October 2009 (“the 2009 Housing Code”) provided as follows:
“30.4.  Unless the owner of the residential space and his or her former family member have agreed otherwise, the former family member’s right of use of that residential space does not persist after the termination of family relations with the owner of the residential space. The former family member’s right to use the owner’s residential space may be retained pursuant to a court order for a specified period of time [in exceptional circumstances where the former family member lacks capacity, legally, financially or otherwise, to acquire rights to other residential space].”
Article 228 of the Civil Code of 1 September 2000 (“the Civil Code”), in so far as relevant, provides as follows:
“228.1.  Family members of an owner of an integral part of a residential building and other persons can have a right of use of the building on the condition that such a right has been registered in the state register of immovable property.
2.  The emergence, implementation terms and termination of a right of use of an integral part of a residential building shall be established by way of a notarised written agreement concluded with the owner. In the absence of an agreement on the termination of the right of use of an integral part of a residential building, this right may be terminated on the basis of a judicial claim by the owner subject to payment of appropriate compensation at the market price.”
The following are the relevant provisions of the CCP. The text of Article 371 set out below is as it was in force at the relevant time, before the amendment of 26 May 2009:
“Article 14.  Principles of judicial examination of a case
...
2.  The court shall examine and use evidence presented only by the parties. ...
...
Article 77.  Burden of proof
1.  Each party shall prove the circumstances to which it refers as grounds for its claims and objections.
...
3.  If it is not possible to examine the case on the basis of the evidence available in the case file, the court shall be entitled to propose that the parties submit necessary supplementary evidence.
...
Article 97.  Appointment of an expert examination by the court
1.  For the purpose of clarification of matters requiring specialised knowledge when examining the case, the court may order an expert examination upon request by a party or of its own initiative.
...
Article 217.  Lawfulness and substantiation of a judgment
1.  The judgment of a court must be lawful and substantiated.
2.  The judgment shall be delivered by reference to the substantive law in force at the time the legal dispute arose and the procedural law in force at the time of the examination of the case.
3.  The judgment shall be substantiated in accordance with the actual circumstances established in respect of the case and the mutual relations between the parties.
4.  The court (the judge) shall substantiate its (his or her) judgment only with the evidence examined at the court hearing.
...
Article 371.  Submission of new evidence
1.  Parties to the case may submit new evidence to the court of appeal.
2.  The court of appeal may reject new evidence which a party was unable to submit to the first-instance court in the event that it deems such new evidence as either belated or aimed at delaying the appellate procedure or as having not been submitted [to the first-instance court] owing to gross negligence ...
Article 372.  Limits of review by the court of appeal
1.  The court of appeal, having full competence, shall examine the case on its merits on the basis of the evidence available in the case file and any evidence submitted in addition.
2.  Additional facts and evidence shall be accepted by the court if the party submitting it can prove the impossibility of the earlier submission of such evidence to the first-instance court for reasons beyond his control ...”
A decision of the Constitutional Court of 27 July 2001, in so far as relevant, provided as follows:
“... Disputes in connection with legal relations arising after 1 September 2000 must be decided in accordance with the rules set out in Articles 228.1 and 228.2 of the Civil Code and disputes in connection with legal relations arising prior to that date shall be decided in accordance with the rules set out in Article 123 of the [1982] Housing Code.”
A further decision of the Constitutional Court of 26 September 2007 “on reviewing the compliance with the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan of the decision of the Civil Panel of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan of 31 March 2006 concerning the complaint by R. Agalarov” (“the Agalarov case”) clarified its earlier position (as outlined above), ruling that in disputes specifically concerning the termination of a right of use of a residential space, Article 228.2 of the Civil Code was applicable even in cases where the right of use had arisen before 1 September 2000, because it afforded a higher level of regulation and protection to the rights of both the owner and the user than Article 123 of the 1982 Housing Code, which lacked any provisions concerning the termination of the right of use. The decision provided the following reasoning:
“Where family members (or equivalent persons) reside in the same flat, it is possible for one (or several) of them to have the right of ownership of the flat (which includes in itself a right of use of the residential space), while the others have only a right of use of the residential space. When resolving disputes between those individuals, regard must be had to the nature of the right of ownership and that of the right of use of a residential space, the fair balance between them and the provisions of the legislation ... regulating the manner of exercise [of those rights].
At the outset, it must be specifically noted that the right of ownership and the right of use of a residential space constitute different legal categories ...
The right to use a residential space despite the will of its owner was previously recognised in the [1982] Housing Code. At that time the Republic of Azerbaijan was a constituent republic of the former USSR; its legislation was part of the Soviet legislation and was predominantly aimed at the protection of State property ...
The right of ownership ... comprises not only the owner’s wide legally established powers (to possess the property that belongs to him, to use the property as he wishes, depending on its intended purpose, in order to meet his requirements, and to determine the legal fate of the property according to his will), but also the power to remove any third party interference with the owner’s State-guaranteed dominion over his property without breaching the rights and legally protected interests of others within the framework of the applicable legislation, and, when doing so, to act as he deems fit in the light of his interests ...
Customarily, the right of use of a residential space, depicted as a right to live in a flat, house or other dwelling, is one element of the right to housing. The right to housing ... is a long-established right in the legislation of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The right to housing is mainly ensured in such ways as allocation of a residential space from the State housing fund under the procedures ... and rules provided by law, as well as taking possession of a residential space from its owner under mutually agreed terms (such as a lease, rent-free use, etc.) or its acquisition from the owner in exchange for value (by means of a sale and purchase agreement, an in-kind exchange, etc.) or without charge (by means of an inheritance, a gift, a lottery, etc.) ...
... [As regards the resolution of disputes arising in connection with the exercise of the right of ownership and the right of use of a residential space,] the position of the Constitutional Court is that ... both rights should be ensured by way of striking a fair balance between them ...
... [T]he possibility of applying the rule stipulated in Article 228.2 of the Civil Code, about the termination of the right of use of a residential space subject to payment of compensation, to relationships that arose earlier [before the Civil Code entered into force] and that are continuing is not contrary to the position of the Constitutional Court as set out in its decision of 27 July 2001 and supplements it ...
... It must be taken into account that, while the [1982] Housing Code does not provide for compensation to be paid for the termination of the right of use of a residential space, Article 228.2 of the Civil Code ... provides for a higher level of protection of the parties’ rights and legally protected interests ...
... Although compensation does not give the user a right to claim a division of the property or payment of a certain proportion of its value, it does not result in the simple termination of the right of use of the residential space, but in such a replacement of it as to give the user an opportunity to live in suitable alternative accommodation at the expense of the owner on a continuous basis and for a certain period of time under conditions similar to those of the previous property.”
A decision of 8 October 2013, in so far as relevant, provided as follows:
“When examining the issues in connection with the right of the former family member to use a residential space after the termination of family relations with the owner of that residential space, the provisions of Article 228 of the Civil Code must be applied to such relations arising before 1 October 2009 and the provisions of Article 30.4 of the [2009] Housing Code must be applied to relations arising after that date.”
A decision of 12 July 2016 was delivered following an application by the Baku Court of Appeal requesting further interpretation of Article 228.2 of the Civil Code in the light of a number of provisions of the law on civil procedure. The application was made in connection with a civil case where the appellate court had initially rejected an amended claim by the claimant proposing payment of a higher amount of compensation than that offered in the initial claim (rejected by the first-instance court), based on a finding that changing the amount of the proposed compensation would amount to changing the subject matter of the claim at the appellate stage of the proceedings, which was prohibited by the rules of civil procedure. This led the claimant to initiate a separate set of proceedings, in which he offered a higher amount of compensation in exchange for the termination of the right of use. When those proceedings also reached the appellate stage, the Baku Court of Appeal decided to refer the matter to the Constitutional Court for interpretation. In its application, the Court of Appeal noted that “there existed no unified approach in the court practice as to whether the amount of compensation referred to in Article 228.2 of the Civil Code constituted part of the subject matter of the claim” and that that situation “created difficulties in examining such cases within a reasonable time and caused a breach of the principle of legal certainty”.
The Constitutional Court’s decision of 12 July 2016, in so far as relevant, provided as follows:
“The amount of compensation for the termination of the right of use of a residential space as stipulated in Article 228.2 of the Civil Code is not part of the subject matter of the claim.
When examining cases, the first-instance court shall determine the amount of the compensation in accordance with the market price regardless of whether the amount of compensation has been indicated in the claim or not.
When granting a claim for termination of the right of use in exchange for compensation in line with the market price, the court shall consider the owner’s willingness to pay that amount.”