The case originated in an application (no. 40033/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mrs Jelena Čiklić (“the applicant”), on 4 August 2007.
The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 9 July 2008 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant, who is a Croatian national was born in 1957 and lives in .
On 16 July 1996 the applicant brought a civil action against the company Z. in the Zadar Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Zadru) challenging her dismissal from work and seeking salary arrears.
The court held six hearings and on 10 October 1997 dismissed the action. The applicant appealed.
On 15 March 2000 the  (Županijski sud u Zadru) quashed the impugned judgment and remitted the case to the court of first instance.
In the resumed proceedings, the Zadar Municipal Court held six hearings and on 16 April 2003 stayed the proceedings (prekid postupka) because the bankruptcy proceedings had meanwhile been opened against the defendant.
On 14 July 2003 the Municipal Court found that it no longer had jurisdiction in the matter because of the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings and transferred the case to the  (Trgovački sud u Zadru). The  held three hearings and on 1 June 2004 adopted a judgment. The applicant appealed to the  (Visoki trgovački sud Republike Hrvatske).
On 3 May 2006 the applicant lodged a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske).
On 12 September 2006 the  quashed the first-instance judgment and remitted the case. In the resumed proceedings the  gave its judgment on 6 February 2007 against which both parties appealed to the .
On 6 March 2007 the Supreme Court found a violation of the applicant's right to a hearing within a reasonable time and attributed delays in the proceedings to the inefficiency of the Zadar Municipal Court and the . It awarded the applicant 15,000 Croatian kuna in compensation and ordered the  to give a decision in the applicant's case within one month following the service of its decision. The Supreme Court's decision was served on the  on 2 July 2007, although the latter already gave its decision in that case (see § 11 above).
On 26 September 2007 the  quashed the first-instance judgment of 6 February 2007 and remitted the case. On 22 January 2009 the  gave its judgment against which both parties appealed to the .
On 7 October 2009 the  upheld the first instance judgment in part and in the remaining part quashed and remitted to the  before which the proceedings are currently pending.
PROTECTION OF THE RIGHT TO A HEARING WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME
Section 27
“(1) A party to court proceedings who considers that the competent court failed to decide within a reasonable time on his or her rights or obligations or a criminal charge against him or her, may lodge a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time with the immediately higher court.
(2) If the request concerns proceedings pending before the High Commercial Court of the Republic of Croatia, the High Petty Offences Court of the Republic of Croatia or the Administrative Court of the Republic of Croatia, the request shall be decided by the Supreme Court of the .
(3) The proceedings for deciding the request referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be urgent.
Section 28
(1) If the court referred to in section 27 of this Act finds the request well founded, it shall set a time-limit within which the court before which the proceedings are pending must decide on a right or obligation of, or a criminal charge against, the person who lodged the request, and shall award him or her appropriate compensation for the violation of his or her right to a hearing within a reasonable time.
(2) The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date the party's request for payment is lodged.
(3) An appeal, to be lodged within fifteen days with the Supreme Court, lies against a decision on the request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time. No appeal lies against the Supreme Court's decision but one may lodge a constitutional complaint.”