The case originated in an application (no. 78168/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Valeriy Mikhaylovich Vaneyev (“the applicant”), on 8 November 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Vaneyev, a lawyer practising in Syktyvkar. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 23 February 2018 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in Syktyvkar.
On 22 August 2012 the applicant was involved in a motor vehicle accident. His car collided with Sh.’s car, injuring Sh. On the same date a traffic police inspector opened an administrative investigation into the accident. Subsequently the administrative case was closed.
On 19 October 2012 the police opened a criminal case against the applicant on charges of causing bodily injury by dangerous driving.
On an unspecified date the investigation was completed. The case was transferred to the Omutninsk District Court of the Kirov Region and assigned to Judge K.
On 8 February 2013 the applicant asked that Judge K. withdraw from the case because Sh.’s wife was a judge at the same court. In response, Judge K. made the following statement:
“While it is true that Sh.’s wife works for [the District Court], [Sh.] is not an acquaintance of mine. Nor is he my close relative or related to me. I am not personally interested in the outcome of the case, either directly or indirectly.”
The applicant, who was represented by counsel, withdrew his challenge and agreed to his case being considered by Judge K. He pleaded guilty and asked the court to dispense with a full trial.
On the same date the District Court, sitting in a single judge formation composed of Judge K., found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to one year and four months’ restriction of liberty. The court also ordered him to pay Sh. 150,000 Russian roubles in respect of nonpecuniary damage. The applicant appealed.
On 14 May 2013 the Kirov Regional Court upheld the judgment of 8 February 2013 on appeal, holding that there were no circumstances requiring that Judge K. withdraw from the applicant’s case. It reiterated the trial judge’s statement that the latter was not an acquaintance or a relative of the victim.