.  The case originated in an application (no. 68556/13) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Reiner Krebs (“the applicant”), on 15 October 2013.
.  The applicant was represented by Mr Tegebauer, a lawyer practising in Trier. The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by one of their Agents, Mr H.-J. Behrens, of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection.
.  The applicant alleged a breach of Article 6 §§ 1 and 2 of the Convention because, when assessing evidence in relation to sentencing following his first conviction, the criminal court’s statements in respect of further offences of fraud of which he had been charged but in relation to which separate criminal proceedings were pending had violated the presumption of innocence.
.  On 6 October 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaint concerning Article 6 §§ 1 and 2 of the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
.  The applicant was born in 1979.
.  On 9 August 2010 the Weiden District Court convicted the applicant of twenty-five counts of fraud in conjunction with twenty-two counts of forgery of data. The applicant was found to have ordered documents and services via the Internet under a false name and given another person’s bank account details for payment.
.  He was sentenced to a global sentence (Gesamtstrafe) of ten months’ imprisonment, comprising individual sentences for the twenty-five counts of fraud. The sentence was not suspended on probation because the prognosis regarding the likelihood of the applicant reoffending was unfavourable. It was considered of relevance that the applicant had been convicted of similar offences in the past and had committed the fraud and forgery while being on probation as a result of a previous conviction. The applicant and the public prosecutor appealed and subsequently limited the scope of their appeals to the sentence.
.  In February and April 2011 new criminal proceedings against the applicant were instituted after several other persons and organisations filed criminal complaints alleging fraudulent behaviour.
.  On 17 June 2011 the police searched the applicant’s house and seized evidence regarding the new accusations.
.  On 7 and 21 June 2011 the Weiden Regional Court held oral hearings in the appeal proceedings. It also heard witness testimony from police officer P., who was in charge of the new criminal investigations (see paragraph 8 above). P. reported on the new accusations, indicating in particular that items had been seized from the applicant’s apartment during the house search, which had been ordered online using a fake identity. When questioned during the court hearing, the applicant did not comment on the new accusations, but stated via his lawyer that he was not able to remember anything.
.  On 21 June 2011 the Regional Court dismissed the appeals. When assessing the evidence in relation to sentencing following his first conviction for fraud and forgery, the Regional Court found:
“The appellate court has also no doubt that the accused committed further offences of fraud after his conviction by the first-instance court on 9 August 2010. This follows from the credible witness testimony given by [police officer] P., who is conducting further criminal investigations against the accused.
...
The appellate court has no doubt that the accused is responsible for these further offences. There is no doubt about witness P.’s credibility. The witness has testified objectively and without any eagerness to incriminate [the accused]. There are no indications that the results of the criminal investigations are not correct.
...
Since the items, which had been ordered by the fraudulent use of another person’s bank account, were delivered to the applicant [‘s property] and seized there, it has been proven that the accused is once more guilty of several offences of fraud.”
[“Für die Berufungskammer besteht auch kein Zweifel daran, dass der Angeklagte seit der Verurteilung durch das Erstgericht am 09.08.2010 sich weiterer Vergehen des Betrugs schuldig gemacht hat. Dies folgt aus den glaubwürdigen Bekundungen des Zeugen P., der weitere Ermittlungen gegen den Angeklagten führt.
...
Für die Berufungskammer besteht kein Zweifel daran, dass der Angeklagte für diese weiteren Straftaten verantwortlich ist. An der Glaubwürdigkeit des Zeugen P. besteht kein Zweifel. Der Zeuge hat sachlich und ohne jeglichen Belastungseifer ausgesagt. Es gibt keinen Hinweis dafür, dass seine Ermittlungsergebnisse nicht zutreffend wären.
...
Da die Waren, die unter missbräuchlicher Verwendung eines fremden Kontos bestellt wurden, an den Angeklagten geliefert und dort sichergestellt wurden, ist der Beweis geführt, dass der Angeklagte sich erneut mehrerer Vergehen des Betrugs schuldig gemacht hat.“]
.  With regard to the sentence of ten months’ imprisonment, the Regional Court found that it could not be suspended on probation because of the unfavourable prognosis for the likelihood of the applicant reoffending. Even though the applicant’s psychotherapist had presented an opinion in favour of the applicant, the court found in that context that:
“The taking of evidence has, however, shown that the applicant, while undergoing psychotherapy and despite the forthcoming appeal hearing, reoffended. This behaviour shows a high degree of obstinacy.”
[„Die Beweisaufnahme der Berufungshauptverhandlung hat jedoch ergeben, dass der Angeklagte noch während seiner psychotherapeutischen Behandlung und trotz der bevorstehenden Berufungshauptverhandlung sich erneut straffällig gemacht hat. Gerade dieses Verhalten zeigt ein hohes Maß an Unbelehrbarkeit.“]
.  The applicant appealed on points of law. He argued that the Regional Court’s statements were in breach of the presumption of innocence because he had denied having committed the further offences, of which he had not been convicted in a final judgment. In reply, the public prosecutor argued that pursuant to domestic law a tribunal could take into account further offences committed by an accused after he had been charged with the initial offences if it had heard evidence in relation to the further offences in the hearing and if it was convinced that the accused had committed those further offences. Thus, it was legitimate for the Regional Court to have taken account of the applicant’s further offences when deciding whether to suspend his prison sentence.
.  On 11 January 2012 the Nuremberg Court of Appeal, endorsing the arguments put forward by the public prosecutor, dismissed the appeal on points of law as ill-founded and the sentence became final.
.  On 31 January 2012 the Court of Appeal dismissed a subsequent complaint by the applicant regarding a breach of his right to be heard.
.  On 20 February 2012 the applicant was formally indicted for further offences of fraud.
.  On 16 August 2012 the Weiden District Court convicted the applicant of, inter alia, ten counts of fraud in conjunction with five counts of forgery of data. The conviction included the further offences that had been the subject of the Regional Court’s sentencing assessment and in relation to which the Regional Court had made the statements reproduced in paragraphs 11 and 12 above. The applicant had confessed to those further offences after the District Court had heard witness testimony.
.  The applicant was sentenced to a global sentence of one year and six months’ imprisonment. The global sentence included the individual sentences for the ten counts of fraud and also incorporated the twenty-five separate sentences which had been imposed by the Weiden District Court on 9 August 2010 and confirmed by the Weiden Regional Court on 21 June 2011 (see paragraphs 7 and 11-12, respectively). The District Court did not suspend the global sentence on probation because the prognosis for the prospect of the applicant reoffending was unfavourable in the light of his criminal record.
.  On 18 December 2012 the District Court’s judgment became final as the applicant withdrew his appeal.
.  On 31 July 2013 the Federal Constitutional Court, without giving reasons, declined to consider a constitutional complaint lodged by the applicant against the initial global sentence of ten months’ imprisonment (2 BvR 333/12).
.  Articles 53 to 55 of the Criminal Code concern the fixing of a global sentence when individual sentences have been imposed for different offences or counts of offences that are the subject of the same or previous convictions. A tribunal has to fix a global sentence by increasing the most severe individual sentence. However, the global sentence must be less than the sum of the individual sentences. In finding an appropriate global sentence, there will be a global assessment of the offender’s personality and the individual offences.
.  When fixing a global sentence by also including previous convictions, the competent court must assess afresh, in accordance with Article 56 § 1 of the Criminal Code, whether a global sentence can be suspended on probation.  That provision stipulates the conditions for suspension on probation and reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
Article 56
Conditions for suspension
“(1) If a person is sentenced to a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, the court shall suspend the enforcement of the sentence for a probationary period if there are reasons to believe that the sentence will serve as sufficient warning to the convicted person and that he will commit no further offences without having to serve the sentence. The court shall particularly take into account the character of the convicted person, his previous history, the circumstances of his offence, his conduct after the offence, his circumstances and the effects to be expected from the suspension.
(2) The court may also suspend the enforcement of a longer term of imprisonment which does not exceed two years under the conditions set out in paragraph 1, if a comprehensive evaluation of the offence and character of the convicted person reveals the existence of special circumstances. In such a decision, the efforts of the convicted person to make restitution for the harm caused by the offence should be taken into particular consideration.
(3) ...”
.  When a previous global sentence becomes part of a new global sentence, the previous one becomes obsolete.
.  In a decision dated 10 May 2017 (file no. 2 StR 117/17), the Federal Court of Justice confirmed its case-law on the requirements to be met in order to take into account charges in pending criminal proceedings in which there had not yet been a final decision. It found that a tribunal, when deciding on the suspension of a prison sentence, could not take into account such charges to the detriment of the accused unless it had made its own findings on the validity of those accusations, observing the principles of due process.
.  Having regard to the presumption of innocence, a state of suspicion in respect of such charges may never be taken into account to the detriment of the accused.