The case concerns the alleged unfairness of the criminal proceedings against the applicant and, in particular, the appointment as an independent expert of a police officer whose audit report had led to the applicant’s indictment, as well as the domestic judicial authorities’ reliance on that police officer’s findings.
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Pirogovskiy, Moscow Region. The applicant was represented by Mr G. Zhuravlev, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 6 May 2008 the acting head of Investigative Division No. 2 of the Department in Charge of Tax Crimes of the State Department of the Interior of the Moscow Region Colonel Sh. ordered an audit in respect of the municipal hospital where the applicant held the post of chief physician. He assigned the case to Lieutenant Colonel K., Lieutenant Colonel Kuz. and Major R. The audit detected a number of irregularities and the applicant was charged with two counts of abuse of power and two counts of use of State budgetary funds exceeding 7,500,000 Russian roubles for unauthorised purposes.
On 17 March 2009 the investigator with the Investigative Division of the Department of the Interior of the Moscow Region in charge of the applicant’s case appointed Lieutenant Colonel K. to conduct a forensic economic examination to determine, inter alia, the damage resulting from the applicant’s unauthorised use of State budgetary funds.
On 18 June 2009 Lieutenant Colonel K. finalised her forensic report. On 10 July 2009 the investigator sent the findings to the applicant.
On an unspecified date the Mytishchi Town Court of the Moscow Region (hereinafter “the Town Court”) opened the trial in the applicant’s case.
On 7 October 2010 the applicant asked the Town Court to exclude K.’s forensic report as evidence, claiming that K., as an officer with Department in Charge of Tax Crimes of the Department of the Interior of the Moscow Region, was not qualified to conduct a forensic examination in his case. The applicant also asked for an independent forensic expert to be appointed. The court dismissed the applicant’s request for lack of feasibility.
On 26 October 2010 the Town Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to a conditional sentence of two and a half years’ imprisonment with a two-year probation period during which he was banned from holding public office. As well as putting questions to K., the court questioned medical practitioners who had worked at the hospital, the hospital’s contractors, and patients who had paid to receive medical care there. It also studied contracts and financial documents in the hospital’s possession. It based its findings on the witnesses’ statements and financial evidence, including the report prepared by Colonel K. The applicant maintained his innocence. He challenged the forensic expert’s findings, arguing that Colonel K. could not have been impartial given that she had taken part in the original audit leading to his indictment.
On 3 February 2011 the Moscow Regional Court upheld the applicant’s conviction, in substance, on appeal but overturned the ban on his holding public office. The court ruled that the trial court had established the applicant’s guilt correctly and referred to the evidence admitted and examined by the trial court, including the report prepared by Colonel K.