The case originated in an application (no. 12918/12) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 23 December 2011 by a company incorporated in Moldova, Electronservice-Nord S.A. (“the applicant company”).
The applicant company was represented by Ms Pîrău, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Apostol.
The applicant company alleged, in particular, that a final judgment in its favour had been quashed as a result of it having been revised in an abuse of process.
On 27 June 2012 notice of the application was given to the Government.
Following judicial proceedings which ended with a final judgment of the Bălţi Court of Appeal of 8 December 2009, the applicant company obtained a final ruling obliging the Cadastral Authority to register immovable property privatised by it in 1999 and in 2004 in its name.
On an unspecified date the defendant in the proceedings lodged a request for a review of the judgment of 8 December 2009, seeking its annulment on the grounds that in a technical report dated 25 May 2009 it had been stated that the immovable property in question did not qualify as immovable property (“the review request”).
On 24 August 2010 the Bălţi Court of Appeal dismissed the review request on the grounds that the information contained in the technical report of 25 May 2009 did not qualify as new and relevant information which could not have been obtained before the delivery of the final judgment in the case.
On 22 December 2010 the Supreme Court quashed the above judgment and ordered a re-examination of the review request.
On 16 November 2011 the Chişinău Court of Appeal re-examined the review request and allowed it. The court relied on grounds other than those relied upon by the defendant in framing the request. In particular, the court relied on a Government decision from 2005, in accordance with which the disputed goods had been transferred to the defendant’s control. The court quashed the final judgment of 8 December 2009 and ordered a fresh examination of the case.
On 16 August 2012, after examining the merits of the case, the Edineţ District Court again found in favour of the applicant company and required the Cadastral Authority to register some of the immovable property privatised by the applicant company in 1999 and in 2004 in its name. The Cadastral Authority challenged that judgment by lodging an appeal and the proceedings are still pending.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure concerning the review of final judgments read as follows:
“A request for review shall be granted when:
...
....”
A request for review may be lodged:
...
....”