The case originated in three applications (nos. 69234/11, 69252/11 and 69335/11) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Azerbaijani nationals, Mr Agasif Shakir oglu Ibrahimov (Ağasif Şakir oğlu İbrahimov – “the first applicant”), Mr Emin Mehdi oglu Farhadi (Emin Mehdi oğlu Fərhadi – “the second applicant”) and Mr Jamil Malik oglu Hajiyev (Cəmil Malik oğlu Hacıyev – “the third applicant”), on 19 October 2011.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr R. Mustafazade and Mr A. Mustafayev, lawyers practising in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicants alleged in particular, that the dispersal of the demonstration in which they had participated and their arrest and conviction had violated their right to freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of expression. They further complained that the administrative proceedings against them had fallen short of guarantees of a fair hearing, and that their arrest and conviction had been contrary to guarantees of the right to liberty.
On 17 February 2014 the complaints concerning Articles 5, 6, 10 and 11 were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible.
The applicants were born in 1988, 1989 and 1977 respectively. The first and third applicants live in Baku, and the second applicant lives in Khirdalan.
The youth group Committee for Protection of Rights of Young Political Prisoners (“Gənc Siyasi Məhbusların Hüquqlarını Müdafiə Komitəsi”) decided to hold a demonstration at around 5.30 p.m. on 22 May 2011 at the Seaside Boulevard in Baku. They did not notify their plan to the relevant authority, the Baku City Executive Authority (the BCEA).
According to the applicants, the demonstration was intended to be peaceful and was conducted in a peaceful manner. The participants, a group of ten to twelve persons, were demanding the release of young persons arrested during some previous demonstrations.
The applicants attended the demonstration, but shortly after it had begun the police started to disperse it. According to the applicants, as soon as they noticed the police approaching they attempted to run away and leave the place of the demonstration but police officers followed and caught them. All three applicants were arrested by police officers V.I. and R.G. at around 5.30 p.m. and were taken to police station No. 39 of the Sabail District Police Office.
Police officers V.I. and R.G. stated the following in a report (raport) submitted to a superior police officer:
“... at around 5.30 p.m. at the Seaside Boulevard ... a group of young persons attempted to hold an unauthorised [demonstration] by shouting out loud, and disturbed people. When we wanted to calm down those persons they ignored us. ... We ... brought them to police station no. 39. ...”
According to the applicants, they were questioned at the police station.
Between 6.15 p.m. and 6.30 p.m. on the day of the arrest, “administrative-offence reports” (inzibati xəta haqqında protokol) were issued by police officer T.R. in respect of all three applicants. The reports stated that at 5.30 p.m. on 22 May 2011, by deliberately failing to comply with the lawful order of the police, the applicants had committed an administrative offence under Article 310 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”).
All three applicants refused to sign the respective administrative-offence reports, which contained pre-printed texts declaring that “[the arrested person] was familiarised with the report” and “the rights and obligations under Articles 371, 372, 374, 377, 379 and 410.4 of the CAO of the Republic of Azerbaijan were explained”.
Subsequently, police officer T.R. prepared “administrative-arrest reports” (inzibati qaydada tutma haqqında protokol) with respect to the first and second applicants.
According to those administrative-arrest reports, copies of which were submitted to the Court by the Government, the first and second applicants had been subjected to administrative arrest at 7 p.m. on 22 May 2011. The reports also stated that the applicants had been released on the same date, without specifying the time of the alleged releases, and contained signatures of the first and second applicants. However, all three applicants maintained that they had been kept in police custody overnight.
According to the applicants, they were never served with copies of the administrative-offence reports or with other documents in their case files. They were not given access to a lawyer after the arrest or while they were kept in police custody.
On 23 May 2011, the day after his arrest, the first applicant, Mr Agasif Ibrahimov, was brought before the Sabail District Court.
According to the applicant, the hearing, which began at 12.40 p.m., was very brief and members of the public, including human rights defenders and journalists, were not allowed to attend, even though the court had not taken a formal decision to close the hearing to the public.
The applicant was not represented by any lawyer. According to the applicant, he was not given an opportunity to hire a lawyer of his own choice.
The applicant stated before the court that he was not guilty of disobeying a lawful order of a police officer.
The only witness questioned during the court hearing was police officer R.G., who testified as follows:
“At around 5.30 p.m. on 22 May 2011 ... a group of persons attempted to hold an unauthorised [demonstration] by shouting out loud, and disturbed people. When we wanted to calm down those persons, among them [the applicant], they disobeyed a lawful police order. Then we ... brought them to police station no. 39 where administrative-offence reports were issued in their respect. One of them was [the applicant].”.
The court found that the applicant had failed to stop participating in the unauthorised demonstration. The court convicted him under Article 310.1 of the CAO and sentenced him to seven days’ “administrative” detention.
The applicant lodged an appeal before the Baku Court of Appeal, arguing that his conviction was in violation of his rights because the demonstration in which he had participated had been peaceful. He also complained that his arrest had been unlawful and that the hearing before the first-instance court had not been fair. He requested the Baku Court of Appeal to quash the first-instance court’s decision.
The applicant was represented before the Baku Court of Appeal by a lawyer of his own choice.
On 31 May 2011 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the first-instance court, stating that its findings had been correct.
The Court of Appeal also noted that at the first-instance court hearing the applicant had refused the assistance of a State-funded lawyer and had decided to defend himself in person.
On 23 May 2011, the day after his arrest, the second applicant, Mr Emin Farhadi, was brought before the Sabail District Court.
According to the applicant, the hearing, which began at 12.30 p.m., was very brief and members of the public were not allowed to attend, even though the court had not taken a formal decision to close the hearing to the public.
The applicant was not represented by any lawyer. According to the applicant, he was not given an opportunity to hire a lawyer of his own choice. According to the transcript of the court hearing, he refused the assistance of a State-funded lawyer and decided to defend himself in person.
The applicant stated before the court that he was not guilty of disobeying a lawful order of a police officer and that he had participated in the demonstration as an observer.
The only witness questioned during the court hearing was police officer R.G. The statement that he gave against the second applicant, Mr Emin Farhadi, was similar to his statement against the first applicant, Mr Agasif Ibrahimov (see paragraph 20 above).
The court found that the applicant had failed to stop participating in the unauthorised demonstration. The court convicted him under Article 310.1 of the CAO and sentenced him to eight days’ “administrative” detention.
The applicant lodged an appeal before the Baku Court of Appeal, arguing that his conviction was in violation of his rights because the demonstration in which he had participated had been peaceful. He also complained that his arrest had been unlawful and that the hearing before the first-instance court had not been fair. He requested the Baku Court of Appeal to quash the first-instance court’s decision.
The applicant was represented before the Baku Court of Appeal by a lawyer of his own choice.
On 31 May 2011 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the first-instance court, stating that its findings had been correct.
On 23 May 2011, the day after his arrest, the third applicant, Mr Jamil Hajiyev, was brought before the Sabail District Court.
According to the applicant, the hearing, which began at 12.30 p.m., was very brief and members of the public were not allowed to attend, even though the court had not taken a formal decision to close the hearing to the public.
The applicant was not represented by any lawyer. According to the applicant, he was not given an opportunity to hire a lawyer of his own choice and he refused the assistance of a State-funded lawyer because he believed that such assistance would be of a formalistic nature.
The applicant stated before the court that he was not guilty of disobeying a lawful order of a police officer. He further emphasised that he and other participants of the demonstration had protested peacefully, and that they had been holding photos of arrested young persons, without uttering any slogans. The applicant also stated that he had run away as soon as he saw the police approaching and had boarded a taxi, and that police officers had stopped that taxi and had forced him out.
The only witness questioned during the court hearing was police officer R.G. The statement that he gave against the third applicant, Mr Jamil Hajiyev, was similar to his statement against the first applicant, Mr Agasif Ibrahimov (see paragraph 20 above). R.G. also confirmed that Mr Jamil Hajiyev had tried to escape by taxi, and that the police officers had stopped that taxi.
The court found that the applicant had failed to stop participating in the unauthorised demonstration. The court convicted him under Article 310.1 of the CAO and sentenced him to seven days’ “administrative” detention.
The applicant lodged an appeal before the Baku Court of Appeal, arguing that his conviction was in violation of his rights because the demonstration in which he had participated had been peaceful. He also complained that his arrest had been unlawful and that the hearing before the first-instance court had not been fair. He requested the Baku Court of Appeal to quash the first-instance court’s decision.
The applicant was represented before the Baku Court of Appeal by a lawyer of his own choice.
On 31 May 2011 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the first-instance court, stating that its findings had been correct.
The relevant part of Article 49 of the Constitution reads as follows:
“... II. Everyone has the right, having notified respective governmental bodies in advance, to assemble with other people peacefully and without arms, to organise meetings, demonstrations, protests and marches, and to stage pickets.”
Under Article 5 of the Law, advance written notification is required in order to agree upon the place and time of an assembly and upon the route of a march, with the purpose of enabling the relevant local executive authority to take necessary measures. The notification has to be done in writing five days before the demonstration. Under Article 5 § IV of the Law, no prior written notification was required for spontaneous assemblies.
.  Other provisions of the Law provide the relevant local executive authority with broad powers to issue relevant orders so as to prohibit (Article 8 §§ IV and V) or stop (Article 8 § VI) a public assembly; to restrict or change the place, route and/or time of a public assembly (Article 9 §§ II and VII); and to designate specific areas for public assemblies (Article 9 § VI).
At the material time Article 14 of the Law provided as follows:
“I.  ... the police authorities have the following powers with regard to the holding of an assembly: ...
2)  When necessary, to stop an assembly which has not been notified [to the authorities] beforehand, save for [spontaneous] assemblies ...;
...
4)  To apprehend and remove from the place where an event is being held persons who came carrying ... weapons, as well as rocks, pieces of wood and glass, or clubs that may pose a threat to people’s life and safety or damage property, [as well as] ... explosives, ... flammables, ... radioactive materials;
...
The police authorities have the following powers with regard to the execution of orders specified under Article 8 paragraphs V and VI of this Law:
...
2)  To order the organisers and participants of an assembly to use all available opportunities to stop the assembly and to disperse;
3)  To warn organisers and participants that physical force or exceptional measures will be used against them if the order to stop the assembly and to disperse is not complied with;
4)  To use physical force or exceptional measures in order to stop an assembly and disperse participants, in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
5)  To apprehend persons not complying with the order to stop an assembly and disperse. ...
The use of physical force or exceptional measures by police officers in all circumstances must be proportionate to an existing threat.”
Article 298 of the CAO provided, at the material time, as follows:
“Any breach of the rules, set forth under the legislation, on the organisation and holding of assemblies, demonstrations, protests, marches and pickets shall be punishable by a reprimand or a fine of seven to thirteen manats [AZN].”
Article 310 provided, at the material time, as follows:
“310.1.  Deliberate failure [by an individual] to comply with the lawful order of a police officer or military serviceman carrying out their duties to protect public order shall be punishable by a fine of twenty to twenty-five manats [AZN] or, if that sanction is inadequate in the circumstances of the case and taking into account the character of the offender, by administrative detention for a term of up to fifteen days.”
Article 376 provided, at the material time, as follows:
“... 376.2.  If it is impossible for the lawyer chosen by the person against whom administrative-offence proceedings are being carried out to attend, a judge ... shall appoint a lawyer for that person, in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
3.  If a person subjected to an administrative arrest has no possibility to hire a lawyer due to [his or her] financial situation, [his or her] legal assistance shall be funded by the State. In this case a lawyer may not refuse to carry out his or her duties.”
Article 396 provided, at the material time, as follows:
“396.1.  An authorised official may use the following measures in order to prevent administrative offences, to establish the identity of a person, to draw up an administrative-offence report if this cannot be done at the place [of the administrative offence] and if the drawing up of a report is important, to ensure the correct and timely examination of [administrative-offence] cases, and to ensure the implementation of decisions in administrative-offence cases: ...
1.2.  administrative arrest; ...”
Article 398 provided, at the material time, as follows:
“398.1.  Administrative arrest, that is the short-term restriction of an individual’s liberty, may be applied in exceptional circumstances when deemed necessary for ensuring the correct and timely examination of an administrative-offence case or for the implementation of a decision in an administrative-offence case, except for instances set out in legislation. ...”
Article 410 provided, at the material time, as follows:
“... 410.3.  An individual who is subject to the administrative-offence proceedings or a representative of a legal entity shall be given an opportunity to familiarise with the administrative-offence report.
4. ... An individual who is subject to the administrative-offence proceedings or a representative of a legal entity ... has the right to a copy of the administrative-offence report.”
Article 414 provided, at the material time, as follows:
“... 414.2.  A report ... concerning an administrative offence punishable by administrative detention shall be sent to a judge for examination immediately after it has been drawn up.”
Article 422 provided, at the material time, as follows:
“422.3.  Cases [concerning an administrative offence] punishable by administrative detention shall be examined on the day of receipt [by the court] of an administrative-offence report; cases against persons subjected to administrative arrest shall be examined at the latest within 48 hours of their arrest.”
Under Article 368 a public prosecutor has a right to participate in the administrative proceedings. Chapter 28 of the CAO enumerates the participants of administrative proceedings and their rights and obligations. This Chapter does not mention “the prosecution” – a police officer, public prosecutor or any other public official representing the prosecution – as a participant of the proceedings.
The relevant extracts of this document read as follows:
“... [T]he Commissioner’s attention was drawn to the wave of arrests of activists and political opponents in connection with protests held in Baku in March and April 2011. According to the information received, these protests were sometimes dispersed with excessive force, and the work of journalists was hindered. The organisers were denied permission to demonstrate in a central square and other places in the city centre in Baku, and were instead authorised to hold a demonstration in the outskirts of the city. Several persons were detained on grounds of violating public order. Six opposition activists were sentenced on 25 August 2011 for participating in ‘actions causing disturbance of public order’, following trials whose conformity with human rights standards has been called into question.
The Commissioner has on various occasions criticised the method of curbing the impact of a demonstration by allowing it to take place only at another time and at a less central location, thereby diminishing significantly the visibility of the rally and its message to the general public. ... The Commissioner ... urges the Azerbaijani authorities to ensure that the right to freedom of peaceful assembly is fully guaranteed in Azerbaijan, in accordance with the Court’s case-law.”
The relevant extracts of the Report read as follows:
“... 53.  The issue of limitations imposed on freedom of assembly has regularly been raised by local and international observers in recent years. The most frequent problems encountered include the banning of demonstrations in central and easily accessible locations and the use of force to disperse the demonstrations which still go ahead, leading to arrests and, in some cases, harsh sentences. ...
The Commissioner calls on the authorities to adopt effective measures to prevent the use of force against peaceful protestors by law enforcement officials. In particular, he reiterates the recommendation of the 2010 Report, inviting the authorities to reform the existing system of internal disciplinary investigations of police ill-treatment and to introduce an independent police complaints body. ...
Azerbaijan amended its Law on Freedom of Assembly in 2008, following two opinions adopted by the Council of Europe Venice Commission. While the law is thus in line with international standards, undue restrictions of the right to freedom of peaceful assembly are widely reported in practice. The problems mainly stem from the interpretation of Article 5 of the law. This Article provides for a “notification” procedure before convening an assembly. In 2006, the Venice Commission welcomed the confirmation by representatives of the Government that the requirement in the law was for notification and not for a prior permission to hold the assembly, noting that “other provisions of the Law could, as they currently stand, encourage the competent authorities to issue a blanket prohibition as soon as the notification process proves incomplete.” In 2007, the Venice Commission added that a system of notification is in itself admissible so long as it is only meant to help the authorities cope more easily with the practical problems involved with the holding of an assembly; it also stressed that it is indeed important that assemblies can be held with a presumption of legality so as to avoid any chilling effect on organisers and participants.
The Commissioner notes that the authorities have also confirmed that the legislation does not require permission for rallies. However, the authorities appear to have interpreted it as requiring such permission, and a system of authorisation has in practice replaced the system of notification. Peaceful protesters have for instance been effectively banned from demonstrating in central Baku since 2006, despite advanced notification of the assemblies. Several requests by the political opposition or civil society to hold demonstrations were allegedly denied or, when allowed, organisers were obliged to have them in areas very remote from the city centre. ...
The Commissioner remains concerned by the way the Law on Freedom of Assembly is currently being implemented in Azerbaijan. He therefore calls on the authorities to assess the functioning of that law. In particular, the authorities should ensure that no authorisation is required for the holding of public demonstrations and that the system of notification is applied in accordance with European standards.
The Commissioner welcomes the announced publication by the authorities of a list of locations where demonstrations will be made possible, and calls for these to include adequate locations in the centre of Baku and other cities, as a first step towards a better enjoyment of the right to freedom of assembly by the population of Azerbaijan. Given the need for tolerance in a democratic society, the authorities should nevertheless seek to facilitate and protect public assemblies at the organisers’ preferred location. ...
Another concern relates to the reported non-implementation of due process standards in proceedings brought against participants in “unauthorised” demonstrations. ...
The Commissioner is of the view that participants in peaceful assemblies should not be sanctioned for the mere fact of being present at and actively participating in the demonstration in question, provided they do not do anything illegal, violent or obscene in the course of it. The Commissioner therefore urges the authorities to ensure that no disproportionate sanction, which would undermine the fundamental right to peaceful assembly, is imposed.
Finally, the Commissioner calls on the Azerbaijani authorities to ensure the full respect of fair trial guarantees for protesters. ...”
The relevant extracts of the Report read as follows:
“Another manifestation of the government’s crackdown has been severe limitations on freedom of assembly. The Baku municipal authorities have implemented a blanket ban on all opposition demonstrations in the city center since early 2006. The authorities have broken up unsanctioned ones – often with violence – and have arrested and imprisoned peaceful protestors, organizers, and participants. Our research shows that the misdemeanor trials of those charged for involvement in unsanctioned protests are perfunctory. ...
While the constitution of Azerbaijan stipulates that groups may peacefully assemble after simply notifying the relevant government body in advance, in practice authorities require that gatherings obtain a permit issued by local municipalities. ...
Municipal authorities have effectively banned all forms of peaceful protest from the center of Baku and instead force all demonstrations into designated zones on the outskirts of the city. Such a blanket ban on freedom of assembly in the central areas of Baku violates Azerbaijan’s international obligations to respect freedom of assembly and expression. ...
[F]or several years police have dispersed, at times violently, peaceful protests in Baku’s center. In the days before and during the Eurovision Song Contest held in Baku in May 2012, police broke up several protests in the city’s center and briefly detained dozens of peaceful demonstrators. In 2011 when activists, inspired by the uprisings in the Middle East and North Africa, launched protests in Azerbaijan, the government responded by arresting hundreds of protesters, activists, and journalists. Several were convicted of public order offences and imprisoned for up to three years. ...
The Azerbaijani authorities regularly use administrative, or misdemeanor, charges to lock up people for organizing or participating in unsanctioned rallies, then prosecuting and convicting them in perfunctory trials. ...”