The present case concerns dissolution of the applicant association by a decision of the administrative authorities on account of the fact that bankruptcy proceedings had been opened against it, even though in those bankruptcy proceedings it had been decided, by a common agreement of all its creditors, to restructure the association with a view to preserving it and continuing its activities. The restructuring plan was approved by the bankruptcy court and the bankruptcy proceedings were eventually closed whereupon the association continued to operate. The case also concerns the alleged lack of impartiality of the Constitutional Court given that one of the three judges of that court who decided on the applicant association’s constitutional complaint is the wife of the president of a golf club against which the association had instituted enforcement proceedings.
The applicant association (Hrvatski golf savez), an association which used to be incorporated and registered as such under Croatian law, has its seat in Zagreb. It was represented by Ms I. Bojić, a lawyer practising in Zagreb.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant association was established on 23 June 1992 and was recorded as a legal entity (a federation of associations – savez udruga) in the register of associations in Croatia. It was a national sports association (federation) whose members were various golf clubs in Croatia. Its main activities were organising golf competitions at a national level, managing the national golf teams, representing Croatia in international golfing organisations and promoting golf in Croatia.
Following an application by the applicant association’s largest creditor, Mr D. K., by a decision of 23 January 2009 the Zagreb Commercial Court (Trgovački sud u Zagrebu, hereafter “the bankruptcy court”) opened bankruptcy proceedings against the association and appointed a bankruptcy administrator. The decision was based on the report of the temporary bankruptcy administrator, who found:
-  that the applicant association’s main sources of income were membership and other fees paid by its members, funds from the Croatian Olympic Committee, and funds from sponsors and other donors;
-  that the debts of the applicant association on 19 January 2009 had amounted to 1,005,936.20 Croatian kunas (HRK), and that its account had been frozen since 6 November 2008;
-  that the main cause of the applicant association’s insolvency was the unwillingness of the governing bodies and persons authorised to represent the applicant association to settle valid claims which it had against its own debtors.
On the same day the bankruptcy administrator issued a decision stating that all the golf clubs which were members of the applicant association would retain that status after the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings, and she set the annual membership fee. She notified the golf clubs – the members of the applicant association – of her decision.
On 30 January 2009 the above-mentioned bankruptcy court’s decision (see paragraph 6 above) was forwarded to the relevant local State administration office, namely the General Administration Office of the City of Zagreb (Grad Zagreb, Gradski ured za opću upravu – hereafter “the Zagreb City Office”), which is in charge of the register of associations.
On 25 February 2009 the bankruptcy administrator informed the golf clubs – the members of the applicant association – of the grounds for opening the bankruptcy proceedings and the extent of the association’s debts. She also explained what the legal effects of opening the bankruptcy proceedings were, namely: that all the powers of the applicant association’s governing bodies had been transferred to her; that all the association’s internal regulations, including its statute, had lost their legal force; and that its account had been closed and a new one would be opened. She also stated that, in her opinion, the applicant association could nevertheless continue with its activities, but the decision as to whether or not the association should continue to operate was one for its creditors.
At a hearing held on 26 March 2009 before the bankruptcy court, all the creditors decided that rather than liquidating the applicant association’s assets (by selling them) and distributing the proceeds among themselves, the association should continue to operate. They also decided to appoint a board of creditors (odbor vjerovnika). Their decision was based on the report of the bankruptcy administrator, who had established that the members of the applicant association owed the association HRK 700,000 in total for 2008 and 2009. The bankruptcy administrator also informed the creditors that while some golf clubs which were members of the applicant association had expressed a negative opinion regarding the association continuing its activities during the bankruptcy proceedings, and others had expressed a positive opinion, none of the members had left the association or cancelled their membership.
On 3 April 2009 the bankruptcy administrator informed the golf clubs concerned of the creditors’ decision that the association should continue to operate (see paragraph 10 above). She also informed those clubs that the applicant association would retain its membership of international golfing associations and the Croatian Olympic Committee. She further informed the members that the Zagreb City Office, in a decision of 26 February 2009, had wrongfully established that the applicant association had ceased its activities, and that she had appealed against that decision (see paragraphs 19-20 below). Lastly, she informed the clubs which were members that the official competitions organised by the association would begin in May, and that the calendar of competitions would be published within a week.
On 9 April 2009 the board of creditors informed the golf clubs concerned that the association would continue to operate, and it scheduled a joint information meeting with the clubs’ representatives at which the calendar of competitions would be agreed.
In May 2009 seven golf clubs informed the bankruptcy administrator of their intention to retain their status as members of the applicant association, and one golf club applied for membership.
By a decision of 26 January 2010 the board of creditors instructed the bankruptcy administrator to prepare a reorganisation plan (a bankruptcy plan, stečajni plan) with a view to restructuring the applicant association and enabling it to continue its activities.
At a hearing held on 28 June 2010 before the bankruptcy court, all the creditors unanimously approved the reorganisation plan, which was also approved at the same hearing by the bankruptcy court. The court decision approving the plan became final on the same day, because all the creditors waived their right of appeal.
The plan provided, inter alia, that the association’s administrative board consisted of three members, and it specifically listed the names of the three creditors who were the board members, including D.K., who was its president. The plan also envisaged that all the creditors’ claims, together with accrued interest, were to be paid off by the end of 2023, whereupon the administrative board would have to organise elections with a view to electing new members of the board.
By a decision of 29 June 2010 the bankruptcy court closed the bankruptcy proceedings. The decision specified that the adoption of that decision meant that the powers of the bankruptcy administrator and the board of creditors had been terminated and the association’s power to manage its own affairs and assets had been restored. It also stated that the authority in charge of the register of associations was to be notified of the decision, and that the decision should be published in the Official Gazette.
In the meantime, after the Zagreb City Office had been given notice of the above-mentioned bankruptcy court’s decision of 30 January 2009 (see paragraph 8 above), it had instituted administrative proceedings of its own motion.
By a decision of 26 February 2009 the Zagreb City Office established that the applicant association had ceased its activities. In so holding, it relied on section 28(1) sub-paragraph 4 of the Associations Act, which stated that bankruptcy was one of the grounds for dissolving an association (see paragraph 56 below). The relevant part of that decision reads as follows:
“1.  It is hereby established ... that the association under the name the Croatian Golf Federation has ceased its activities.
An appeal against this decision does not suspend its effects.
The bankruptcy administrator appealed against that decision on behalf of the applicant association.
By a decision of 4 May 2010 the Ministry of Administration (Ministarstvo uprave) dismissed the appeal. The relevant part of that decision reads as follows:
“In the appeal, [the applicant association] submitted that neither on the day of the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings nor [afterwards] ... had [the association] been dissolved, nor had it ceased to operate. Relying on the [relevant] provisions of the Bankruptcy Act and the Associations Act, the appellant argued that a bankruptcy debtor ceased to exist only once it was struck off the relevant register, which was possible only on the basis of a final decision of the Commercial Court on the conclusion of bankruptcy proceedings. The appellant submitted that since the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings [the association] had continued to operate under the name of the Croatian Golf Federation in Bankruptcy, and that the powers of the former governing bodies and authorised representatives had been taken over by the bankruptcy administrator.
...
The appeal is ill-founded.
The first-instance authority, of its own motion, established that [the association] had ceased to operate, in accordance with sub-paragraph 4 of section 28(1), on the basis of the Zagreb Commercial Court’s decision of 23 January 2009 whereby bankruptcy proceedings had been opened against the [association]...
Having consulted the first-instance authority’s case file and the document [drafted] by the Croatian Olympic Committee of 6 May 2009, received during the secondinstance proceedings, it was established that the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings [had resulted in] ... all [the association’s] governing bodies (the Assembly, the persons authorised to represent [the association], the Administrative Board and the Supervisory Board) stopping operating and the appointed bankruptcy administrator being the only authorised representative of [the association]. It was also established that the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings [had resulted in] the statute, as the basic act of [the association], losing its legal force.
Sub-paragraph 4 of section 28(1) of the Associations Act provides that bankruptcy is one of the grounds for dissolving an association.
Section 47 of the Sports Act ... defines a national sports federation, with regard to its status, as a legal entity which endorses and promotes sport, organises national sport championships, takes care of the national team, and represents the sport for which it was established in relevant international sports associations. Paragraph 6 of that section ... provides that a national sports federation, by [its own] regulations, regulates: a system of competition, the registration of athletes, athletes’ rights and obligations, the right of foreign athletes to play for Croatian sports clubs, the disciplinary liability of athletes, and other issues within [the federation’s] field of activity.
After consulting the statute of the Croatian Golf Federation of 23 April 2008, it was established that the goals of [the association] were: the coordination of special and common interests, the planning and organisation of the development and promotion of golf, the creation of golfing sports programmes and related activities, the representation of Croatia in golf, and the promotion and raising of awareness on the importance of golf as a healthy way of life, regardless of players’ age, sex or social status.
Having regard to section 47 of the Sports Act and [the fact: that] the statute of [the association], which regulated the central issues of a national sports association, had lost its legal force; that all governing bodies of [the association] had stopped operating when the bankruptcy proceedings had been opened; and that because of the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings, the Croatian Golf Federation could not pursue the goals defined in [its] statute for which [the association] had been established, the firstinstance authority correctly established that the Croatian Golf Federation had ceased its activities, on the basis of sub-paragraph 4 of section 28(1) of the Associations Act.
At the same time the first-instance authority, by correctly applying the Associations Act, established that the association Croatian Golf Federation had ceased its activities. The dissolution of the association shall consequently occur only once the conditions set out in section 33 of the Associations Act are met.
In the light of the foregoing, and given that the Croatian Golf Federation, as a sports association with the status of a national sports federation, is not acting in accordance with the provisions of the Sports Act and the Associations Act, and that sub-paragraph 4 of section 28(1) of the Associations Act provides for bankruptcy being one of the grounds for dissolving an association, there are no obstacles to establishing another association to perform golf-related sports activities at a national level in accordance with the Sports Act.”
By a judgment of 30 October 2013 the High Administrative Court (Visoki upravni sud Republike Hrvatske) dismissed an action for judicial review brought by the applicant association. The relevant part of that judgment reads as follows:
“The plaintiff association’s appeal, lodged against the [first-instance decision] ... of 26 February 2009 establishing the dissolution of the Croatian Golf Federation owing to bankruptcy, was dismissed by the contested decision.
The plaintiff association contests the above-mentioned decision on all legal grounds, pointing out that it did not cease to operate after the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings. In the statement of claim it extensively cites the circumstances which meant that the decision to dissolve the association should not have been made, essentially [the fact that] the association still existed, had the required number of members and was carrying out its activities. [The plaintiff association] objects to the way in which the case was handled, and considers that the administrative authorities were biased because they referred to the decision of the Croatian Olympic Committee, according to which the plaintiff association was no longer a national representative for golf, something which, in the plaintiff association’s opinion, has no bearing on the dissolution of the association. It believes that as regards the examination of the lawfulness of the decision to dissolve the association, the only important element is that [the association] continued to: carry out all the tasks entrusted to national sports associations by the Sports Act, organise national golf championships, manage golf teams, and represent that sport before golf associations at a European and international level. Accordingly, [the plaintiff association] concludes by stating that the association had not ceased to operate, and that this decisive fact was not properly established in the proceedings. It proposes that [the court] allow the action and quash the contested decision.
...
The action is ill-founded.
The information in the case file indicates that bankruptcy proceedings were opened against the Croatian Golf Federation by the Zagreb Commercial Court’s decision ... of 23 January 2009 ..., and that the bankruptcy proceedings were closed by a decision of the same court ... of 29 June 2010.
Given that section 28(1) sub-paragraph 4 of the Associations Act provides that an association shall be dissolved in the event of bankruptcy, [and that], in the present case, [bankruptcy proceedings were] opened by the Commercial Court’s decision of 23 January 2009, the administrative authority was bound to find that the association had been dissolved.”
On 13 January 2014 the applicant association lodged a constitutional complaint against the lower-instance decisions, relying, inter alia, on its freedom of association, guaranteed by Article 43 of the Croatian Constitution.
By a decision of 20 March 2014 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), sitting as a panel composed of Judges M.A., D.Š. and M.Š., declared the applicant association’s constitutional complaint inadmissible, holding that the case did not raise a constitutional issue. The Constitutional Court served its decision on the applicant association on 5 April 2014.
Meanwhile, on 11 March 2009 the applicant association had asked the Zagreb City Office to record the change of its name from the Croatian Golf Federation (Hrvatski golf savez) to the Croatian Golf Federation in Bankruptcy (Hrvatski golf savez u stečaju), as required by the Bankruptcy Act, and to record the changes as regards its seat and the person authorised to represent it.
By a decision of 31 March 2009 the Zagreb City Office declared the request inadmissible. It held that the applicant association had ceased its activities and therefore the conditions for requesting the recording of changes in the register of associations had not been met.
The bankruptcy administrator appealed against that decision on behalf of the applicant association.
By a decision of 8 July 2010 the Ministry of Administration dismissed the appeal. The relevant part of that decision reads as follows:
“[The Zagreb City Office], in its decision ... of 26 February 2009, ... established of its own motion, in accordance with section 28(1) sub-paragraph 4 of the Associations Act, that the activities of [the applicant association] had ceased on the basis of the Zagreb Commercial Court’s decision of 23 January 2009 whereby bankruptcy proceedings had been opened against the [association]. The bankruptcy administrator lodged an appeal against that decision. In the appellate proceedings, this Ministry found that the Croatian Golf Federation, as a sports association with the legal status of a national sports federation, was not acting in accordance with the Sports Act. It also found: that the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings had resulted in the statute of the association, which regulates central issues of a national sports federation, losing its legal force; that all the governing bodies of the [applicant association] had stopped functioning; and that [the applicant association] could fulfil neither the purpose of a national sports federation nor the goals laid down in its statute, for which the [applicant association] had been established ... In its decision of 4 May 2010, the Ministry therefore dismissed the appeal by the bankruptcy administrator as illfounded.
It follows from the above that since the Zagreb City Office established in its decision that [the applicant association] had ceased its activities, that office correctly declared [the applicant association’s] request to record [certain] changes in the register of associations inadmissible ...”
By a judgment of 30 October 2013 the High Administrative Court dismissed an action for judicial review by the applicant association. The relevant part of that decision reads as follows:
“Section 28(1) sub-paragraph 4 of the Associations Act provides that in the event of bankruptcy, an association is dissolved. In the instant case, the bankruptcy proceedings were opened by a decision of the Zagreb Commercial Court of 23 January 2009, a [fact] which was established by the decision of [the Zagreb City Office] of 26 February 2009.
It follows that on the day when the request to record the changes in the register of associations was submitted, the applicant association had been dissolved, and that after the conclusion of the bankruptcy proceedings the conditions for striking [the association] off the register, set out in section 33 of the Associations Act, were met.
Since the party requesting the recording of changes in the register was a legal entity whose activities had ceased owing to bankruptcy, as was established, the first-instance authority correctly concluded that it could not proceed with such a request. That is so because under section 5(4) of the rules on the register of associations and the register of foreign associations, the dissolution of an association is recorded in the register, whereas the [applicant association] was dissolved on 26 February 2009 by a decision whose effects were not suspended by an appeal.”
In the meantime, by a decision of 27 January 2014 the Zagreb City Office, referring to the judgments of the High Administrative Court (see paragraphs 22 and 29 above), had struck the applicant association off the register of associations.
On 28 January 2016 the Ministry of Administration dismissed an appeal by the applicant association against that decision.
In response to the Ministry of Administration’s decision, the applicant association then brought an action for judicial review with the Zagreb Administrative Court (Upravni sud u Zagrebu).
By a judgment of 12 July 2018 the Zagreb Administrative Court dismissed the action. The relevant part of that judgment reads as follows:
“The case file indicates ... that a decision [of the Zagreb City Office] ... of 26 February 2009 ... established that the [applicant association] had been dissolved owing to bankruptcy. In particular, the Zagreb Commercial Court’s decision of 23 January 2009 opened the bankruptcy proceedings against the [association], and a decision of the same court ... of 29 June 2010 concluded the bankruptcy proceedings.
 The appeal by the bankruptcy administrator against [that] first-instance decision was dismissed by the Ministry [of Administration]’s decision of 4 May 2010...
In a judgment ... of 30 October 2013 the High Administrative Court dismissed the action [for judicial review lodged in response to those decisions], holding that the [applicant association] had been dissolved by the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings in accordance with the Zagreb Commercial Court’s decision of 23 January 2009.
By [another] judgment of [the same date] the High Administrative Court dismissed the action [for judicial review] lodged in response to [the first-instance decision declaring inadmissible the bankruptcy administrator’s request to change the name, ... the seat and the person authorised to represent the association in the register of associations, on the grounds that [the association] had been dissolved.
Sub-paragraph 4 of section 28(1) of the Associations Act provides that in the event of bankruptcy, an association is dissolved.
...
The case file indisputably indicates that in the [second] judgment of the High Administrative Court of 30 October 2013 it was established that the conditions for striking [the applicant association] off the register of associations, set out in section 33 of the Associations Act, had been met upon the bankruptcy proceedings being concluded in accordance with the Zagreb Commercial Court’s decision ... of 29 June 2010.
...
Therefore, the contested decision [of the Ministry of 28 January 2016], whereby the plaintiff association’s appeal against the above-mentioned first-instance decision was dismissed, is lawful.”
The Zagreb Administrative Court’s judgment was certified as having become final on 9 August 2018, even though the applicant association learned about it for the first time from the Government’s submissions of 20 November 2019 containing a factual update. It turned out that the judgment had never been served on the applicant association, but at the address of an association with a similar name. Therefore, on 2 January 2020 the applicant association simultaneously lodged a request to set aside the certificate of finality in respect of that judgment, a request to reopen the proceedings, and a constitutional complaint.
By a decision of 7 September 2010 the Croatian Olympic Committee excluded the applicant association from the committee; as a national sports federation (see paragraph 47 of the Sports Act cited in paragraph 58 below), the association had been a member of that committee since 15 September 1994. The committee held that owing to bankruptcy, the applicant association no longer met the criteria of a national sports federation. Specifically, owing to bankruptcy, it was no longer acting in accordance with the Sports Act and the Associations Act, because its governing bodies had not been elected by the members of the association, but imposed by a decision of the bankruptcy court (see paragraphs 16-17 above).
On 8 August 2011 the applicant association contested that decision by lodging a request for extraordinary review with the Sport Arbitration Council of the Croatian Olympic Committee.
By a decision of 13 April 2012 the Sports Arbitration Council of the Croatian Olympic Committee rejected the applicant association’s request as being out of time.
On 17 May 2012 the applicant association lodged an appeal against that decision before the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) in Lausanne.
By a decision of 23 January 2013 the CAS dismissed the applicant association’s appeal, finding that there was no arbitration clause in favour of the CAS.
Meanwhile, on 28 December 2012 the Croatian Olympic Committee had promoted another golfing federation, an association named the Croatian Golf Association (Hrvatska golf udruga), from associate committee member to full committee member. That association thereby acquired the status of a national sports federation.
By a resolution of 17 October 2010 the applicant association was expelled from the European Golf Association (EGA), an association of national golf federations in Europe, owing to bankruptcy.
On 17 November 2010 the applicant association lodged an appeal against that resolution with the CAS in Lausanne.
In an arbitral award of 12 June 2011 the CAS held that the applicant association’s appeal was well-founded, because the contested resolution had been based on invalid reasons and/or the association’s fundamental right to be heard had been violated.
In 2011 the applicant association applied to a notary public for a payment order to be issued against one of its members (a golf club), with a view to collecting an unpaid membership fee. On 11 August 2011 the notary public issued a payment order.
Upon the golf club in question raising an objection, the payment order was set aside, and regular civil proceedings ensued before the Zagreb Commercial Court.
By a judgment of 13 June 2013 that court dismissed the applicant association’s claim for payment of the unpaid membership fee. Relying on the Zagreb City Office’s decision of 26 February 2009 (see paragraph 19 above), it held that the applicant association had ceased its activities.
On 13 October 2016 the High Commercial Court (Visoki trgovački sud Republike Hrvatske) reversed the first-instance judgment and ruled in favour of the applicant association. The relevant part of its judgment reads as follows.
“... The plaintiff association did not cease its activities as an association, because it is evident from the documents in the case file that it continued with its activities [both] during the bankruptcy proceedings ... and [afterwards] under the approved reorganisation plan ... Section 2 of the Associations Act provides that an association acquires the status of a legal entity by being registered in the register of associations. However, under section 3 of that Act, the rules governing civil-law partnerships apply, mutatis mutandis, to associations without the status of a legal entity, from which it may be concluded that an association exists even if it is not registered in the register of associations. Therefore, for the resolution of this dispute, it is not decisive that the plaintiff association was struck off the register of associations, or that judicial review proceedings are ongoing in that regard.”
The applicant association submitted and furnished evidence indicating that it had not stopped its activities either during the above bankruptcy proceedings (see paragraphs 6-17 above) or afterwards, before it had been struck off the register of associations.
Specifically, it had organised team and individual Croatian golf championships every year in the period between 2009 and 2014. Every year, the golf club which had won the Croatian team championship had duly participated in the relevant European championship, as usual.
The national golf team had continued to participate in the leading world championship – the World Team Championship (held in Argentina in 2010 and in Turkey in 2012) – which was held every two years.
The representatives of the applicant association (during the bankruptcy proceedings and afterwards) had continuously attended meetings of the umbrella European and international associations, where, until their expulsion in 2014 on the basis of the High Administrative Court’s judgment of 30 October 2013 (see paragraph 22 above), they had been recognised as the legitimate national golf federation of Croatia, notwithstanding the bankruptcy proceedings. In particular, they had taken part in annual meetings of the International Golf Federation in 2012 and the European Golf Association in 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012.
Lastly, the applicant association submitted that even though it had had some thirty golf clubs as its members before the opening of the bankruptcy proceedings and some of them had left the association afterwards, the number of its members had never fallen below seven.
The applicant association also submitted that on 29 April 2011 it had instituted enforcement proceedings to collect unpaid membership fees from one of its members, a golf club whose president was the husband of Judge D.Š., who had sat on the Constitutional Court panel that had decided on the association’s constitutional complaint in the administrative proceedings for dissolution of the association (see paragraph 24 above). According to the applicant association, the enforcement proceedings – in which a writ of execution had been issued on 29 April 2011 and had become final on 17 May 2011 – had been ongoing at the time the Constitutional Court had delivered its decision of 20 March 2014 (see paragraph 24 above), and had still been ongoing at the time when the association had lodged its application with the Court on 3 October 2014.
The relevant Articles of the Croatian Constitution (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 56/90 with subsequent amendments) read as follows:
Article 16
“(1) Rights and freedoms may be restricted only by law in order to protect the rights and freedoms of others, the legal order, public morals or health.
 (2) Every restriction of rights and freedoms should be proportional to the nature of the necessity for the restriction in each individual case.”
Article 43
“Everyone shall be guaranteed the right to associate freely for the protection of their interests or the promotion of social, economic, political, national, cultural and other convictions or goals. For this purpose, anyone may freely form trade unions and other associations, join them or leave them, in accordance with the law.
The right to associate freely is limited by the prohibition of any violent threat to the democratic constitutional order and the independence, unity, and territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia.”
Article 125
“The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia shall consist of thirteen judges elected among eminent lawyers, especially judges, State attorneys, advocates and university professors of law, by the Croatian Parliament for a term of eight years.”
The relevant provision of the Constitutional Act on the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 99/1999 with subsequent amendments – “the Constitutional Court Act”) reads as follows:
Section 68
“(1)  A panel composed of six judges shall decide on a constitutional complaint.
(2)  A panel composed of three judges shall decide on constitutional complaints which do not meet procedural requirements (belated, lodged by unauthorised persons or [otherwise] inadmissible).
(3)  The panel may only decide unanimously and with all its members present.
(4)  If the panel does not reach a unanimous decision, or if the panel considers that the issue [raised in] the constitutional complaint is of wider importance, the constitutional complaint shall be decided by the [plenary] session of the Constitutional Court.”
The relevant provisions of the Associations Act (Zakon o udrugama, Official Gazette no. 88/01), which was in force between 1 January 2002 and 30 September 2014, read as follows:
DISSOLUTION OF AN ASSOCIATION
Grounds for dissolving an association
Section 28
“(1)  The grounds for dissolving an association are:
a decision by the relevant [governing] body of the association to dissolve the association,
the association ceasing its activities,
a final court decision banning the association,
bankruptcy.
(2)  It is to be considered that an association has ceased its activities if the number of its members falls below the number provided for establishing an association, or if a period twice as long as the one provided for in the statute of the association for meetings of the assembly has elapsed without a meeting being held.
(3)  The facts referred to in sub-paragraphs 1 and 2 of paragraph 1 of this section shall be established in [administrative] proceedings by a decision of the [relevant local] office of State administration, of its own motion, or at the initiative of the relevant [governing] body of the association or other interested natural and legal persons.
(4)  The [relevant local] office of State administration shall issue a decision on the dissolution of the association on the grounds provided for in sub-paragraphs 1 and 2 of section 1, and [shall] notify the relevant court of its decision, with a view to instituting bankruptcy proceedings.
(5)  ...”
Striking off the register
Section 33
“(1)  [The relevant administrative authority] shall strike the association off the register [of associations] on the basis of the final decision on the conclusion of the bankruptcy proceedings.
(2)  The association ceases to exist [is dissolved] when it is struck off the register.”
The relevant provisions of the Bankruptcy Act (Stečajni zakon, Official Gazette, no. 44/96 with subsequent amendments), which was in force between 1 January 1997 and 31 August 2015, provided as follows:
CHAPTER I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Objectives of bankruptcy proceedings
Section 2
 “(1) Bankruptcy proceedings are carried out with a view to jointly satisfying [the claims of] the bankruptcy debtor’s creditors through the liquidation [sale] of its assets and the distribution of the proceeds among the creditors.
(2) During bankruptcy proceedings a reorganisation plan ... may be [adopted and restructuring may be] carried out with a view to regulating the legal status of the [bankruptcy] debtor and its relationship to its creditors, in particular with a view to preserving its business.”
CHAPTER III.
LEGAL EFFECTS OF THE OPENING OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEEDINGS
Transfer of powers of the [bankruptcy] debtor’s governing bodies ... to the bankruptcy administrator
Section 89(1)
“When bankruptcy proceedings are opened against a legal entity as a [bankruptcy] debtor, the powers of its governing bodies shall be terminated and transferred to the bankruptcy administrator.”
CHAPTER IV.
ADMINISTRATION OF THE BANKRUPTCY ESTATE AND ITS LIQUIDATION
DECISION ON LIQUIDATION
Report hearing
Section 155(1)
“At the report hearing, the bankruptcy administrator shall submit a report on the economic status of the [bankruptcy] debtor and its causes. In particular, he or she should indicate whether there are chances that the debtor company could preserve its business, fully or in part, and what effects this could have on the satisfaction of the creditors [i.e. their claims].”
Section 155a
“(1)  If the decisions referred to in paragraph 2 of this section have not been made so far, the bankruptcy judge shall schedule a special session of the creditors’ assembly no later than six months from the day of the first report hearing to discuss the bankruptcy proceedings and decide on their continuation.
(2)  At the hearing referred to in paragraph 1 of this section, creditors may, based on the report of the bankruptcy administrator ... adopt a decision:
...,
on whether and in what way the business of the bankruptcy debtor will be preserved,
...,
on the need and possibilities to start preparing a reorganisation plan,
...,
on other issues of importance for the ... the bankruptcy proceedings.”
Section 155b(1)
“In any event, if the creditors do not adopt a decision to preserve the bankruptcy debtor’s business at the hearing referred to in section 155a(1) of this Act, the business activities shall be suspended and the bankruptcy debtor’s assets shall be liquidated without delay.”
CHAPTER VI.
REORGANISATION
PREPARATION OF THE REORGANISATION PLAN
Principal provision
Section 213
“(1) Following the opening of bankruptcy proceedings, a reorganisation plan may be prepared in which deviation from the statutory provisions on liquidation and distribution of a bankruptcy estate is permitted.
(2) The reorganisation plan may [provide for]:
- the debtor [entity] being left all or some of its assets, with a view to preserving its business,
...”
The relevant provisions of the Sports Act (Zakon o športu, Official Gazette, no. 71/06 with subsequent amendments), which has been in force since 6 July 2006, provided as follows:
Sports federations
Section 46(1) and (2)
“(1) A sports federation is an association of at least three legal entities engaged in sporting activities in the same sport which, in order to pursue common interests in a given sport, [carries out the following activities], in particular: coordinating the activities of its members; organising and conducting competitions; regulating a system of competition, and issues related to the registration of athletes, their status and disciplinary liability; promoting professional work in sports; and caring for categorised athletes [skrbi se o kategoriziranim sportašima].
(2) Only one sports federation for a single sport may be established at a national level and at a local or regional level.”
National sports federation
Section 47
“(1) A national sports federation is established if at least three sports clubs or at least two sports federations established in the same sport are active in the territory of Croatia.
(2) ...
(3) ...
(4) A national sports federation regulates a system of competition in sport for which it was established, as well as other issues which it is entitled to regulate under this Act, and adopts individual decisions when entitled to do so.
(5) A national sports federation endorses and promotes sport in accordance with the National Sports Programme, organises national sport championships, takes care of the national team, and represents the sport for which it was established in the relevant international sports association.
(6) In addition to the issues referred to in paragraph 4 of this section, the national sports federation, by [its own] regulations, also regulates: the conditions to be fulfilled by sports clubs in order to obtain professional status, ... the registration of athletes, [athletes’] rights and obligations, the right of foreign athletes to play for Croatian sports clubs, the disciplinary liability of athletes, and the rights and obligations of sports referees and health professionals if these issues are not regulated by [their] professional associations, as well as other issues within [the federation’s] field of activity.”
Croatian Olympic Committee
Section 49(1) and (3)
“(1) The Croatian Olympic Committee is the highest non-governmental national sports association in which national sports federations, sports unions in the counties and in the City of Zagreb, and other organisations whose activity is important for the promotion of sports, join together in accordance with the rules of the Croatian Olympic Committee.
(2) ...
(3) The Croatian Olympic Committee is independent in its operation.”
Section 76 of the Administrative Disputes Act (Zakon o upravnim sporovima, Official Gazette nos. 20/10 with subsequent amendments) allows for the possibility to reopen proceedings on the basis of a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights. The text of that provision is reproduced in the case of Guberina v. Croatia (no. 23682/13, § 28, ECHR 2016).
The relevant part of Recommendation CM/Rec(2007) 14 on the legal status of non-governmental organisations in Europe, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 10 October 2007 at the 1006th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies, reads as follows:
“IV. Legal personality
...
Termination of legal personality
The legal personality of NGOs can only be terminated pursuant to the voluntary act of their members – or in the case of non-membership-based NGOs, its governing body – or in the event of bankruptcy, prolonged inactivity or serious misconduct.
...
Accountability
...
Supervision
The termination of an NGO ... should only be ordered by a court where there is compelling evidence that the grounds specified in paragraph 44 ... above have been met. Such an order should be subject to prompt appeal.”
The Explanatory memorandum to the Recommendation, in the part concerning Paragraph 44 of the Recommendation, reads as follows:
“The termination of the legal personality of an NGO against the will of its members or, in the case of a nonmembership-based organisation, its founders, is not something that should be easily done as this would undermine the principle that such bodies ought not to be subject to the direction of public authorities (see Paragraph 6 of the Recommendation). Involuntary termination ought, therefore, only to be possible where there is a compelling public interest in so doing. This will be where the NGO concerned has become bankrupt, has not been active for an extensive period – this is probably not something that can be claimed unless at least several years have elapsed between meetings of the highest governing body and there have been at least two failures to file annual reports on their accounts – or has engaged in serious misconduct in the sense of wilfully engaging in activities that are inconsistent with the objectives for which an NGO can be founded (including becoming an essentially profit-making body).”