The case originated in an application (no. 47685/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Radovan Buvač (“the applicant”), on 12 July 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr Lj. Planinić, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
On 9 October 2015 the complaint concerning the right of access to a court hearing was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Zagreb.
On 28 April 2008 the daily newspaper B. published an article under the headline “Mob Lawyer joins the Supervisory Board”, describing the applicant as an extortionist.
On 27 May 2008 the applicant’s representative asked the publisher to publish a correction of that information. The publisher neither replied nor published a correction of the disputed information.
On 9 July 2008, after the expiry of the deadline envisaged in the relevant provisions of the Media Act (Zakon o medijima) to publish a correction, the applicant brought a civil action against the publisher in the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court (Općinski građanski sud u Zagrebu), claiming non-pecuniary damage.
On 10 July 2009 the publisher replied stating in particular that the applicant had failed to submit a power of attorney with his request.
At a hearing held on 31 January 2012 the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court heard evidence from the applicant who said that he had authorised his representative to act on his behalf vis-à-vis the publisher.
On 31 January 2012 the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court, relying on sections 22(2) and 40(3) of the Media Act, declared the applicant’s claim inadmissible. The first-instance court held that the request for the publication of a correction of the disputed information had not been signed by a duly authorised person because the applicant had not proved that his representative had actually submitted a power of attorney with the request.
The relevant part of the decision reads:
“In his testimony, the [applicant] stated that he had given power of attorney to his counsel, [Lj.P], authorising her to institute both criminal and civil proceedings for defamation ... He was present during the preparation of a draft of the request for the correction of the disputed information ...
...
This court does not accept the [applicant]’s evidence because the [applicant] has no direct knowledge of what was ultimately sent to the defendant ... On the other hand, the [applicant’s] statement concerning the granting of a power of attorney is of no relevance for the solution to the specific legal issue ...
...
Given that the request for the publication of a correction of the disputed information was not signed by the [applicant], but by his counsel, [Lj.P.], and that it was not accompanied with a power of attorney, the [applicant] has not proved that he had properly requested the publication of a correction of the disputed information ... an action which is, pursuant to section 22(2) of the Media Act, a procedural requirement for bringing a civil action for non-pecuniary damage against the publisher ...”
On 19 November 2012 the Šibenik County Court (Županijski sud u Šibeniku) dismissed an appeal by the applicant and upheld the first-instance decision.
On 14 March 2013 the Constitutional Court declared a constitutional complaint lodged by the applicant inadmissible on the grounds that there was “no constitutional issue” to be examined.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette no. 53/1991 with subsequent amendments), as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“A representative shall submit a power of attorney when undertaking the first procedural action.
The court may allow that procedural actions for a party be temporarily undertaken by a person who has not submitted a power of attorney, but shall, at the same time, order this person to submit subsequently, within a specified time-limit, either a power of attorney or the party’s approval for the performance of a procedural action.
...
In the course of the whole proceedings, the court shall pay attention to whether the person appearing as a representative is duly authorised. If the court establishes that the person appearing as representative is not duly authorised, it shall set aside the procedural actions undertaken by this person, unless these actions are subsequently approved by the party.”
The relevant provisions of the Media Act (Zakon o medijima, Official Gazette no. 59/04, with subsequents amandemnets), as applicable at the relevant time, read as follows:
“Non-pecuniary damage shall be compensated, as a rule, by publishing a correction of the information and with the publisher’s apology and with the payment of compensation pursuant to the general regulations of the Obligations Act.
A person who previously requested from the publisher that a correction of the disputable information be published, that is to say the publisher’s apology if correction is not possible, shall have the right to lodge a claim for compensation for non-pecuniary damage in compliance with the general regulations of the Obligations Act.”
“Everyone shall have the right to request from the editor-in-chief publication without compensation of a correction of the published information which has violated their rights or interests. Legal persons and other organisations and bodies shall also be entitled to a correction if the information is in violation of their rights and interests. The purpose of the correction is to correct untruthful or incomplete information.
The publication of a correction may be requested within thirty days of the publication of the information.
The request for a correction shall be submitted to the editor-in-chief in written form. The request shall be reasoned and signed by the applicant and it shall contain all necessary data concerning the applicant and his address.
...”
In decision no. U-III-4057/2013 of 17 September 2014, relied on by the applicant, the Constitutional Court found a violation of the right to a fair hearing when the civil courts had declared the claimant’s civil action inadmissible because her representatives had not enclosed a power of attorney with the request to publish the correction of the disputed information. The Constitutional Court held that the manner in which the domestic courts had applied the relevant provisions of the Media Act had amounted to excessive formalism.
The Government relied on the Supreme Court’s decisions nos. Rev  908/1997-2 of 24 October 2000, Rev 848/2004-2 of 30 March 2005, Rev 717/2003-2 of 12 May 2005, Rev 551/2009-2 of 27 May 2009, Rev 1016/2009-2 of 9 September 2009 and Rev 929/2009-2 of 15 September 2009 in which the court held that a procedural requirement for bringing a claim for damages, arising out of inaccurate information, in a court, was a request for correction of the disputed information lodged with a publisher. In addition to this, the Supreme Court held that when a request was submitted by a representative, he or she was obliged to enclose a power of attorney with it.