The case originated in an application (no. 19580/06) against Montenegro lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Montenegrin national, Mr Borislav Mijanović (“the applicant”), on 4 May 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr N. Pavličić, a lawyer practising in Podgorica. The Montenegrin Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Pažin.
The applicant complained about the non-enforcement of the judgment rendered in his favour and a violation of his property rights thereby.
On 18 January 2010 the President of the Fourth Section, to which the case had been assigned at the time, decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The application was transferred to the Second Section of the Court, following the re-composition of the Court’s sections on 1 November 2012.
The applicant was a Montenegrin national, born in 1930, who lived in Podgorica.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On an unspecified date the applicant filed a compensation claim against “Radoje Dakić”, a joint-stock company mostly consisting of State-owned capital (hereinafter “the debtor”; see paragraphs 27-28 below).
On 24 September 2003, following a remittal, the Court of First Instance (Osnovni sud) in Podgorica ruled in favour of the applicant, ordering the debtor to pay 159,879.33 euros (”EUR”) plus statutory interest, as well as EUR 6,216.26 for legal costs.
On 6 July 2004 the High Court (Viši sud) in Podgorica upheld this judgment, and on 27 December 2005 the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud) dismissed the debtor’s appeal on points of law (revizija).
On 24 September 2004, upon the applicant’s request to that effect, the Court of First Instance issued an enforcement order (rješenje o izvršenju) by means of a bank account transfer.
On 31 October 2005 the Central Bank (Centralna banka Crne Gore) informed the Court of First Instance that the judgment had not been enforced due to a lack of funds in the debtor’s bank account.
On an unspecified date in February 2006, and in response to a prior request, the applicant was informed by the Minister of Justice that the judgment could not be enforced due to the lack of funds in the debtor’s account. At the same time, the applicant was invited to provide the courts with any other accounts used by the debtor.
On 9 March 2006 the applicant provided details of several such accounts.
On 16 March 2006 the Court of First Instance issued a decision (zaključak) ordering the Central Bank to block all the debtor’s bank accounts and provide data on the funds available therein (dostave podatke o stanju sredstava na tim računima). The Central Bank was to order the payment to the applicant, primarily from the designated bank account. If there were no sufficient funds in the said account, the Central Bank was to order the payment from another bank account in which there were funds. At the same time the court forwarded to the Central Bank the information obtained from the applicant on the debtor’s other bank accounts.
On 24 March 2006 the Central Bank informed the court that the debt at issue had been attached to one of the debtor’s bank accounts pursuant to section 194 of the Enforcement Act 2004 (see paragraph 35 below).
On 3 April 2006 and 13 April 2006 the applicant complained about the delay to the Court of First Instance. In particular, he submitted that the Central Bank had attached the debt to the account in which there were no funds available thus making the enforcement impossible.
On 26 April 2006 the Court of First Instance reaffirmed its decision of 16 March 2006, insisting on full compliance with the relevant legal provisions which defined the role of the Central Bank in enforcement proceedings (see paragraph 35 below).
On 28 April 2006 the Central Bank informed the court that the enforcement at issue had been attached to the debtor’s account specified in the letter of 24 March 2006, as well as that the debtor’s other accounts had been blocked.
It would appear that on 31 August 2006 the Court of First Instance requested once again the enforcement of the judgment at issue.
On 13 September 2006 the Central Bank informed the court that the enforcement was awaiting the inflow of funds in the particular account of the debtor. According to the information provided by the Central Bank there were fifteen other claims against the debtor, which had priority over the applicant’s claim.
On 27 March 2007 the applicant would appear to have requested a change of the means of enforcement.
On 29 March 2007 the Court of First Instance asked the applicant to specify his enforcement request within 8 days, in default of which it would be considered withdrawn. The applicant’s representative received this request on 2 April 2007.
On 24 April 2007 the bailiff requested that the case-file be archived as the applicant’s representative had failed to amend the enforcement request which was thus considered withdrawn. At the same time it was stated that there was no reason for any further action by the court at the time as the enforcement order issued in favour of the applicant was registered (rješenje o izvršenju unijeto u program prinudne naplate) and was awaiting the inflow of funds in the debtor’s account.
On 4 May 2009 the applicant filed a new enforcement request, pursuant to section 30 of the Enforcement Act (see paragraph 34 below), proposing that the judgment at issue be enforced by sale of the debtor’s immovable assets. On 15 July 2009 an enforcement order to that effect was issued. There is no evidence in the case file that the domestic bodies made any attempt whatsoever to enforce this order.
The enforcement proceedings are still ongoing.
The Government submitted that between 3 March 2004, which is when the Convention entered into force in respect of Montenegro, and the end of 2005, 52.196% of the debtor’s stocks were owned by the State, either directly or through some of its bodies (the Government, the Employment Agency, the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, and the Development Fund).
As of 2006 onwards the State and the said bodies owned 50.579% of the debtor’s stocks.
The applicant maintained that: (a) the Government’s Privatisation Council (Savjet za privatizaciju) had sold several plots of the debtor’s land to a private company X and the Municipality of Podgorica for EUR 7,618,000 and EUR 1,400,000, respectively; (b) the debtor had received a grant of EUR 1,200,000 from the Government, and (c) it had made a profit of approximately EUR 2,000,000 in two and a half years, which made a total of EUR 12,218,000. He also submitted that the debtor had avoided doing business through its official bank account specified in the enforcement order, having instead opened accounts in other banks.
Since 7 December 2005 the applicant complained about the non-enforcement to the President of the debtor’s Board of Directors, the President and the Prime Minister of Montenegro, the President of the Supreme Court, the Ombudsman, and the Central Bank’s General Director.
On 21 April 2010 the applicant passed away. On 21 October 2010 the Court of First Instance declared Mrs Marina Mijanović Markuš, one of the applicant’s daughters, his sole heir in respect of the amount owed by the debtor as established by the final judgment issued on 24 September 2003.
Section 4 § 1 provided that the enforcement court was obliged to proceed urgently.
Section 14 provided that the Civil Procedure Act would apply accordingly to the enforcement proceedings unless provided otherwise by this or another Act.
Section 30 provided, inter alia, that the court would order the enforcement in a manner proposed by the creditor. If the enforcement order could not be enforced thereby the creditor could propose another means of enforcement, on which proposal the court would rule by a decision.
Sections 190-198 set out details as regards enforcement by means of a bank account transfer. Section 194, in particular, provided that the court would forward an enforcement order to the Central Bank, which would immediately order other banks to block all the debtor’s accounts and provide data on the funds available therein. Upon receipt of these data the Central Bank would order the payment primarily from the bank account specified in the enforcement order. If there were several bank accounts specified in the enforcement order the payment would be made in the same order as specified. If there were no sufficient funds in the account specified in the enforcement order the Central Bank would order the payment from other accounts in which the debtor had funds.
Sections 143-187 set out details relating to enforcement in respect of the debtor’s immovable assets.
This Act entered into force on 25 September 2011 and thereby repealed the Enforcement Procedure Act 2004. Section 292 § 1, in particular, provides that all enforcements (postupci izvršenja) will be terminated in accordance with this Act.
Sections 6 § 1 and 14 of this Act correspond, in substance, to sections 4 § 1 and 14 of the Enforcement Procedure Act 2004.
Sections 154-201 set out details relating to enforcement in respect of the debtor’s immovable assets.
Section 106 provides, inter alia, that if a request (podnesak) is incomprehensible or incomplete the court shall ask that it be amended or rectified within a specified time-limit which cannot be longer than eight days. If the request is not amended/rectified within the specified time it shall be considered withdrawn.
Section 130 provides that the deceased’s estate (zaostavština) shall be transferred ex lege to the legal heirs at the moment of death.
Section 28 provides that property can be acquired ex lege, through a legal transaction, by means of inheritance, or on the basis of a decision issued by the State in accordance with the law.
Section 91 provides that the deceased’s property will be transferred ex lege to the legal heirs at the moment of death.
Section 2a provided, inter alia, that the Government of Montenegro would establish a Privatisation Council to manage, control and supervise the process of privatisation. The Privatisation Council was responsible to the Government and was financed from the State’s budget. The privatisation was to be conducted in accordance with annual plans adopted by the Government upon proposals of the Privatisation Council.
These provisions entered into force on 3 March 1999.
As of 2000 the Government adopted annual Privatisation Plans setting out details about the privatisation of various companies.
The Privatisation Plan 2003 (Odluka o planu privatizacije za 2003. godinu), which entered into force on 14 March 2003, explicitly provided, inter alia, that the privatisation of the debtor would be run by the Privatisation Council.
The Privatisation Plan 2004, which entered into force on 16 April 2004, provided that the Government would adopt privatisation plans and strategies and would issue relevant decisions in that regard. The Privatisation Council was, inter alia, to: (a) decide on the distribution of the income obtained by the privatisation; (b) coordinate the activities of the subjects involved; (c) establish various Commissions, one of which would also examine the effects of privatisation on the social status of workers and would propose adequate measures. In cases where a privatisation contract was annulled, further privatisation was to be conducted by the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, the Development Fund and the Employment Agency in accordance with their stake (vlasničko učešće). In particular, this Plan reaffirmed that the privatisation of the debtor was one of the priorities and that a decision on the most effective privatisation method would be rendered by the Privatisation Council or the Government.
The Privatisation Plan 2005 (Odluka o planu privatizacije za 2005. godinu), which entered into force on 24 February 2005, envisaged the preparation of a concrete privatisation plan for the debtor.
For other relevant domestic law see Boucke v. Montenegro, no. 26945/06, §§ 38-48, 21 February 2012.