The case originated in an application (no. 30714/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Ivanovich Chekushkin (“the applicant”), on 27 August 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mrs O. Suprunova, a lawyer practising in Bataysk. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
Relying on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, the applicant complained about the quashing of the judgment in his favour by way of supervisory review and the non-enforcement of that judgment.
On 10 February 2004 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits (Rule 54A § 1).
The applicant was born in 1947 and lives in the town of  of the Rostov Region.
In 1986 the applicant took part in the emergency operation at the  nuclear plant. As a result he suffered from extensive exposure to radioactive emissions. The applicant underwent medical examinations which established the link between his poor health and his involvement in the  events. He was consequently granted status of a disabled person and awarded a monthly pension and a special allowance from the State, to be adjusted once a year in line with the minimum subsistence amount (величина прожиточного минимума).
At a certain moment in 2001 the social security authorities ceased to increase regularly the amounts of pension and allowance, paid to the applicant in connection with his disability. Instead, he started to receive his pension in a fixed amount (2,800 Roubles), which was less than he expected. Presuming that this practice was illegal, the applicant brought proceedings against the regional social security office (“the defendant”) claiming the increase of the monthly allowance and pension in line with the increase of the minimum subsistence amount during the relevant period.
On 21 January 2003 the Bataysk Town Court of the Rostov Region (“the ”) rendered a judgment ordering the increase of the monthly allowance due to the applicant in line with the increase of the minimal subsistence amount in the  region. In re-calculating the amount of the applicant's pension the court applied the multiplier of 1.92 based on the data provided by the regional committee on statistics. As a result, the monthly pension of the applicant increased to 5,376 Roubles. The court ordered the defendant to pay the applicant the recalculated amount as from 1 January 2002 less the sums already paid.
The defendant appealed challenging, among other things, the multiplier of 1.92 applied by the first-instance court.
On 16 April 2003 the  (“the ”) upheld the judgment of 21 January 2003 in full. The enforcement proceedings were opened.
On 13 May 2003 the defendant appealed to the Regional Court by way of supervisory review seeking to quash the judgment of 21 January 2003, as upheld on 16 Aril 2003.
On 30 June 2003 the judge rapporteur refused to initiate the supervisory review proceedings and to remit the case for examination on the merits to the Presidium of the  (“the Presidium”).
On 14 July 2003 the defendant complained to the President of the  about the judgment of 21 January 2003, as upheld on appeal, and the judge rapporteur's decision of 30 June 2003 rejecting their previous application for supervisory review. They also requested that the enforcement proceedings be suspended pending the examination of the new supervisory review appeal.
On 4 November 2003 the applicant was informed about the date and venue of the hearing of his case by the Presidium.
On 4 December 2003 the Presidium quashed the judgment of 21 January 2003, as upheld on appeal, stating that the first instance court's calculation of the minimum subsistence amount, based on the multiplier of 1.92, had been insufficiently supported by evidence. The Presidium also noted that the first instance court had misinterpreted the domestic law. The case was remitted to the first instance court for a fresh examination.
On 25 December 2003 the  examined the case anew. In the course of the proceedings the court established that the allowance should have been multiplied by 1.25 in 2002 and by 1.26 for 2003. The applicant maintained that he accepted this multiplier.
As a result, the court held that the amount of pension due to the applicant for 2002 was 3,125 Roubles per month. In 2003 the pension of the applicant should have amounted to 3,937.5 Roubles per month. The court ordered the social security authorities to compensate the applicant for previous underpayments and, starting from January 2004, pay him 3,937.5 Roubles monthly, with subsequent indexation.
On 14 January 2004 the  rendered an additional decision in the above case aimed at correction of an arithmetic error in the calculation of the amount awarded to the applicant.
The above decisions of the  were not appealed against and became final.
On 1 February 2003 the Code of Civil Procedure of the  (“the CCivP”) entered into force introducing, in particular, an amended system of supervisory review.
The CCivP, in the relevant part, provides as follows:
Article 376. Right to apply to a court exercising supervisory review
“1. Judicial decisions that have become legally binding ... may be appealed against... to a court exercising supervisory review by parties to the case and by other persons whose rights and legal interests had been adversely affected by these judicial decisions.
Judicial decisions may be appealed against to a court exercising supervisory review within one year after they became legally binding...”
Article 379. Proceedings in a supervisory review court after an application for supervisory review was lodged
“A President or Deputy President of the respective court transfers the application for supervisory review ... to a judge of this court for examination.”
Article 381. Examination of an application for supervisory review
“2. Having examined an application for supervisory review, the judge issues an interim decision on –
(1)  obtaining the case file if there exist doubts as to the lawfulness of the judicial decision;
(2)  refusing to obtain the case file if the arguments in the application for supervisory review may not, in accordance with the federal law, result in quashing of the judicial decision.
...
The President of the...regional...court... may disagree with the judge's decision refusing to obtain the case file. In such case the President issues his own decision on obtaining the case file.”
“2.  Having examined the case file obtained by the supervisory review court, the judge issues an interim decision on –
– refusing to remit the case for examination on the merits by the supervisory review court;
– remitting the case for examination of the application for supervisory review on the merits by the supervisory review court.”
Article 383.  Interim decision refusing to remit the case for examination 
on the merits by the supervisory review court
“2.  The President of the...regional...court...may disagree with the judge's decision refusing to remit the case for examination on the merits by the supervisory-review court. In such case the President issues his own decision on remitting the case for examination on the merits by the supervisory review court.”
Article 387. Grounds for quashing or varying judicial decisions
 by way of supervisory review
“The grounds for quashing or varying the judicial decisions of the lower courts by way of supervisory review are serious violations of the substantive and procedural laws”