The case originated in 165 applications against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ukrainian nationals, a company based in Ukraine and a Russian national, whose details are specified in the appended tables (“the applicants”).
The applicants Mr Volodymyr Adamovych Umanets (application no. 22064/11) and Mr Petro Dmytrovych Neskoromyuk (application no. 22018/11) died. Their son, Mr Stanislav Volodymyrovych Umanets, and sister, Ms Mariya Dmytrivna Morgun, respectively, manifested the wish to pursue the applications on their behalf.
By letters dated 11 February 2013, the Government informed the Court that the applicants Mr Yukhym Mykolayovych Nishchymenko (application no. 14893/11) and Ms Praskovya Ivanivna Kiriyachenko (application no. 20025/11) had died. Copies of the letters were forwarded to the deceased applicants’ addresses, respectively, on 18 and 7 March 2013 by registered post for comments to be submitted by 18 and 8 April 2013. The readers were warned that in the absence of response, the Court would assume that the applicants had died and that no individuals were entitled and wished to pursue the applications. No replies were received.
The Government (“the Government”) are represented by their Agent, Mr Nazar Kulchytskyy.
On 20 November 2012 the applications above were communicated to the Government of Ukraine.
The Russian Government, having been informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings in respect of the applicant in application no. 17575/11 (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court), indicated that they did not wish to exercise that right.
On the dates set out in the appended tables domestic courts and labour disputes commissions delivered decisions according to which the applicants were entitled to various pecuniary amounts or to have certain actions taken in their favour. The decisions became final and enforceable. However, the applicants were unable to obtain the enforcement of the decisions in due time.
Some of the applicants also made submissions concerning factual and legal matters unrelated to the above non-enforcement issues.