The case originated in 121 applications (see Annex) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by 184 Ukrainian nationals (“the applicants”), in December 2004 – May 2005.
The applicants (except Mr M. M. Matveyev) were represented by Mr G. M. Avramenko, a lawyer practising in the city of . The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev.
On 16 October 2006 the Court decided to communicate the applications to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the applications at the same time as their admissibility.
All 184 applicants (see Annex) reside in .
Between 1997 and 2004 the applicants or their relatives (except Mrs Y. V. Naumets) instituted separate sets of proceedings in the local domestic courts, seeking the recovery of salary arrears and other payments from the State-owned company “Atomspetsbud” (Державна будівельно-промислова компанія «Атомспецбуд»), which carried out construction work at Chernobyl within the zone that had been compulsorily evacuated. The courts found for the litigants and awarded them the amounts claimed; nevertheless, the judgments remained unenforced in full or in major part (see Annex).
By an order of the Ministry of Energy dated 27 June 2002, the debtor company was liquidated and a liquidation commission established. As a result, the State Bailiffs' Service terminated the existing enforcement proceedings and all the writs of enforcement were forwarded to the liquidation commission as creditors' claims. The commission also recognised other debts owed to some of the applicants as creditor's claims.
Furthermore, some of the applicants inherited the judgment awards against the debtor company (see Annex).
The company's liquidation proceedings are still pending.
The relevant domestic law is summarised in the judgment of Mykhaylenky and Others v. Ukraine (nos. 35091/02 and foll., §§ 24-33, ECHR 2004XII).