The case was transmitted to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 11 September 1999. It originated in an application (no. 26680/95) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Commission under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Ms Pelin Şener (“the applicant”), on 7 March 1995.
Before the Court the applicant was represented by Mr Kamil Tekin Sürek, a lawyer practising in Istanbul (Turkey). The Turkish Government (“the Government”) did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
The Commission’s request to the Court referred to former Articles 47 and 48 of the Convention. It sought the determination of the applicant’s various complaints:
- under Article 10 of the Convention that her conviction constituted an unjustified interference with her right to freedom of expression;
- under Article 18 of the Convention that the restrictions which were applied to the exercise of this right were inconsistent with the legitimate aims prescribed in Article 10 § 2 of the Convention; and
- under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that the Istanbul State Security Court which dealt with her case was not an independent and impartial tribunal.
The application was allocated to the Third Section (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted in accordance with Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court. Mr Rıza Türmen, the judge elected in respect of Turkey, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28). The Government accordingly appointed Mr Feyyaz Gölcüklü to sit as an ad hoc judge, the judge elected in respect of Turkey, to sit in his place (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
Having consulted the parties, the Court decided that there was no need to hold a hearing. The parties each filed memorials.
At the material time, the applicant was the owner and editor of a weekly review entitled Haberde Yorumda Gerçek (The Truth of News and Comments), published in Istanbul.
On 5 September 1993 the Istanbul State Security Court ordered the seizure of the twenty-third edition of the review, dated 4 September 1993, on the ground that an article therein entitled Aydın İtirafı contained separatist propaganda. The article read:
“Bir ulusun toptan yok edilmesini izliyoruz. Bir soykırım izliyoruz ki, bugüne kadar başka örneği görülmemiş desek yanlış olmaz.
Bir kirli savaşın dişlileri arasında inim inim inliyoruz. Savaşa karşı çıkmak gerektiğini bildiğimiz halde öfkemizi haykırmak, kirli savaş dişlilerini parçalamak yerine inim inim inliyoruz. Ağıt yakıyoruz sadece. Ölüme övgü dizmeye çalışıyoruz ölüm sessizliğinde. Havanın esintisinden, yaprak hışırtısından odalarımıza korku taşınıyor. Yüreklerimiz hop oturup hop kalkıyor. Ölüm korkusunda ölüme övgüler dizerken devlete teslim oluyoruz.
Klima esintisinde sıcak çaylarımızı yudumlarken yürüttüğümüz hararetli tartışmalarımızda, kavgacı kesiliyoruz birden. Ulusların kaderlerini tayin hakkı diyoruz. Bu hakkın kullanılması önünde hiçbir engelin olmaması gerektiğinden söz ediyoruz. Kürt realitesinin tanınmasının önemli bir adım olduğunu açıklamaya çalışıyoruz. Ortadoğu’da savaşın nedeni Amerikan emperyalizmidir. Ve biz savaşa karşı çıkmanın insanlığın bir gereği olduğunu düşünüyoruz. Namaz dağları, Tendürek ve Nurhak ve daha niceleri bombalanıyor bu sırada. Kürdistan alev alev yanıyor. Soykırım bütün hızıyla sürüyor. Renkli ekranlardan Bosna’da yaşanan vahşeti izliyoruz.
Öfkeleniyoruz birden. İnsan hakları savunucusu kesiliyoruz. Kimyasal silahlar kullanılıyor Nurhak dağlarında. “Taş üstünde taş bırakmayacağız” diyor askeri yetkili. Bir ulusu toptan yoketme isteklerindeki kararlılık çınlıyor kulaklarımızda. “Yalnız Güneydoğu’da değil batıda da operasyonların sürdürüleceğini, teröristlere yardımcı olanların haklarından gelineceğini” ekliyor konuşmasına ve tabii basının kulağını çekmeyi de ihmal etmiyor. İşte burada, bir kirli savaşın söylemlerimizdeki yenilgiye mahkum akibetini, savaşa karşı çıkmanın tek ama tek yolunun haklı savaşın yürütülmesi gerektiği doğrusunu unutuyoruz. Unutmak istiyoruz. Tendürek’e düşen bomba, yüreğimizde patlıyor. “Yazık” diyor içimizden biri. “Bunca kanın dökülmesi niye? Kürt ve Türk ulusları kardeş değil mi?” diye ekleyerek başlıyor bilinen konuşmasına.
Hep bu konuşmayı bekliyormuşuz da, birbirimizden haberimiz yokmuş meğer. Her birimiz ayrı ayrı ve sanki farklı şeyler söylüyormuşuz gibi korkularımızı açığa vuruyoruz. Askeri yetkilinin hizmetinde kusur etmemeye itina gösteriyoruz. Türk şovenizminin asla onaylanmadığını ama, Kürt şovenizminin de onaylanamayacağını anlatıyoruz hep bir ağızdan. Ezilen ulusun şovenizminin olmayacağını bile bile lades yapmaya çalışıyoruz. Kürt meselesinin çözümünde barışçıl yolların denenmesi gerektiğini vaaz ediyor, çözümün ne olabileceğini tartışıyoruz, büyük pişkinlikle.
Gazetelerimizin sayfalarını Sündüz yaylasını basan “teröristlerin”, kadınları, çocukları nasıl öldürdüklerini anlatan düzmece haberlerle dolduruyoruz. Basına verilen brifingden kamuoyunun bilgisi olmadığı bilgisizliğiyle köşe yazılarımızda Kürt ve Türk vatandaşların yüzyıllar boyunca kardeşçe bir arada yaşadığını, oysa “teröristlerin” emellerinin bu kardeşliği yıkmak olduğunu anlatıyoruz demokratça! Ve kara çalıyoruz özgürlük yürüyüşüne geçen Kürt köylüsünün tavrına.
Biz aydın insanlarız. Demokratlığı elden bırakmayız. Ama yalandan kim ölmüş? Devlete hizmeti de esas alırız. İnsanları aptal biliriz. Onca yıl mürekkep yalamışlığımız bizi onlardan farklı kılar.
Bu bir itiraftır.
Biz aptalız.”   
<translation>
“We are watching the wholesale extermination of a nation. We are watching a genocide on such a scale that it is not a mistake to call it unprecedented. 
We are groaning between the cogwheels of a dirty war. We know we should take a stand against the war, but instead of shouting out our anger and smashing the cogwheels, we are groaning. We only wail. We try to praise death in the deathly silence. Fear seeps into our rooms from the whisper of the breeze and the rustle of leaves. Our hearts jump in our throats. We surrender to the State while we praise death in fear of death.
We suddenly become quarrelsome during our feverish discussions and while sipping our hot tea in the cool breeze of the air conditioner. We talk about the right to selfdetermination of nations. We are saying that there should be no impediment to the exercise of this right. We try to explain that recognition of Kurdish reality is an important step. The reason for war in the middle-east is American imperialism and we think that to stand up against this war is a requirement for being a human being. The Namaz mountains, the Tendürek, the Nurhak and many others are being bombed at this moment. Kurdistan is blazing. The genocide pounds on. We watch the terror in Bosnia on our colour TV screens. 
Suddenly we are full of anger. We become human rights advocates. Chemical weapons are being used on the Nurhak mountains. ‘We will not leave a stone standing’ says a military authority. Their determination to exterminate a whole nation echoes in our ears. ‘Operations will be conducted not only in the south-east but also in the west. We’ll deal with the people who help the terrorists’ he adds, and of course makes sure to tip off the press. Here we forget that in our own words a dirty war can only end in defeat. We [also] forget the axiom that the only way to oppose a war is to wage a just war.  We want to forget it. The bomb falling on Tendürek explodes in our hearts. ‘What a pity’ says one of us. ‘Why shed so much blood? Aren’t Kurdish and Turkish nations brothers?’ And he begins his usual speech. 
We seem to have been waiting for that speech all the time, but we were not aware of one another. We each confess our fears as if we are saying different things. We take great care to serve the army officer faultlessly. We chorus that we have never approved of Turkish chauvinism but cannot approve of Kurdish chauvinism either. We turn a blind eye to the fact that an oppressed nation cannot be chauvinistic. We brazenly preach the necessity of trying peaceful methods to resolve the Kurdish problem and discuss what the solution might be.
We fill the pages of our newspapers with bogus news of the terrorists’ raid on the Sündüz plateau and details of how they killed women and children. Oblivious of the fact that the public at large knows nothing of the briefing given to the press, we democratically explain in our newspaper columns that Kurdish and Turkish citizens have lived together in brotherhood for centuries and that the terrorists’ aim is to undermine that brotherhood. And we denigrate the attitude of the Kurdish peasants who started a freedom march.
We are intellectuals. We shall not give up the democrat’s way of life. But who ever died of a lie? We also make it our rule to serve the State. We consider people stupid. Our many years of ink-licking make us different from them.
This is a confession. 
We are stupid.” 
In an indictment dated 29 September 1993 the Public Prosecutor at the Istanbul State Security (İstanbul Devlet Güvenlik Mahkemesi) charged the applicant with having disseminated propaganda against the indivisibility of the State by publishing the above article. The charges were brought under section 8 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1991 (hereinafter “the 1991 Act”, see paragraph 18 below).
In the proceedings before the State Security Court, the applicant denied the charges. She pleaded that the article did not contain separatist propaganda. She alleged that the institution of criminal proceedings against her, as the owner and the responsible editor, was aimed at punishing the review since no investigation was opened against the author of the impugned article whose picture appeared above it. The applicant referred to Article 10 of the Convention on Human Rights and argued that section 8 of the 1991 Act restricted her right to freedom of expression in contravention of both the Turkish Constitution and the Convention.
In a judgment dated 5 July 1994 the Istanbul State Security Court, composed of three judges including a military judge, found the applicant guilty of an offence under section 8 § 1 of the 1991 Act. The court sentenced the applicant to six months’ imprisonment and a fine of 50,000,000 Turkish liras (“TRL”), to be paid in ten monthly instalments. It also ordered confiscation of the offending publication.
In its reasoning, the court held that the impugned article had referred to a certain part of Turkish territory as “Kurdistan”, had asserted that people living there were Kurdish citizens, that the Kurdish nation wanted to be exterminated, that genocide had taken place, that the territory defined as “Kurdistan” had been bombed and burned and that chemical weapons had been used. On these grounds, the court found that the article, as a whole, disseminated propaganda against the indivisibility of the State.
The applicant appealed against her conviction. On 30 November 1994 the Court of Cassation dismissed her appeal. It upheld the Istanbul State Security Court’s assessment of the evidence and its reasons for rejecting the applicant’s defence. On 2 January 1995 the judgment was served on the applicant.
Following the amendments made by Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995 to the 1991 Act (see paragraph 19 below); the Istanbul State Security Court ex officio re-examined the applicant’s case. On 8 March 1996 the court imposed the same sentence on the applicant. The applicant appealed.
On 10 June 1997 the Court of Cassation quashed the judgment of 8 March 1996 on the ground that the Istanbul State Security Court had not commuted the applicant’s sentence of imprisonment to a fine.
On 25 September 1997 the Istanbul State Security Court decided to defer the imposition of a final sentence pursuant to section 1 of Law no. 4304 of 14 July 1997. The court held, under section 2 of the same law, that the criminal proceedings against the applicant would be suspended and a final sentence imposed should the applicant be convicted of a further intentional offence in her capacity as an editor within three years of this decision.
On 17 November 1995 the Istanbul State Security Court also found the author of the impugned article, Erhan Altun, guilty of an offence under section 8 § 1 of the 1991 Act. It sentenced him to 1 year, 1 month and 10 days’ imprisonment and a fine of 111,111,110 TRL. However, the court suspended the author’s sentence taking into account his good conduct in the past, the likelihood that he would not commit any further offence and the fact that he was not a recidivist.
A full description of the relevant domestic law may be found in the Sürek (No. 1) v. Turkey judgment ([GC], no. 26682/95, §§ 23-36, ECHR 1999-IV).
Section 8 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1991 (Law no. 3713 of 12 April 1991) creates the offence of undermining the territorial integrity of the Republic of Turkey or the indivisible unity of the nation through written and spoken propaganda, meetings, assemblies and demonstrations, irrespective of the methods used and the intention. Any person who engages in such an activity may be sentenced to imprisonment or a fine, which for a press editor nowadays may be up to 2 years’ imprisonment and a fine of up to three hundred million Turkish lira.
Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995 amended the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1991 to require the re-examination of the cases of persons convicted under the aforementioned Section 8 with a view to imposing substitute penalties or measures to imprisonment. Editors who had been convicted before 12 July 1997 of a Section 8 offence were later entitled to a suspended sentence for up to three years, provided that no further offences were committed, pursuant to Law no. 4304 of 14 August 1997.
Article 138 of the Constitution requires all judges to perform their duties independently. State Security Courts were established by Article 143 of the Constitution to try offences “against the territorial integrity of the State or the indivisible unity of the nation or against the free democratic system of government, and offences which directly affect the State’s internal or external security.”
According to Sections 5 and 6 of Law no. 2845 on the creation and rules of procedure of the State Security Court, such courts shall be composed of a president, two other regular members and two substitute members, appointed for four-year renewable periods. At the material time, one regular member and one substitute were military judges of the first rank.
Appeals lie to the Court of Cassation against State Security Court decisions.
The careers of military judges, according to Section 7 of the Military Legal Service Act (Law no. 357), depend on assessments by the Minister of State in the Ministry of Defence, or the Minister of Defence. Section 8 of that Act provides that military judges are to be appointed “by a committee composed of the personnel director and the legal adviser of the General Staff, the personnel director and the legal adviser attached to the staff of the arm in which the person concerned is serving and the Director of Military Judicial Affairs at the Ministry of Defence… .” It is an offence under Article 112 of the Military Code for a public official to attempt to influence the performance by a military judge in the exercise of his judicial functions. Military judges are subject to officer salary scales and discipline by the Minister of Defence (Sections 18 and 29). Career disputes concerning military judges are ultimately determined by the Supreme Military Administrative Court (Section 22 of Law no. 1602 of 4 July 1972 on the Supreme Military Administrative Court).
Amendments made by Law no. 4388 of 18 June 1999 and Law no. 4390 of 22 June 1999 removed military judges from the bench of the State Security Courts.