On 21 February 2014 the applicants participated in a spontaneous gathering in front of the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow where they came to attend a public hearing involving activists who were on trial in relation to mass disorders at Bolotnaya Square in Moscow on 6 May 2012. They were arrested during the gathering and convicted of administrative offences.
The applicants’ details are set out in the appended table. The nine applicants in application no. 66856/14 were represented before the Court by the lawyers of the Memorial Human Rights Centre, the Public Verdict Foundation and the European Human Rights Advocacy Centre (EHRAC). The applicant in application no. 33606/15 was represented by the lawyers of the Memorial Human Rights Centre and EHRAC.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On the morning of 21 February 2014 the applicants, among several hundred people, came to the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow to attend the public delivery of the judgment in the criminal case concerning mass disorder at Bolotnaya Square in Moscow on 6 May 2012. However, the court-house was cordoned off by the police and the applicants could not enter. The police officers did not explain the reasons for not allowing the public into the building.
The applicants remained outside among other members of the public aspiring to attend the hearing. The gathering lasted for several hours and was peaceful. From time to time the police arrested some of the participants, and every time those present at the site responded by shouting “Shame on the police”. Occasionally someone would shout slogans such as “Freedom for the 6 May prisoners”, “Freedom for political prisoners” and “Russia without Putin”. A handful of banners with handwritten messages in support of the activists on trial were displayed. At different times the applicants were arrested and transferred to a police station.
Details as regards the administrative proceedings against each applicant are outlined in the Appendix.
Article 20.2 § 5 of the Code of Administrative Offences (CAO) provides that violation by a participant in a public event of the established procedure for conducting a public event is punishable with a fine of 10,000 to 20,000 roubles (RUB) or up to forty hours of community work.
For a summary of other relevant domestic provisions see Navalnyy v. Russia [GC] (nos. 29580/12 and 4 others, §§ 46-47, 15 November 2018), and Lashmankin and Others v. Russia (nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, §§ 223 and 226, 7 February 2017).
The domestic legal provisions governing administrative transfer (escorting) and detention are also set out in the case of Butkevich v. Russia (see no. 5865/07, §§ 33-36, 13 February 2018).
According to Article 31.9 of the Code of Administrative Offences, if a decision imposing an administrative punishment is not enforced during the two years from its entry into force, it can no longer be executed. The time when the enforcement of such a decision is suspended or stayed is excluded from the aforementioned period.