The case originated in an application (no. 37959/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Albanian national, Mr Arben Xheraj (“the applicant”), on 20 September 2002.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. Bengasi, a lawyer practising in Tirana. The Albanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr S. Puto and Ms S. Meneri.
On 8 September 2005 the President of the Fourth Section of the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant and the Government each filed written observations (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1970 and is currently serving a sentence in Vicenza Prison in .
The proceedings that led to the applicant’s conviction
“the request for judicial review meets the legal requirements (kërkesa për rishikimin e vendimit plotëson kriteret ligjore)”.
It requested the district prosecutor to examine objectively the new pieces of evidence to be submitted to the District Court.
The prosecutor’s request for leave to appeal out of time
The prosecutor’s late appeal
 proceedings
Article 31
During criminal proceedings, everyone has the right:
to be notified immediately and in detail of the charges brought against him, of his rights, and to have the possibility to notify his family or relatives;
to have sufficient time and facilities to prepare his defence;
to have the assistance of a translator free of charge, when he does not speak or understand the Albanian language;
to present his own case or defend himself through the assistance of counsel of his own choosing; to communicate freely and privately with him, as well as to be provided free legal counsel when he does not have sufficient means;
to examine witnesses who are present and to request the appearance of witnesses, experts and other persons who can clarify the facts.
Article 32
No one shall be obliged to testify against himself or his family or to confess his guilt.
No one shall be declared guilty on the basis of evidence collected unlawfully.
Article 33
Everyone has the right to be heard before being judged.
A person who is seeking to evade justice may not avail himself of this right.
Article 34
No one shall be punished twice for the same criminal offence or be tried again, except when the reopening of the case is ordered by a higher court, in accordance with the law.
Article 42 § 2
Article 43
Everyone has the right to appeal against a court decision to a higher court, save as otherwise provided in the Constitution.
Article 142 § 3
Article 131
“The  shall decide: ...
(f) in a ruling that shall be final, complaints by individuals alleging a violation of their constitutional rights to a fair hearing, after all legal remedies for the protection of those rights have been exhausted.”
Under Article 147 § 1 of the CCP, a party to proceedings who had failed, owing to unforeseen events or force majeure, to lodge an appeal against a judgment within the prescribed time, could seek leave to appeal out of time. Under Article 147 § 2 a defendant convicted in absentia may be granted leave to appeal out of time against a court decision, if he has established that he had no effective knowledge of it. Under Article 147 §3, the request for leave to appeal out of time had to be lodged within ten days of the date on which the party was notified of the judgment. Under Article 147 § 5 the decision to allow a request for leave to appeal out of time could be appealed against in conjunction with the decision on the merits of the case.
Under Article 414 an appeal could be filed with the Court of Appeal within 10 days starting from the day of the pronouncement or notification of the decision.