The case originated in an application (no. 62870/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Croatian nationals, Ms Lenka Bilbija and Ms Sanja Blažević (“the applicants”), on 21 June 2013.
The applicants were represented by Ms I. Bojić, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicants alleged, in particular, the lack of an effective procedure before the domestic authorities concerning the death of their mother allegedly caused by medical negligence, contrary to Articles 2, 8 and 13 of the Convention.
On 4 December 2013 the above complaints were communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1958 and 1961 respectively and live in Zagreb.
On 13 February 2001 the applicants’ mother died after being admitted for respiratory problems to the Jordanovac Clinical Hospital Centre (Klinički bolnički centar Jordanovac; hereinafter: the “Hospital”), a public health care institution.
An autopsy performed on the next day by the General Medical Pathology and Anatomical Pathology Department of the Zagreb University Medical Faculty (Zavod za opću patologiju i patološku anatomiju Medicinskog fakulteta Sveučilišta u Zagrebu) indicated that the cause of death was a respiratory insufficiency leading to cardiac complications.
The applicants were informed of the results of the autopsy and the measures which had been taken in the treatment of their mother were explained to them.
According to the applicants, based on a mutual agreement, it was decided that the first applicant would pursue legal remedies concerning the death of their mother.
In July 2001 the first applicant met two health inspectors at the Ministry of Health (Ministarstvo zdravstva; hereinafter: the “Ministry”) to whom she complained of their inability to obtain their mother’s medical records and about the circumstances in which she had died. The inspectors, however, took no further action concerning these complaints.
On 1 October 2002 the first applicant complained to the Croatian Medical Chamber (Hrvatska liječnička komora; hereinafter: the “CMC”) that her mother had died in unclear circumstances which had severely affected her family. She also expressed her dissatisfaction with the functioning of the medical system and complained in particular of her own medical treatment.
Upon receiving the first applicant’s complaint, the Professional Supervisory Commission of the Croatian Medical Chamber (Povjerentsvo za stručni nadzor Hrvatskw liječničke komore; hereinafter: the “Commission”) invited the first applicant to specify in respect of which doctor and medical institution she made her complaints.
By a letter of 28 February 2003 the Commission informed the first applicant that it considered her complaints to be withdrawn as she had failed to specify them as requested.
On 17 March 2003 the first applicant replied to the letter of the Commission maintaining that there must have been some misunderstanding with the correspondence she had received from them. She indicated that her complaint concerned the Hospital, its director doctor, LJ.P., and the head of the intensive care unit doctor, B.S. The first applicant in particular submitted that her family had never received any relevant documents concerning their relative’s death. A copy of this reply was sent to the Ministry.
After receiving the first applicant’s complaint, the Ministry requested the Hospital to provide a report concerning her mother’s death.
On 16 April 2003 the Hospital submitted a report to the Ministry concerning the medical treatment of the applicants’ mother and the circumstances of her death.
On 30 April 2003 the Ministry forwarded all available documents to the Commission and requested a report on the actions taken with regard to the first applicant’s complaint.
By a letter of 2 May 2003 the Commission informed the first applicant that it had not found any malpractice in the medical treatment of her mother.
The first applicant objected to these findings on 6 June 2003. She stressed that her family had never received any concrete document indicating the cause of death of their relative and that the letter which she had received from the Commission lacked the relevant reasoning.
On 15 July 2003 the first applicant submitted further observations on her objection and on 20 November 2003 she urged the CMC to adopt a decision on the matter.
On 21 October 2003 the CMC Executive Board (Izvršni odbor Hrvatske liječničke komore), as a second-instance body of the CMC, dismissed the first applicant’s objection as ill-founded, upholding the decision of the Commission. It also informed the first applicant that she could challenge its decision by lodging an administrative action in the Administrative Court (Upravni sud Republike Hrvatske).
After receiving the decision of the CMC Executive Board, the first applicant requested the CMC for an explanation concerning the procedure before it. On 4 December 2003 she received a reply from the CMC indicating that she had been accordingly informed that she could lodge an administrative action in the Administrative Court and that there was no need for the CMC to communicate further with her concerning the matter.
On 24 November 2003 the first applicant lodged an administrative action in the Administrative Court challenging the decision of the CMC Executive Board. She argued that the bodies of the CMC had not replied to her submissions and had failed to properly assess the circumstances of her mother’s death.
On 24 April 2006 the first applicant urged the Administrative Court to examine her case. She received a reply from the Administrative Court on 11 May 2006 indicating that due to a backlog at that court her case had still not been examined.
The applicant then complained to the Ministry of Justice (Ministarstvo pravosuđa Republike Hrvatske) about the manner in which her case was processed by the Administrative Court and on 4 October 2006 the Ministry of Justice requested the Administrative Court for a report on the matter. The Administrative Court replied on 14 November 2006, reiterating its previous explanation as to the reason why the case had not been examined.
On 14 February 2007, upon another complaint by the first applicant, the Ministry of Justice requested the Administrative Court for a report concerning the progress of the case.
On 2 March 2007 the Office of the President of the Republic of Croatia (Ured Predsjednika Republike Hrvatske), based on the first applicant’s complaint, urged the Administrative Court to speed up the proceedings in her case.
On 5 October 2007 the Administrative Court declared the first applicant’s administrative action inadmissible on the ground that the decision of the CMC Executive Board was not an administrative decision concerning any of her rights or obligations or legal interests.
On 8 January 2008 the first applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), complaining of the ineffectiveness of the proceedings before the lower bodies and her family’s inability to obtain any concrete information about the circumstances of their relative’s death.
On 27 February 2010 the first applicant urged the Constitutional Court to examine her case. Meanwhile she supplemented her constitutional complaint with further arguments and complaints, complaining in particular about the inordinate length of the proceedings in her case.
On 19 August 2010, the first applicant also asked the Constitutional Court to allow her to inspect the case file.
In the meantime, the first applicant complained to various domestic authorities, including the Office of the President of the Republic of Croatia, the Office of the Prime Minister of Croatia (Ured Predsjednika Vlade Republike Hrvatske) and a Deputy in the Parliament about the ineffectiveness of the domestic authorities’ response to her complaints concerning her mother’s death.
On 26 November 2012 the Ministry, replying to a question of the Deputy, stressed that it had never taken any action within its competence concerning the applicants’ case, although it had taken note of the proceedings before the competent bodies of the CMC and informed the first applicant of its findings with regard to the decisions of the CMC.
On 17 December 2013 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint of 8 January 2008 as ill-founded (see paragraph 29 above), upholding the decision of the Administrative Court. It also declared the applicant’s additional complaints inadmissible as being lodged out of time and for non-exhaustion of the length of proceedings remedies. The decision of the Constitutional Court was served on the first applicant on 14 January 2014.
On 6 February 2004 the first applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office (Općinsko državno odvjetništvo u Zagrebu) alleging medical negligence by unknown Hospital staff. In particular, the first applicant submitted that upon the admission of her mother to the Hospital she had been given a drug to which she was allergic, which had caused an allergic reaction and further medical complications leading up to her death.
After lodging the criminal complaint, the first applicant inquired several times with the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office about the progress of the investigation.
On 13 September 2006 the first applicant submitted a written request to the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office urging it to examine her criminal complaint.
As she received no reply from the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office, the first applicant complained to the Ministry of Justice about the inactivity in processing her complaint.
Based on the first applicant’s complaint, on 4 October 2006 the Ministry of Justice requested a report from the State Attorney’s Office of the Republic of Croatia (Državno odvjetništvo Republike Hrvatske) concerning the case.
Since it received no reply, on 14 February 2007 the Ministry of Justice again urged the State Attorney’s Office of the Republic of Croatia to produce a report concerning the proceedings at issue.
On 1 March 2007 the State Attorney’s Office of the Republic of Croatia informed the Ministry of Justice and the first applicant that the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office had requested an investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) to commission an expert report concerning the circumstances of the applicants’ mother’s death. It also stressed that this fact should be known to the first applicant as she had been duly informed about the status of the proceedings when she had made an inquiry in the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office.
After receiving this information, the first applicant made several inquiries in the Zagreb County Court concerning the status of the case. On 11 January 2008 she was informed by that court that the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office had never requested any investigative actions concerning her criminal complaint.
Meanwhile, on 21 December 2007 the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office found that the first applicant’s case file had been lost and ordered that it should be reconstructed.
The Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office also ordered the police to conduct an investigation into the circumstances of the first applicant’s complaint. In addition, it requested the Zagreb University Medical Faculty to provide the autopsy report, and it commissioned an expert report concerning the circumstances of the applicants’ mother’s death.
On 2 January 2008 the police produced a report on the interviews with the applicants’ mother’s general practitioner and doctor B.S. The latter denied any medical malpractice and administration of the drug to which the applicants’ mother was allergic. His statement was confirmed by the Hospital director, doctor LJ.P. The police also obtained the relevant medical records concerning the medical treatment and death of the applicants’ mother.
On 8 January 2008 an expert, doctor J.Š., produced a report indicating that the cause of death of the applicants’ mother was a respiratory insufficiency leading to cardiac complications. The report did not indicate any medical malpractice on the part of the Hospital doctors.
On 25 January 2008 the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office rejected the first applicant’s criminal complaint on the ground that there was no reasonable suspicion that a criminal offence had been committed in the medical treatment of the applicants’ mother. The first applicant was instructed that she could take over the prosecution as a subsidiary prosecutor.
On 13 February 2008 the first applicant asked the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office to provide her with a copy of the entire domestic case file.
On 21 February 2008, after she had received the relevant documents from the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office, the first applicant instituted criminal proceedings in the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court (Općinski kazneni sud u Zagrebu) against doctor B.S. on charges of medical negligence.
In the meantime, the first applicant complained to various domestic authorities about the ineffectiveness of proceedings before the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office and on 11 April 2008 she received a reply from the State Attorney’s Office of the Republic of Croatia expressing its regrets for the protracted length of the proceedings dealing with her criminal complaint.
On 7 August 2008 the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court requested the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office to forward the relevant documents concerning the first applicant’s case.
The documents were provided on 16 October 2008.
On 16 March 2009 the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court invited the first applicant to amend her request to prosecute (optužni prijedlog) as required under the relevant domestic law concerning the factual and legal basis of the charges against doctor B.S.
On 30 March 2009 the first applicant submitted an indictment (optužnica) against doctor B.S. on charges of medical negligence.
As there was no progress in the proceedings, on 13 November 2009 the applicant urged the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court to examine her case.
On 22 December 2009 the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court commissioned an expert report concerning the medical treatment and death of the applicants’ mother. It requested an investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court to coordinate that procedural action.
An expert report of 11 March 2010, drafted by doctors D.M. and I.Š., indicated that there had been no irregularity in the medical treatment of the applicants’ mother. It further found that the drug, to which the applicant’s mother was allergic, had neither been used nor indicated for use during her treatment on 13 February 2001. The experts also excluded the possibility that the applicants’ mother had died as a result of an allergic reaction.
The first applicant received the expert report on 27 August 2010.
On 22 September 2010 the first applicant challenged the findings of the expert report, arguing that it had failed to examine all aspects of the medical treatment and death of her mother. The first applicant thus requested that the experts be ordered to re-examine and accordingly supplement their findings.
On 4 April 2011 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court returned the indictment to the first applicant, ordering her to institute an investigation before an investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court.
The first applicant complied with that order and on 25 April 2011 requested that an investigation be opened before an investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court.
On 14 October 2011 an investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court questioned doctor B.S., who denied any medical malpractice maintaining that the drug to which the applicants’ mother was allergic had neither been used nor indicated in her treatment.
On 12 December 2011 the investigating judge expressed his disagreement with the first applicant’s request for opening of an investigation and forwarded the case file to a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court.
On 16 February 2012 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court dismissed the first applicant’s request for an investigation on the ground of lack of evidence of medical malpractice. The first applicant challenged this decision by lodging an appeal before the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske).
Meanwhile, the first applicant complained to the Supreme Court about the length of the criminal proceedings and on 18 September 2012 the Supreme Court found a violation of her right to a trial within a reasonable time and awarded her 2,500 Croatian kunas (HRK) in non-pecuniary damage (approximately EUR 340).
On 28 November 2012 the Supreme Court dismissed the first applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the Zagreb County Court of 16 February 2012 (see paragraph 64 above). The decision of the Supreme Court was served on the first applicant on 24 December 2012.
The first applicant then lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court, complaining of the ineffectiveness of the proceedings before the lower courts and their failure to elucidate the circumstances of her mother’s death.
On 28 February 2013 the Constitutional Court declared the constitutional complaint inadmissible on the ground that the decisions of the lower courts did not concern any of her rights or obligations or any criminal charge against her. The decision of the Constitutional Court was served on the first applicant on 12 March 2013.
On 28 March 2013 the first applicant lodged a request for the reopening of the proceedings before the Zagreb County Court, alleging procedural flaws in the processing of her case.
The Zagreb County Court rejected the request as unfounded on 29 October 2013 and this was upheld by the Supreme Court on 20 March 2014.
The first applicants also lodged a criminal complaint against the medical experts D.M. and I.Š. on 27 August 2013 alleging that they had provided false evidence. On 7 October 2013 she received a reply from the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office indicating that it considered her criminal complaint unfounded in any respect.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010 and 5/2014) read as follows:
“Every human being has the right to life.
...”
The relevant part of section 62 of the Constitutional Court Act (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 49/2002) reads as follows:
“1.  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that an individual act on the part of a State body, a body of local or regional self-government, or a legal person with public authority, concerning his or her rights and obligations or a suspicion or accusation of a criminal deed, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms or his or her right to local or regional self-government guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter “a constitutional right”) ...
If another legal remedy exists in respect of the violation of the constitutional right [complained of], a constitutional complaint may be lodged only after that remedy has been used.”
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 50/2000 and 129/2000) provide:
“(1) A physician or a dentist who, in rendering medical services, does not apply measures for the protection of patients in accordance with professional standards, or applies an obviously inadequate remedy or method of treatment, or in general acts carelessly, thus causing the deterioration of an illness or the impairment of a person’s health, shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment not exceeding two years.
...
(3)  A physician ... who commits an offence under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article by negligence shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment not exceeding one year.”
“...
(3)  If, by the criminal offence referred to in ... Article 240 paragraph 3 of this Code, serious bodily injury to a person is caused, or his or her health is severely impaired, or an existing illness considerably deteriorates, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of between six months and five years.
(4)  If death of one or more persons is caused by a criminal offence referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of between one and eight years.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002 and 62/2003) provided:
“(1)  Criminal proceedings shall only be instituted and conducted upon the order of a qualified prosecutor. ...
(2)  In respect of criminal offences subject to public prosecution the qualified prosecutor shall be the State Attorney and in respect of criminal offences that may be prosecuted privately the qualified prosecutor shall be a private prosecutor.
(3)  Unless otherwise provided by law, the State Attorney shall undertake a criminal prosecution where there is a reasonable suspicion that an identified person has committed a criminal offence subject to public prosecution and where there are no legal impediments to the prosecution of that person.
(4)  Where the State Attorney finds that there are no grounds to institute or conduct criminal proceedings, the injured party may take his place as a subsidiary prosecutor under the conditions prescribed by this Act.”
Articles 47 to 61 regulated the rights and duties of private prosecutors and of injured parties acting as subsidiary prosecutors. A private prosecutor (privatni tužitelj) was an injured party who brought a private prosecution in respect of criminal offences for which such a prosecution was expressly allowed by the Criminal Code (these were offences of a lesser degree). An injured party acting as a subsidiary prosecutor (oštećeni kao tužitelj) was a person taking over criminal proceedings in respect of criminal offences subject to public prosecution where the relevant prosecuting authorities, for whatever reason, had decided not to prosecute (Article 55). When acting as a subsidiary prosecutor, the victim had all rights in the proceedings which the State Attorney’ Office would have had as public prosecuting authority, save for those vested in the State Attorney’s Office as a state body.
Pursuant to Article 58, the State Attorney’s Office was authorised, on a discretionary basis, to take over a prosecution from a subsidiary prosecutor at any point before the end of the trial.
Further relevant provisions concerning the processing of cases provide:
“(1)  ... indictments [and] requests to prosecute ... shall be submitted in writing unless otherwise provided by law.
(2)  The submissions referred to in paragraph 1 shall be comprehensible and contain the necessary information for the authorities to act upon them.
(3)  Unless otherwise provided in this Act, the court conducting the proceedings shall invite a person who has made submissions which do not contain the necessary information or are incomprehensible to supplement them. Where the submissions have not been amended as required, the court shall declare them inadmissible.”
“(2)  If the investigating judge does not agree with the State Attorney’s request for the opening of an investigation, he or she shall ask a panel of judges from the county court (Article 20 § 2) to issue a decision. The parties and the injured party may lodge an appeal against that decision which shall not have suspensive effect. If only the injured party lodged an appeal and that appeal is allowed, it shall be considered that by lodging the appeal the injured party took over the proceedings.”
“(1)  After the investigation, or if the investigation under this Code is not mandatory (Article 191), the proceedings before the competent court shall be conducted only on the basis of an indictment [made by] the State Attorney or the subsidiary prosecutor.”
“In proceedings before the municipal court for offences punishable by a fine or a term of up to five years’ imprisonment, the provisions of Articles 431 to 445 of this Code shall apply, and if something is not provided under those provisions, the other provisions of this Code shall apply.”
“(1)  Proceedings shall be instituted by a request to prosecute made by the State Attorney or the subsidiary prosecutor ...”
“(1)  The request to prosecute ... shall contain all the information contained in Article 268 § 1 (1) to (5) of this Code, a proposal to find the accused guilty under the law, as well as a proposal for a sentence to be applied.”
“(1)  On receipt of the request to prosecute ... the judge (the president of the panel or the single judge) shall first examine whether the court is competent, whether further investigative measures need to be taken, and whether there are reasons to reject the request to prosecute ...”
The relevant provision of the Health Care Act (Zakon o zdravstvenoj zaštiti, Official Gazette nos. 75/1993, 11/1994, 55/1996, 1/1997, 95/2000 and 129/2000):
Section 27
“...
A citizen has the right to seek, directly or in writing, the protection of his or her rights concerning the quality, content and type of health-care services provided, from the director of the health institution ...
The director ... must act without delay following a complaint and notify the person concerned in writing within three days of the measures he has taken.
If the citizen is not satisfied with the measures that were taken, he or she may seek protection of his or her rights before the competent Chamber, the Minister of Health or competent court.”
The relevant provision of the Administrative Disputes Act (Zakon o upravnim sporovima, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991, 9/1992 and 77/1992) provides:
“An organ under this Act shall be any State organ and when it is, within its public authority, deciding about administrative matters.”
“(1)  An administrative dispute may be initiated only against an administrative act.
(2)  An administrative act, within the meaning of this Act, is an act whereby a body referred to in section 5 of this Act, in the exercise of public authority decides on a right or obligation of an individual or an organisation in some administrative matter.”
The Government referred to several decisions of the Constitutional Court by which it declared inadmissible constitutional complaints lodged by victims against the domestic courts’ decisions refusing to open criminal proceedings or further investigative measures on the ground that such decisions did not raise any question of the appellants’ rights and obligations. In particular, the Government pointed out that this practice was available in a document published on the Internet site of the Constitutional Court in June 2004 providing examples and practical instructions for appellants on how to fill in constitutional complaints.
On 14 May 2001 in case no. U-III-791/1997 the Constitutional Court accepted an injured party’s constitutional complaint concerning a violation of the right to life. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“Under the [Code of Criminal Procedure], in a situation where the State Attorney is the prosecutor, the injured party has only very limited rights in the proceedings. However, as soon as the State Attorney is no longer a party (if he drops the charges) the injured party can act as a subsidiary prosecutor in the proceedings. In other words, when the State Attorney does not appear [as a prosecutor] in the proceedings, the [injured] party is (or can be) the subsidiary prosecutor. This should be, mutatis mutandis, applied in respect of a constitutional complaint. Since the State Attorney cannot lodge a constitutional complaint ... the injured party can represent himself. In this case [the injured party] can lodge a constitutional complaint.”
In its decision of 13 February 2004 in case no. U-IIIA-232/2003 the Constitutional Court declared a subsidiary prosecutor’s constitutional complaint concerning the length of criminal proceedings inadmissible on the ground that the proceedings at issue had not concerned his civil rights or obligations or any criminal charge against him. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“It is clear from the constitutional complaint that the criminal proceedings ... did not concern the applicant’s civil rights or obligations or any criminal charge against him. In the criminal proceedings the applicant was not the defendant and he failed to lodge a civil claim, which he had notably pursued in separate civil proceedings.
Therefore ... the applicant does not have the necessary locus standi before the Constitutional Court ...”
The Constitutional Court followed the same approach in its decision of 23 December 2004 in case no. U-III-2729/2004 in which it declared a subsidiary prosecutor’s constitutional complaint concerning the outcome of criminal proceedings inadmissible on the same basis as noted above.
In its decision of 22 October 2008 in case no. U-IIIVs-3511/2006, the Constitutional Court accepted a constitutional complaint concerning the length of criminal proceedings lodged by a subsidiary prosecutor who had not had lodged a civil claim in those criminal proceedings. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“The approach taken by the lower courts, by which the applicant did not have the right to lodge a length-of-proceedings complaint because she, as a subsidiary prosecutor in criminal proceedings, ... had failed to lodge a civil claim ... reflects the approach previously taken by this court.
... [T]he Constitutional Court considers that that approach should be revisited on the grounds of the public interest and the protection of victims’ rights.
...
Therefore, the Constitutional Court considers that the question of whether a subsidiary prosecutor in criminal proceedings has a right to have the competent court decide within a reasonable time [whether] the defendant be found guilty and punished according to law, cannot be considered only from the perspective of the civil claim which the injured party may have against the defendant. Such a restrictive approach would deprive the subsidiary prosecutor [of the ability] to exercise his right to bring a subsidiary prosecution and it would run contrary to the principle that rights should be effective ...”
Recently, on 13 November 2014, in the case no. U-III-6559/2010, the Constitutional Court accepted a constitutional complaint concerning the lack of an effective investigation under Article 3 of the Convention in connection with the appellant’s alleged ill-treatment in suspicious circumstances.