The application concerns the inefficiency of the criminal investigation into an alleged murder attempt on the applicants’ relative.
The applicants, whose details are set out in the Annex, are relatives of Mr Dumitru Danciu senior (hereinafter, “the injured party”, or “D.D. sr.”), who died on 9 August 2011. The first and second applicants are his sons, the third applicant is his surviving wife and the fourth applicant is his daughter. The applicants were represented by Mr E.C. Iordăchescu, a lawyer practising in Cluj-Napoca.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms S.-M. Teodoroiu, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 17 September 2008 the Borşa local police received an emergency call concerning an ongoing altercation taking place in front of a local restaurant. By the time police officers V.L. and M.D., arrived at the scene of the incident, the injured party, D.D. sr., had already been taken to hospital. No witness statements or any other evidence was collected from the scene at the time.
Another police officer, G.H., went to the hospital and took a statement from the injured party about what had happened. D.D. sr. said that “G.T.’s son” (hereinafter “G.T. jr.”) had attacked him with tear gas spray and then hit him in the head with a wooden stick. G.T. jr. had continued to hit him in the head even after he had fallen to the floor; two other persons, one of whom had been working in the local restaurant, had tried to stop G.T. jr., but to no avail. D.D. sr. further stated that when his wife (the third applicant) had entered the restaurant and seen him on the floor, she had called the emergency number and asked for help. He had then been taken to hospital for medical examinations.
In his statement, the injured party said that he wanted the police to take action against the perpetrator and sanction him accordingly. He also confirmed having been informed by the police that he needed to lodge a written complaint in relation to the circumstances mentioned above.
On 30 September 2008 the injured party received a medical report issued by the Sighetu Marmației forensic medicine department, confirming that he had sustained an open head injury on the left side, as well as minor concussion, possibly caused by a blow with a hard object. The injuries would require between forty-five and fifty days of medical care, if there were no further complications.
On 12 November 2008 the injured party lodged a criminal complaint with the Maramureş County Court against G.T. sr., G.T. jr., V.D., O.D. and F.M., accusing them of attempting to murder him on 17 September 2008.
In the complaint he stated that on that day he had wanted to go to the local restaurant with his wife and an acquaintance (later referred to as his mother). When they were about to enter the restaurant, a car had come towards them at full speed. Five people, namely those indicated above, had got out of the car. They had all been armed with wooden sticks. One of them had sprayed tear gas in the injured party’s eyes, and then all of them had hit him in the head and on the hands. He had fallen down but had continued to be hit until he lost consciousness.
His wife had managed to call the police. Police officer G.H. had arrived and called an ambulance, which had taken him to hospital, while his wife and the five persons had been taken to the police station. However, for unknown reasons, no statements had been taken at that stage at the police station.
The injured party submitted that he knew those persons because he had previously won a civil case against them, in relation to the ownership of a piece of land.
D.D. sr. further mentioned that while he was still in hospital, namely on 27 and 28 September 2008, O.D. had come to see him and threatened to kill him. The hospital staff had called the police, who had escorted O.D. out and fined him for the incident.
The injured party also stated that both he and his wife had had previous conflicts with O.D. and V.D., who had been fined for having hit them.
On 4 February 2009 the case prosecutor heard evidence from D.D.sr., who reiterated the details mentioned in his criminal complaint (see paragraph 8 above), including in respect of the previous conflicts he had had with the alleged perpetrators.
He named several witnesses who had allegedly been present, either at the time of the incident of 17 September 2008, or on 27 and 28 September 2008 at the hospital (see paragraphs 5 and 9 above).
He also said that at the relevant time, the five suspects were under investigation in relation to a criminal complaint lodged by a bailiff, who had accused them of failing to comply with a final judgment granting the injured party property rights over a plot of land, as well as of disturbing the injured party’s peaceful possession of that land.
On the same date the injured party lodged civil claims against the alleged perpetrators.
The injured party was readmitted to hospital between 13 and 24 February 2009 following a deterioration in his state of health, in particular a balance disorder, vertigo, insomnia and depression, as well as a hearing impairment in his left ear.
D.D. sr.’s medical file was then updated, and on 26 February 2009 the forensic medical report of September 2008 (see paragraph 7 above) was supplemented accordingly. It was concluded that the injuries would require twenty additional days of medical care, thus totalling sixty-five to seventy days.
In so far as no other steps had been taken by the case prosecutor in relation to his criminal complaint, the injured party complained before the High Court of Cassation and Justice of the inefficiency of the investigation. That complaint was sent to the prosecutor’s office by the Maramureş County Court.
On 23 April 2009 the prosecutor allowed the injured party’s complaint, qualified as a complaint about the protraction of the proceedings. Noting that no investigative steps had been taken by the case prosecutor since 12 November 2008 (see paragraph 5 above), other than the hearing of evidence from the injured party on 4 February 2009 (see paragraph 10 above), the prosecutor fixed a deadline of 4 May 2009 (termen de anchetă), by which the case prosecutor had to have taken all necessary measures to deal efficiently with the case.
On 8 May 2009 the case prosecutor decided to open a criminal investigation against G.T. sr., G.T. jr., V.D., O.D. and F.M., on suspicion of attempted first-degree murder and serious disturbance of public order.
On 13 May 2009 the case prosecutor heard the five suspects, who were assisted by their chosen lawyer. They all declared that at the time of the impugned incident, they had been in a different town, naming several witnesses who could confirm their whereabouts. All of them submitted that the injured party was an aggressive person who was often inebriated and had a lot of enemies. They accepted in principle to undergo a polygraph test. However, such tests were never undertaken.
In his statement, G.T. jr. declared that on 16 and 17 September 2008 he and the witness, P.B., had been at a client’s house (the client’s name was not provided) to make him a stove. His father, G.T. sr., who had originally talked to the client about the stove, was no longer able to deliver what he had promised, because he had been attacked by D.D. sr. on 16 September. As he had been hospitalised on the same day, G.T. jr. had had to replace him in delivering the order to the client.
G.T. sr. declared that on 17 September 2008 he and his wife had been at the Sighetul Marmaţiei hospital, seeking to obtain a medical certificate confirming his injuries, which D.D. sr. had inflicted on him the previous day.
V.D. declared that he had also gone to the same hospital with G.T. sr. and his wife, so as to obtain a medical certificate confirming his own injuries. He said that on 14 September he had been hit by D.D. sr. and his sons, therefore on 17 September 2008 he had had his hand in plaster.
F.M. declared that on 17 September 2008 he had been at work, namely at the restaurant he was running together with his brother. He said that that fact could be confirmed by the employees who had been present.
On 28 August 2009 the injured party complained before the Maramureş County police that he had been threatened by his aggressors and that it was therefore urgent to move on with the criminal investigation.
On 9 September 2009 the complaint was allowed by the prosecutor, in view of the fact that no further steps had been taken since 13 May 2009 (see paragraph 16 above). The prosecutor ordered that a medical report be produced concerning the injuries sustained by the injured party; that the injured party be re-heard and confronted with the alleged aggressors if necessary; that witnesses be heard; and that any other evidence be produced. The time-limit for finalising the investigation was set for 1 October 2009.
On 21 September 2009 the injured party was asked by the case prosecutor to explain the reasons for his absence from the medical examination scheduled on 8 May 2009 at the Baia Mare forensic medicine department; the examination had been ordered by the case prosecutor in order to obtain a new medical report. The injured party argued that he had never been notified about the medical appointment, and that in any case on that day he had been hospitalised in Cluj Napoca.
On the same date the injured party’s wife (the third applicant), as well as his mother, gave their witness statements before the prosecutor. Both women, as well as the injured party, were subsequently confronted with each of the alleged aggressors.
On that occasion, G.T. sr. explained that the injuries suffered by the injured party had probably been caused by his falling from his horse cart in an advanced state of inebriation.
The medical report of 24 September 2009 drawn up by the Baia Mare County forensic unit at the case prosecutor’s request concluded that the injuries sustained by the injured party on 17 September 2008 had required eighteen to nineteen days of medical care and had never endangered the injured party’s life; no disability had been determined; and his hospitalisation between 13 and 24 February 2009 (see paragraph 11 above) had no causal link with the injuries sustained on 17 September 2008.
On 26 April 2010 the Borşa police notified the injured party that he was to appear in Cluj Napoca on either 28 April or 5 May 2010 before a medical commission, which the case prosecutor had ordered to issue a medical report. The injured party declared that he would not go to the examination, because he had already been examined “by another medical commission in Bucharest”.
On 13 May 2010 two witnesses proposed by the injured party gave statements in which they submitted that on the day of the incident, they had heard some noise in front of the local restaurant, but could not provide any other details about it.
On 13 July 2010 the Cluj Napoca forensic medicine institute issued a letter stating that in the absence of the injured party, who had failed to appear before the medical commission for examination (see paragraph 27 above), they were unable to produce any report concerning the injuries sustained by him on 17 September 2008.
However, based exclusively on the injured party’s medical file, they concluded that there was no clinical or para-clinical justification for the diagnosis of an open head injury and concussion, no such trauma having been noted on the relevant medical observation sheets.
On 23 September 2010, while in Borşa hospital, the injured party was heard by the case prosecutor. He declared that he no longer wanted to be subjected to any further medical examinations, given that the injuries inflicted on him in September 2008 had required sixty-five to seventy days of medical care. He also declared that the signature on the statement given to the police on 17 September 2008 (see paragraph 5 above) was not his own, and that he had not declared at the time that only G.T. jr. was responsible for the attack.
In the period between June and December 2010 the case prosecutor heard eleven witnesses.
On 20 December 2010 the case prosecutor issued an indictment against G.T. jr., charging him with hitting the injured party and other forms of violence (see paragraph 62 below) against him, as well as with causing a serious disturbance of public order. The prosecutor considered that there was insufficient evidence to charge G.T. jr. with attempted first-degree murder; this was based on the fact that the intention of G.T. jr. had been to revenge his father, who had been hit the previous day by D.D. sr., and not to take the latter’s life. Moreover, the medical documents indicating the seriousness of the injuries, which had required eighteen to nineteen days of medical care, showed that the blows had not been so intense as to be able to cause loss of life. In this connection, the prosecutor also referred to the conclusions issued by the Cluj Napoca forensic medicine institute, indicating that the injured party had not suffered any cranial trauma (see paragraph 29 above).
The case prosecutor also decided to terminate the proceedings in respect of the other alleged perpetrators, namely G.T. sr., V.D., O.D. and F.M. He found it relevant that in his first complaint, the injured party himself had pointed only to G.T. jr. as the alleged perpetrator, without mentioning the involvement of any other person (see paragraph 5 above). Moreover, there was no other evidence proving that the four suspects had participated in the criminal act against the injured party.
The case prosecutor’s decision not to initiate criminal proceedings against G.T. sr., V.D., O.D. and F.M. was not challenged by the injured party.
On 9 August 2011, while the criminal proceedings against G.T. jr. were pending before the Vişeu de Sus District Court, the injured party died.
At the request of the police, an autopsy was carried out on 1 September 2011. It revealed, inter alia, swelling of the brain as well as purulent meningitis. It also revealed the existence of a very high alcohol level in the victim’s blood. The death was established to have been nonviolent and due to the toxic and septic consequences of the purulent meningitis.
At a hearing held on 27 September 2011 the District Court took note of the applicants’ wish to pursue proceedings on the injured party’s behalf, in their capacity as heirs. The court ordered a new autopsy report to establish the circumstances of the injured party’s death.
Accordingly, on 12 April 2012 the Cluj Napoca forensic medicine institute issued a new medical report, based on a set of medical documents concerning the injured party’s multiple hospitalisations and consequent medical supervision. The experts concluded that on 17 September 2008 the injured party had suffered an open head injury on the left side, as well as minor concussion. Those injuries had required twenty-five to thirty days of medical care. However, the neurological lesions and the spinal fracture detected subsequent to the incident of 17 September 2008, as well as the death of the injured party, had no causal connection with the cranial trauma sustained on that date, the lesions being of a pathological rather than traumatic nature.
On 26 June 2012 the District Court took note of the medical experts’ conclusions and in view of the number of days of medical care required, it changed the legal classification of the charge from hitting and other forms of violence to acts causing bodily harm (see paragraph 62 below).
On 23 October 2012 the Vişeu de Sus District Court acquitted G.T. jr. and thus dismissed the civil claims lodged by the applicants on behalf of the injured party.
The court indicated that the injured party’s wife (the third applicant) could not be heard as a witness because she had been present in the court room throughout the proceedings. The injured party’s mother had died before the court proceedings had taken place, hence she could no longer be heard either. One other witness named by the injured party was also heard by the court, but his statements were not conclusive, as he said that he had not seen the injured party on that day.
When heard by the court, G.T. jr. stated that the name of the client for whom he had built a stove on the day of the incident (see paragraph 17 above) was O.M.P.. The court then heard O.M.P. as a witness. He declared that at the beginning of September (the year was not mentioned), the defendant had made him a stove at his home. The same alibi was confirmed by another witness, P.B., who declared that at the time of the impugned incident, G.T. jr. had been present at O.M.P.’s house, located in another town, where he had been making a stove.
The court noted that the conflictual relations between the injured party and the family of G.T. jr. were beyond doubt. However, the injured party himself had presented different versions of the facts, initially indicating one and subsequently several aggressors (see paragraphs 5, 8 and 10 above). At the same time, there was documentary evidence in the case file proving that the injured party used to often call the emergency line without any specific reason, simply claiming that he was in danger. The court therefore considered that one explanation for the incident, other than the prosecutor’s hypothesis that G.T. jr. had wanted to revenge his father, was that D.D. sr. had wanted to counterbalance the criminal complaint lodged against him by G.T. jr.’s family in relation to the incidents of 14 and 16 September 2008 (see paragraphs 17-19 above).
The court concluded that the adduced evidence was not sufficiently decisive to rebut the presumption of innocence operating to the benefit of G.T. jr. and thus to justify a criminal conviction.
The applicants and the prosecutor’s office appealed against the District Court’s judgment, arguing mainly that the changes of legal classification, first by the case prosecutor in his indictment, from attempted first-degree murder to hitting and other forms of violence (see paragraph 32 above) and then by the first-instance court, to acts causing bodily harm (see paragraph 39 above) were unlawful and unfounded.
On 16 October 2013 the Cluj Court of Appeal allowed the appeals and remitted the case to the lower court for retrial. It held that the correct legal classification of the criminal acts to be examined was that of attempted first-degree murder, given that the aggressor had used a wooden stick or a baseball bat to hit the injured party in the head, which had resulted in an open head injury. The court emphasised that in classifying the criminal act, the essential element was the intention of the perpetrator, and not necessarily the number of days of medical care required by the injuries inflicted.
The court also criticised the fact that the lower court had considered only the evidence adduced before it, while completely ignoring, without any justification, the evidence adduced during the investigation stage.
The case was sent for re-trial before the Maramureş County Court, which re-examined all of the available evidence, including by hearing the parties again.
On 30 September 2015 the County Court convicted G.T. jr. for attempting to commit first-degree murder and sentenced him to six years’ imprisonment.
The court noted that the majority of the witnesses had amended their statements given during the re-trial so as to favour the defendant, by saying either that he had not been present at the time and place of the incident, or that no incident had ever occurred. However, the court had decided to ignore those new statements as being made pro causa and as being contradictory to the witnesses’ previous statements, namely those given before the investigative authorities and before the Vişeu de Sus District Court. In its reasoning, the court relied on the latter statements, as they had been made at a time closer to the incident.
Furthermore, the court noted that the defendant had given the name of the client for whom he had built a stove only three years after the incident, whereas at first he had claimed that he could not remember that name (see paragraphs 17 and 42 above); at the same time, the witness himself had at first said that the defendant had built a stove for him sometime at the beginning of September, without any indication of the year (see paragraph 42 above), and then, before the county court, the same witness had said that the stove had been built precisely six years earlier. The county court also noted that the witness who had provided G.T. jr. with an alibi, P.B., was in fact an employee of the T. family; his statement was therefore unreliable.
The court also found relevant the defendant’s unjustified refusal to take a polygraph test, even though such a test was not considered as evidence in a criminal case.
The court noted that there were witnesses who had confirmed the incident, namely police officer V.L. (see paragraph 4 above; having died in 2009, the other police officer, M.D., had never given any statement before the authorities), an employee of the local restaurant and one other witness who had seen the injured party and his wife entering the restaurant at the time of the alleged incident.
The court also allowed the applicants’ civil claims and awarded them 6,500 Romanian lei (RON – approximately 1,450 euros (EUR)) in respect of pecuniary damage, as well as the equivalent in RON of EUR 6,000 in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
The applicants appealed against the judgment, arguing that a harsher sentence should have been given to the accused. They also requested that a higher amount be paid in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
The defendant also appealed. The appellate court heard the defendant; no witnesses were heard in the appellate proceedings.
On 12 February 2016 the Cluj Court of Appeal allowed the defendant’s appeal and acquitted him on the basis of lack of incriminating evidence. Consequently, it dismissed the applicants’ civil claims in their entirety.
The appellate court noted the existence of a conflictual relationship between the family of the injured party on the one hand and the family of the defendant, on the other. It also noted the contradictions between the successive statements given by the defendant before the authorities, as well as his refusal to undertake a polygraph test. However, it considered that those elements were not sufficient to justify a conviction. Moreover, contradictions and hesitations as to the exact circumstances of the incident, including in respect of who had participated in it and who had witnessed it, existed also in the statements given by the witnesses called by the applicants. This had led the court to conclude that the presumption of the defendant’s innocence had not been rebutted.
On 16 March 2016 the applicants appealed in cassation against that judgment, claiming that the Vişeu de Sus District Court had lacked jurisdiction to examine the case, in so far as the pre-trial investigation had focused on the criminal act of attempted first-degree murder, which had triggered the jurisdiction of a county court, rather than a district court. However, the indictment had changed the legal classification into “hitting and other forms of violence” and the case had been incorrectly sent before the above-mentioned District Court.
The appeal was allowed in principle (admitere în principiu) by the High Court of Cassation and Justice on 11 May 2016, in so far as the admissibility criteria had been complied with.
On 22 June 2016 the High Court dismissed the appeal as ill-founded, holding that an appeal in cassation was an extraordinary appeal which allowed the parties to challenge exclusively matters of jurisdiction involving the courts, and not the pre-trial investigative authorities.
The relevant domestic legislation concerning civil actions joined to criminal proceedings are set out in the case of Nicolae Virgiliu Tănase v. Romania ([GC], no. 41720/13, §§ 66-70, 25 June 2019).
The provisions of the Criminal Code as in force at the material time concerning the criminal acts of hitting or other forms of violence, bodily harm, murder and first-degree murder are set out in the case of Ciorcan and Others v. Romania (nos. 29414/09 and 44841/09, § 73, 27 January 2015).