The case originated in an application (no. 22298/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Valentina Kondratyevna Lazareva (formerly Ms Luzyanina) (“the applicant”), on 5 March 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr A.D. Peredruk, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 10 November 2016 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Severomorsk, Murmansk Region.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the applicant, may be summarised as follows.
On 12 May 2009 the applicant’s son, K.L., was called up for mandatory military service. He served in military unit no. 55751-2 based in Glebychevo in Vyborgskiy district in Leningrad Region.
On 8 December 2009 K.L. was found at a sentry post with a gunshot wound to his head. On the wall the following notes were written: “[Ks.], I love you”, “Family, forgive me” and “I do not want to live”.
On 11 January 2010, after a pre-investigation inquiry into the circumstances of K.L.’s death, the investigator, Capt. S., found no elements of a crime and refused to open a criminal case. He held that K.L. had committed suicide owing to problems in his relationship with his girlfriend. The investigator relied on the onsite inspection report, the examination of K.L.’s belongings, the ballistics analysis, statements by K.L.’s girlfriend Ks., the post-mortem report, the expert report on the psychological state of K.L. before his death, and statements by military personnel. According to the post-mortem report, K.L. had a gunshot wound to the head and a bruise on his right shoulder. Regarding the bruise, two soldiers stated that five days before his death K.L. had fallen down some stairs and had complained of a pain in his right shoulder. The investigator also questioned twenty-four servicemen and women and found no evidence that K.L. had been subjected to bullying. According to the psychological report, K.L. could have had a depressive reaction, probably caused by difficulties with his girlfriend.
The applicant only learnt of the decision of 11 January 2010 refusing to open a criminal case in March 2010. She complained to the military prosecutor’s office that the pre-investigation inquiry had not been thorough and that she had not been involved in it. The applicant pointed out that the investigator had failed to examine her statement that K.L. had been subjected to violence and financial extortion in his military unit. The applicant also pointed to the need to examine fingerprints on the weapon and the handwriting of the notes on the wall. In April and July 2010 the prosecution refused to reconsider the decision of 11 January 2010.
On 5 July 2010 the applicant challenged the decision of 11 January 2010 before the courts. She repeated her arguments that the preinvestigation inquiry had not been thorough and that she had not been involved in it. In particular, the investigator had failed to examine her allegations that K.L. had been subjected to violence and financial extortion in his military unit. The applicant also asked that the fingerprints on the weapon and the handwriting of the notes on the wall be examined.
On 20 July 2010 the Vyborg Garrison Military Court found the contested decision lawful. Relying on evidential material from the preinvestigation inquiry the court agreed that K.L. had committed suicide because of problems in his relationship with his girlfriend and not because of alleged bullying. On 9 September 2010 the Leningrad Regional Military Court upheld that judgment on appeal.