The case originated in nine applications (see details in Appendix I) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Russian nationals (“the applicants”) on the dates indicated in Appendix I.
The applicants were represented before the Court by lawyers from the NGO Stichting Russian Justice Initiative (SRJI) (in partnership with the NGO Astreya), lawyers from the NGO Memorial Human Rights Centre, and Mr S. Visengereyev, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants claimed that on various dates between 2000 and 2004 their thirteen relatives had been detained by State servicemen in Chechnya and that no effective investigation into the matter had taken place.
On 14 December 2011 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicants are Russian nationals who live in various districts of the Chechen Republic. They are close relatives of individuals who disappeared, allegedly after having been unlawfully detained by servicemen during a special operation. In each of the applications the events concerned took place in areas under the full control of the Russian federal forces. The applicants have had no news of their missing relatives since the alleged arrests.
The applicants complained about the circumstances to lawenforcement bodies, and official investigations were opened. The proceedings were repeatedly suspended and resumed, and have remained pending for several years without achieving any tangible results. The investigations have mainly consisted of requests for information and formal requests for operational search measures to be carried out by counterparts in various parts of Chechnya and other regions of the North Caucasus. The requests received either negative responses or no reply at all.
From the documents submitted it appears that the relevant State authorities were unable to identify the State servicemen allegedly involved in the arrests or abductions.
In their observations the Government did not challenge the allegations as presented by the applicants. At the same time, they stated that there was no evidence to prove beyond reasonable doubt that State agents had been involved in the incidents.
Below are summaries of the facts in respect of each individual application. Each account of the events is based on the statements provided by the applicants and their relatives and/or neighbours to the Court and to the domestic investigative authorities. The personal details of the applicants and their disappeared relatives, and some other key facts, are summarised in the attached table (Appendix I).
The applicants are:
(1) Mr Khamzat Dzhabrailov, who was born in 1941,
(2) Ms Tamara Taysumova (also referred to as Dzhabrailova), who was born in 1955,
(3) Ms Zarema Dzhabrailova, who was born in 1978, and
(4) Ms Larisa Dzhabrailova, who was born in 1985.
The applicants live in Argun, Shali District, the Chechen Republic. They are represented before the Court by lawyers from the Memorial Human Rights Centre.
The first and second applicants are the parents of Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov, who was born in 1981; the third and fourth applicants are his sisters.
At the material time the applicants and Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov lived in Argun in one household consisting of two dwellings. Between 13 and 15 December 2001 Russian servicemen conducted a sweeping-up operation in that settlement. The town was surrounded by military checkpoints and the residents required authorisation to enter or leave it. On-duty servicemen patrolling the streets made it impossible for the residents to move around.
On 14 December 2001 a group of twenty servicemen arrived at the applicants’ house in an armoured personnel carrier (APC) and a UAZ “tabletka” vehicle with obscured registration plates. The servicemen were camouflaged and unmasked, of Russian or Asian appearance, and spoke unaccented Russian. Having searched Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov’s dwelling, they threatened to take him with them and added that those whom they took away never returned. On the same day the servicemen took the applicants’ neighbour, Mr B.U., to the Argun district military commander’s office (“the military commander’s office”) He was later released, but his car had been taken away from him by the servicemen and remained at the office’s premises.
On 15 December 2001, at around noon, the same servicemen returned to the neighbourhood in the APC and cordoned off the area. Some of them broke into the applicants’ dwelling and locked the applicants inside, while two others entered Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov’s part of the house. They forced Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov outside, put him in the APC and drove to the military commander’s office. Servicemen patrolling the streets witnessed the events but did not interfere.
Later on the same day the second applicant went to the Argun town administration, where she met about fifty relatives of other men arrested during the special operation. Two representatives of the town council informed her that the arrested men had been taken to a “filtering” point on the outskirts of Argun, and they agreed to pass on clothes to Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov. In the evening the applicant learnt that the arrested men would be transferred to the military commander’s office.
On 17 December 2001 the military commander’s office informed the applicants that the special operation had been conducted by a special forces unit which did not report to the office and that none of the arrested men had been brought to their premises. Subsequently, the applicants learnt that Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov and seven other persons arrested between 13 and 15 December 2001 had not been released.
According to the second applicant, on 18 December 2001 she heard Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov screaming in the district military commander’s office.
The applicants have not seen Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov since 15 December 2001.
On 12 January 2002 the first applicant was granted victim status in the criminal case and questioned. In his statement he described in detail the circumstances of his son’s abduction by armed men in military uniforms who had arrived in an APC and a UAZ vehicle. He also stated that prior to the abduction, on 14 December 2001, the same group of men had searched his house. The applicant provided a detailed description of the perpetrators and their vehicles and insisted that the APC was the same that had been used by the abductors the day before, on 14 December 2001.
On 17 and 18 January 2002 the investigators questioned the second and third applicants, whose statements about the abduction were detailed and similar to the one given by the first applicant.
On 19 January 2002 the investigators questioned the applicants’ relative, Ms M.M., whose statement about the abduction was also similar to the one given by the first applicant. In addition, she stated that from the abductors’ actions it had been clear to her that they were familiar with the house and that they must have been the same men who had searched the applicants’ house on 14 December 2001.
On 3 September 2003 the investigators questioned the applicants’ neighbour Ms A.D., whose statement about the abduction was similar to the ones given by the first, second and third applicants. She also stated that the APC used to take away Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov had been the same as that used on 14 December 2001 by the men who had searched the applicants’ house.
On 9 September 2003 the investigators questioned the applicants’ neighbour Mr B.U., who stated that on 14 December 2001 armed men who had arrived at his house in an APC had ordered him to take his Mercedes car to the military commander’s office and leave it there for two weeks.
On 10 September 2003 the investigators again questioned the first applicant, who stated, amongst other things, that during their first visit on 14 December 2001 the abductors, having searched his house, had gone to his neighbour’s dwelling and taken the Mercedes car.
On various dates in February 2004 the investigators questioned the applicants’ neighbours Mr A.U. and Mr R.U., whose statements concerning the abductors’ visit on 14 December 2001 were similar to the ones given by the first applicant and Mr B.U. (see paragraphs 20 and 24 above). They also questioned the first applicant, who reiterated his previous statements.
On 30 March 2004 the investigators questioned Mr M.S., who had been the head of the Argun department of the Federal Security Service (FSB) at the time of the abduction. The officer denied having any pertinent information concerning the disappearance of Mr Yakub Dzhabrailov.
On various dates in September 2006 the investigators questioned six of the applicants’ neighbours, all of whom confirmed that a special operation had been conducted in Argun on 15 December 2001.
On 21 September 2006 the investigators again questioned the first applicant, who stated that his son’s abduction had been organised by the head of the Argun FSB, Mr M.S., and that the Argun prosecutor, Mr R.T., had been aware of it.
On 25 September 2006 the investigators questioned Mr R.T., who denied having any pertinent information about the abduction.
On various dates in August 2011 the investigators questioned the first applicant and several of his relatives and neighbours. No new information concerning the abduction was obtained.
On 9 January 2002 the Argun district prosecutor’s office opened criminal case no. 78010.
On 5 February 2002 the investigators requested the Military Commander of the United Group Alignment (UGA) to inform them whether their servicemen had detained the applicants’ relative. On an unspecified date the UGA replied that on 15 December 2001 a joint police and military group had conducted a special operation in Argun.
On 30 March 2002 the investigators examined the crime scene. No evidence was collected.
On 21 January 2004 the district prosecutor’s office criticised the lack of progress in the investigation and the investigators’ failure to take basic steps.
On 14 September 2004 the military prosecutor’s office of military unit no. 20102 informed the investigators that no military servicemen had been involved in the abduction.
On 10 August 2006 the first applicant wrote to the investigators requesting that they take a number of steps to expedite the search for his son. He also stated that he suspected that Mr M.S., who had been the head of the Argun FSB at the time, was responsible for his son’s abduction, and that the Argun Public Prosecutor and the Argun military commander had known about it but failed to take any action.
On 31 October 2006 the district prosecutor’s office informed the applicants that criminal case no. 78027 had been opened in connection with the discovery of four mutilated corpses on the eastern outskirts of Argun on 28 February 2002. One body was identified as being that of Mr AW. Ya., who had been abducted from his home in Argun in January 2001 under similar circumstances.
On 28 February 2008 the first applicant requested that the investigators allow him access to the investigation file. On 6 March 2008 the Shali District Investigation Department granted his request. However, on 1 July 2008 the applicant’s lawyer was denied access to the file’s entire contents on the grounds that the investigation was still pending.
On 17 July 2008 the investigators informed the applicant that the decision of 6 March 2008 had granted him only limited access to the case file.
The contents of a number of documents from the investigation file reflect that the abduction took place “during a sweeping-up operation” by special forces. Such references are made in the decision to suspend the investigation and in the investigators’ request for police assistance, both dated 25 December 2011.
The investigation was suspended and resumed on several occasions; the last suspension took place on 25 December 2011. The proceedings are still pending.
The applicants are:
(1) Ms Mata Suleymanova, who was born in 1956,
(2) Mr Ostambek Suleymanov, who was born in 1950,
(3) Ms Marem Magamaliyeva, who was born in 1981, and
(4) Mr Abdul-Malik Suleymanov, who was born in 2002.
The applicants live in Gudermes, Gudermes district, the Chechen Republic. They are represented before the Court by lawyers from SRJI/Astreya.
The first and second applicants are the parents of Mr Salambek Suleymanov, who was born in 1974, Mr Khasanbek Suleymanov, who was born in 1979, and Mr Anderbek (also spelt as Andarbek) Suleymanov, who was born in 1981. The third applicant is the wife of Mr Salambek Suleymanov, and the fourth applicant is his son.
At the material time the applicants and the three Suleymanov brothers resided in two neighbouring houses in Gudermes. Mr Salambek Suleymanov lived with the third and the fourth applicants while Mr Khasanbek Suleymanov and Mr Anderbek Suleymanov lived with the first and second applicants. The town was under curfew.
On an unspecified date in September or October 2002 federal servicemen conducted a special operation in Gudermes and arrested about thirty persons, including the Suleymanov brothers. The servicemen took the arrested men to the Gudermes district department of the interior (“ROVD”) in buses belonging to the FSB. After their fingerprints had been checked and photographs taken, the arrested men were released.
On 28 October 2002 two neighbours, Mr Ali M. and Mr Musa Z., visited the applicants. Mr Anderbek Suleymanov joked that his family kept a bomb in the basement. It appears that Mr Musa Z. had previously been detained by the FSB and released in exchange for providing information. According to the applicants, it was possible he had informed the FSB about the joke.
On 29 October 2002, at around 4 a.m., a group of camouflaged servicemen in masks and helmets arrived at the applicants’ houses in two UAZ minivans. They were armed with short-barrelled automatic rifles. The servicemen stormed inside and quickly searched the houses, looking for drugs, firearms, and, in particular, for the bomb allegedly hidden in the basement. Threatening the applicants in unaccented Russian, the servicemen ordered them to lie down on the floor. They collected the applicants’ and the three brothers’ identity documents, forced the latter into the UAZ and drove off in the direction of the town centre, passing unhindered through a checkpoint on the way.
At the beginning of November 2002, about a week after the abduction, a former classmate of Mr Khasanbek Suleymanov told the applicants that their relatives were detained at a temporary detention centre (“IVS”) on the premises of the Gudermes ROVD and that FSB officers guarded them and occasionally took them out. Mr Khasanbek Suleymanov had passed an item of his clothing to his parents through another person and asked him to inform them of his place of detention. However, the ROVD officers denied that the brothers were detained there and refused to allow the applicants to enter the premises.
One of the applicants’ neighbours, a police officer, also confirmed that the three men had been held at the ROVD.
At some later  point the applicants heard from anonymous sources that in 2003 the brothers had been detained on the premises of an FSB department, that in 2003 Mr Salambek Suleymanov had been transferred to detention elsewhere, and that Mr Aslan Dzh., the head of the criminal search unit at the Gudermes ROVD, had ordered the brothers’ abduction.
The applicants have not seen their three relatives since 29 October 2002.
On 15 November 2002 the first and third applicants were questioned. Both of them provided a detailed description of the abduction similar to the one furnished to the Court.
On the same date, the second applicant was also questioned and granted victim status in the criminal case. His statement concerning the abduction was similar to the one given by the first and third applicants. The second applicant was subsequently questioned again on two occasions: on 18 June 2005 and 20 April 2006.
On 16 November 2002 the investigators questioned the applicants’ neighbour Mr Kh.A., who confirmed seeing a group of armed men in UAZ vehicles next to the applicants’ house on the night of the abduction.
On 18 May 2005 the first applicant was also granted victim status and was questioned. She reiterated her previous statement, adding that she had made an official complaint about the abduction on the following day.
On 20 April 2006 the first applicant was questioned again. She reiterated her previous statements and added that in her opinion her sons had been abducted by law-enforcement agents.
On 5 and 6 May 2006 the investigation team questioned the head of the IVS and a senior inspector at the ROVD, who denied having any knowledge of the Suleymanov brothers. According to the IVS registration log of detainees examined on 5 May 2006, the brothers had not been detained there.
On 23 September 2008 the first applicant was questioned again. She stated that she had learnt from Mr Uvais, who had died in 2007, that Mr Aslan Dzh., the head of the criminal search unit at the ROVD, was resposible for her sons’ abduction.
On 8 October 2008 the investigators questioned the applicants’ relative Ms M.A., whose statement concerning the alleged organisation of the abduction by Mr Aslan Dzh. was similar to the one given by the first applicant.
On 30 October 2002 an investigation team examined the crime scene. No evidence was collected.
On 1 November 2002 the Gudermes district prosecutor’s office opened criminal case no. 57098 in connection with the abduction. According to the investigation plan drawn up on the same day, the abduction could have been perpetrated by criminals pursuing a blood feud, by creditors, by members of illegal armed groups, or by officers of lawenforcement agencies.
In November 2002, May and June 2005, April 2006 and September 2008 the investigators sent out requests for information to a number of lawenforcement agencies in Moscow and the Southern Federal Circuit, including the Ministry of the Interior and various ROVD offices, detention centres, military commander’s offices and FSB departments. Only negative replies were received.
On 12 December 2002 the Chechnya prosecutor’s office stated in a procedural document that “the investigation [had] failed to establish to which power structure the abductors belonged”. Subsequently, on 16 August 2006, the investigators stated in another procedural document that “the only substantiated investigative theory was that the culprits belonged to power structures”.
On 5 April 2006 the first applicant requested information on the progress of the investigation. In reply she was informed that the proceedings were still in progress.
On 17 November and December 2006, and then on 4 March and 10 November 2008, the first applicant requested access to the investigation file. Her two latest requests were granted, on 7 March and 11 November 2008.
On 10 September 2008 the applicants’ relatives and neighbours Ms M.A. and Ms N.D. wrote to the investigators stating that Mr Aslan Dzh., the head of the criminal search unit at the Gudermes ROVD, had been involved in the abduction of the applicants’ sons. Following that complaint, on 12 September 2008 a supervising prosecutor ordered the questioning of Mr Aslan Dzh. by the investigators. From the documents submitted it appears that this order was not complied with.
On 19 July 2010 and 26 January 2011 the Russian President’s Human Rights Envoy in Chechnya (“the Envoy”) wrote to the investigators on behalf of the first and second applicants requesting assistance in the seach for the applicants’ sons. In reply he was informed that operational seach measures to solve the crime were under way.
According to the information obtained by the investigation, none of the Sulyemanov brothers were detained in penal institutions in the Russian Federation (see paragraph 51 above).
According to the information received by the investigators at the Gudermes ROVD, the Suleymanov brothers were members of illegal armed groups and Salambek Suleymanov had participated in the activities of illegal Sharia courts.
The investigation was suspended and resumed on several occasions; the last suspension took place on 14 October 2008. It is still pending.
The applicants are Mr Viktor Chankayev, who was born in 1948, and Ms Zaynap Chankayeva, who was born in 1954. The applicants live in Urus-Martan, Urus-Martan district, the Chechen Republic. They are represented before the Court by lawyers from SRJI/Astreya.
The applicants are the parents of Mr Ramzan Chankayev, who was born in 1985, and the uncle and aunt of Mr Aslan Chankayev, who was born in 1985.
At the material time the applicants, their son Mr Ramzan Chankayev and their nephew Mr Aslan Chankayev lived together in Urus-Martan. The area was under curfew. Roads leading to and from the settlements were blocked by checkpoints.
On 19 September 2001 a group of about fifteen servicemen arrived at the applicants’ neighbourhood in Urus-Martan and cordoned off the area. Their UAZ car had no registration plates and the registration number of their Ural lorry was obscured by mud. All the servicemen were armed and wore camouflage uniforms and masks, save for the commanding officer. The latter was unmasked, had Slavic features and had an FSB emblem on his sleeve. After a quick search of the applicants’ house, the servicemen told them in unaccented Russian that they had to take Mr Ramzan Chankayev and Mr Aslan Chankayev with them to check their fingerprints at a laboratory situated on the premises of an Azeri market on the western outskirts of Urus-Martan. As the applicants refused to let their relatives go, the commander started shooting in the air. The servicemen then collected the bullet shells, put Mr Aslan Chankayev in the UAZ and Mr Ramzan Chankayev in the Ural and drove away.
On the same morning the servicemen conducted an identity check at the house of a neighbour, Mr N.S.
Immediately after the arrest, the first applicant went to the Azeri market and the Urus-Martan district military commander’s office but his arrested relatives were not there. Then he went to the district prosecutor’s office, where he was told that the two men had been taken to the IVS at the Urus-Martan ROVD. In the evening, an official from the local administration confirmed this information to the second applicant, adding that both young men would be released as soon as they had had their fingerprints checked. Mr Radmir Arbekov, an assistant to the district prosecutor, agreed to pass on some food brought by the applicant for the arrested relatives. However, Mr Ramzan Chankayev and Mr Aslan Chankayev were not released on that day.
On 20 September 2001 the ROVD officers informed the applicants that their relatives had been transferred to the district military commander’s office. None of the officers at that office acknowledged the detention.
On 8 October 2001 the second applicant saw the commanding officer who had participated in her relatives’ arrest on the premises of the military commander’s office. Sometime later she saw two other servicemen who she thought might also have participated in the abduction. When approached, one of the servicemen introduced himself as “Vitaliy”.
The applicants have not seen Mr Ramzan Chankayev and Mr Aslan Chankayev since 19 September 2001.
On 20 October 2001 the investigators questioned the second applicant, who provided a detailed description of the events similar to the one furnished to the Court. In addition, she stated that she had noticed FSB service stripes on the shoulder of the uniform of one of the abductors. The abductors had told her that they were from the Urus-Martan temporary department of the interior. At about 5 p.m. on the same day she complained to the prosecutor’s office about the abduction; near the office she met the deputy head of the Urus-Martan town administration, Mr L.M., who promised to expedite her relatives’ release from detention.
On 2 November 2001 the investigators questioned the first applicant’s brother and the father of Mr Aslan Chankayev, Mr A.Ch., whose statement concerning the events was similar to the one given by the second applicant. He also added that the abductors had told them that Mr Ramzan Chankayev and Mr Aslan Chankayev would be released an hour later at the Azeri market.
On 3 November 2001 the investigators questioned the first applicant, whose statement concerning the events was similar to the one given by his wife, the second applicant. In addition, he stated that on 8 October 2001, near to the military commander’s office his wife had identified one of the abductors in the presence of the district military commander and the head of the town administration Mr Sh.Ya.
On various dates in November and December 2001 the investigators questioned five of the applicants’ neighbours, none of whom had witnessed the abduction but had learnt about it from the applicants.
On 20 September 2006 the investigators again questioned the second applicant, who reiterated her previous statement and added that the man in charge of the abduction had been called Radmir.
On 20 or 21 September 2006 the investigators questioned the applicants’ daughter, Ms Z.Ch. (also referred to as E.Ch. in the documents submitted), whose statement concerning the abduction was similar to those given by the applicants. In particular, she stated that one of the abductors had had FSB stripes on his uniform.
According to the applicants, they complained of the abduction to various law-enforcement agencies on 20 September 2001. According to the Government, the applicants complained of the abduction on 27 October 2001.
On 1 October 2001 Mr Arbekov, the assistant to the district prosecutor, wrote to the Chechnya FSB that, according to the registration log of the Khankala FSB department, both Mr Ramzan Chankayev and Mr Aslan Chankayev had been detained there. On 15 October 2001 the district military commander’s office sent out queries to the military units of the Ministry of Defence and the Internal Troops of the Ministry of the Interior. On 16 October 2001 the ROVD informed the applicants that their relatives were not listed in their databases and that operational search files had been opened in connection with their abduction.
On 27 October 2001 the Urus-Martan district prosecutor’s office opened criminal case no. 25137.
On 20 March 2002 the head of the Main Service for the Execution of Sentences stated that the applicants’ relatives had not been detained in the detention centres in the Rostov Region.
On 26 March 2003 the second applicant was granted victim status in the criminal proceedings.
On 13 October 2005 the applicants requested permission to access the investigation file. No response was given to this request.
On 21 November 2005 the Urus-Martan ROVD informed the investigators that on the date of the abduction of the applicants’ relatives, no special operations had been conducted by the servicemen of the military units stationed in the area.
On 28 September 2006 the investigation was suspended. The applicants were not informed.
On various dates throughout the proceedings, such as 9 November 2001, 4 June 2003 and 13 October 2005, the applicants contacted the investigators to ask about the progress of the investigation and to request assistance in the search for their relatives. In reply they were informed that an investigation was in progress and operational search measures were under way.
On 2 February 2009, having been contacted by the applicants on 27 January 2009, the investigators informed them that the investigation had been suspended on an unspecified date.
The investigation is still pending.
The applicants are:
(1) Ms Maret Sultanova, who was born in 1958,
(2) Ms Madina Sultanova, who was born in 1993,
(3) Mr Khusain Sultanov, who was born in 1984,
(4) Ms Razet Sultanova, who was born in 1988,
(5) Ms Zalina Sultanova, who was born in 1989, and
(6) Mr Ibragim Razhipov, who was born in 1982.
The applicants live in Samashki, Achkhoy-Martan district, the Chechen Republic. They are represented before the Court by lawyers from SRJI/Astreya.
The first applicant is the mother of Mr Dzhamali (also referred to as Khasan) Sultanov, who was born in 1986. The other applicants are his siblings.
Mr Dzhamali Sultanov suffered from a disability. In September 2004 he had an argument with Mr R.S., a local police officer. According to the applicants, Mr R.S., in order to get back at Dzhamali, might have deliberately misinformed the AchkhoyMartan ROVD that Mr Dzhamali Sultanov was involved in illegal activities.
On 5 November 2004, at around 3 a.m., a group of servicemen arrived at the applicants’ house. Five of them broke in. They were in camouflage uniforms and armed with machine guns; three of them wore masks and the others wore helmets and caps. Those whose faces were not covered were of Slavic appearance; the servicemen spoke Russian and Chechen. They asked whether the applicants had any weapons or drugs, then checked Mr Dzhamali Sultanov’s passport, forced him outside and put him in a khaki UAZ car saying that they were taking him to Grozny. Then the UAZ departed in the direction of AchkhoyMartan, accompanied by a convoy of about ten vehicles, including UAZs, Gazelle minivans, and VAZ21099 and Lada (Жигули) civilian cars. Later that night a serviceman manning a roadblock in the vicinity confirmed that the convoy had entered Achkhoy-Martan.
According to the applicants, the abductors were acting on the false information given to the ROVD by police officer R.S.
Five days later, an acquaintance of the applicants, Mr Akhdan, who served at the seventh military commander’s squadron (седьмая комендантская рота) stationed in Achkhoy-Martan, confirmed that he had seen the convoy in Achkhoy-Martan. According to him, a UAZ car had entered the premises of the Achkhoy-Martan ROVD, while the rest of the convoy had continued to drive on. According to Mr Akhdan, Mr Dzhamali Sultanov had been detained at the ROVD and had been questioned by Mr V.K., the head of the ROVD’s criminal search department. According to the applicants, Mr V.K. was head of the Zheleznodorozhniy ROVD in Voronezh in the Voronezh Region and was on a temporary assignment in Achkhoy-Martan. In a meeting with the first applicant Mr A.S., Mr V.K.’s deputy at the AchkhoyMartan ROVD, denied that Mr Dzhamali Sultanov had been detained at the ROVD. Mr Akhdan was killed several days after the conversation with the applicants.
The applicants have not seen Mr Dzhamali Sultanov since 5 November 2004.
On 26 November 2004 the investigators questioned the first and the third applicants, whose statements concerning the abduction were similar to the one submitted to the Court. In addition, the first applicant stated that Mr Dzhamali Sultanov suffered from a learning disability, and had neither been to school nor had any friends. She further stated that she recognised one of the abductors as a police officer from the Achkhoy-Martan ROVD, Mr V.K., also known under the nickname ‘Liman’. The first applicant was subsequently questioned again on 28 December 2004, 10 October 2006 and 25 July 2007 and provided similar statements; the third applicant was questioned again on 25 July 2007 and provided a similar statement.
On 26 November 2004 the investigators questioned the first applicant’s husband and the father of Mr Dzhamali Sultanov, Mr Z. Sultanov, whose statements concerning the abduction were similar to the ones given by the first and third applicants. He was subsequently questioned again on 10 October 2006 and reiterated his previous statement.
On various dates in November and December 2004, September 2006 and then in July 2008 the investigators questioned a number of the applicants’ neighbours and relatives and other residents of Samashki, all of whom stated that they had learnt of the abduction from the applicants.
On 1 July 2008 the investigators questioned the fourth applicant, whose statement about the abduction was similar to the one given by the first and third applicants.
On 3 July 2008 the investigators questioned district police officer Mr Kh.Z., who stated that at about 5 a.m. on 5 November 2004 the first applicant had arrived at his house and informed him of her son’s abduction. She had provided a detailed description of the abductors and their vehicles and also stated that a fortnight prior to the events, Mr Dzhamali Sultanov had had an argument with police officers R.S. and A.A., who had come to the applicants’ household to check the premises.
On 5 and then on 17 November 2004 the investigators examined the crime scene. No evidence was collected.
On 15 November 2004 the Achkhoy-Martan district prosecutor’s office opened criminal case no. 38053 in respect of the abduction.
On 27 December 2004 the investigators checked the transport registration log of checkpoint no. 190 with regard to the passage of the abductors’ convoy on 5 November 2004. No such passage was registered.
On 28 December 2004 the first applicant was granted victim status in the criminal case.
On 5 January 2005 the investigators checked the transport registration log of checkpoint no. 186 with regard to the passage of the abductors’ convoy on 5 November 2004. No such passage was registered.
On 15 March 2005 the investigation was suspended. On 19 August 2006 the district prosecutor’s office rejected the applicant’s complaint against the decision to suspend the investigation.
On 30 June 2006 the Achkhoy-Martan District Court declared Mr Dzhamali Sultanov a missing person.
On 29 July 2006 the ROVD informed the first applicant that an operational search file had been opened in connection with the abduction.
In March and April 2007 district departments of the Southern Circuit of the Federal Service for the Execution of Sentences stated that Dzhamali had not been detained in their detention facilities.
On 25 April 2007 the investigators informed the applicants of the progress in the criminal proceedings, stating that, amongst other things, the investigators had questioned over seventy witnesses, including the applicants’ relatives and neighbours, forwarded information requests to a number of law-enforcement agencies in the Southern Federal Circuit, and examined the registration logs of the checkpoints in Samashki and Achkhoy-Martan districts. No involvement of servicemen in the abduction had been established.
The investigation of the criminal case was suspended and resumed on several occasion; the last suspension took place on 10 July 2008. The proceedings are currently pending.
The applicant is Mr Elsi Eldarov, who was born in 1956 and lives in Gekhi, Urus-Martan district, the Chechen Republic. He is represented before the Court by lawyers from SRJI/Astreya.
The applicant is the brother of Mr Aldan Eldarov, who was born in 1964.
The facts of this application are based on the same events as those examined by the Court in the case of Musayeva and Others v. Russia, no.  74239/01, 26 July 2007, which concerned the abduction of the applicants’ relatives as a result of a special operation conducted by federal forces in Gekhi between 8 and 10 August 2000, and the subsequent discovery of their bodies.
At the material time the applicant and his brother, Mr Aldan Eldarov, lived in neighbouring houses in Gekhi.  On 8 (in the documents submitted the date was also referred to as 9) August 2000 federal servicemen started a three-day sweeping-up operation in Gekhi. They surrounded the settlement in their UAZ cars and Ural lorries, cordoned off the area and blocked the roads leading to and from the settlement. The servicemen were stationed on the eastern outskirts of Gekhi. Around two hundred of the village’s male residents were arrested during the operation.
At around 10.30 a.m. a group of servicemen conducted a search of Mr Aldan Eldarov’s house. They took away a group photograph of him, his brother and some police officers from Grozny, all of whom were in military uniform. Then the servicemen left and Mr Aldan Eldarov went to see the applicant.
Later, at around 11 a.m., two servicemen arrived at the applicant’s house in a UAZ lorry registration number OBS 31-62 (ОБС 31-62). The applicant knew the servicemen personally as Mr Vadim and Mr Oleg Ye. The latter was in charge of the operation in the applicant’s street. Prior to their being sent to work with the Urus-Martan ROVD, both officers had worked in the economic crimes unit of the Penza Regional Department of the Interior (OVD). The servicemen told the applicant that in connection with the photograph they had to take Mr Aldan Eldarov to the military base. Then they put him in their car and left. The applicant was unable to follow them because his car was stopped by servicemen carrying out the special operation.
On that day the servicemen also arrested a local resident, Mr Akhmet Kadyrov, and his two brothers. After checking their passports, the servicemen took them to the military base in an APC and placed them in cages and tents with other detainees. The cages were surrounded by dozens of military vehicles, including APCs, tanks and a helicopter. The detainees, who were asked whether they knew any rebel fighters or local residents who had weapons, were subjected to beatings. Mr Aldan Eldarov was in a very bad state after questioning, and servicemen took him to hospital in an APC. Mr Akhmet Kadyrov and his brothers were released.
On 10 August 2000 the head of the local administration, Mr SaidSelim Ay., informed the applicant that the servicemen conducting the operation would release the detainee in exchange for a machine gun. The applicant agreed to the exchange. However, after visiting the military base, Mr Said-Selim Ay. stated that Mr Aldan Eldarov had been taken to hospital.
In September 2000 a burial site was discovered on the outskirts of Gekhi. Two of the bodies were identified as the Musayev brothers, also Gekhi residents, who had been arrested in the same period as Mr Aldan Eldarov.
The applicant has not seen Mr Aldan Eldarov since the date of the abduction.
On an unspecified date in December 2000 the applicant was questioned. He provided a detailed description of the events, similar to the one furnished to the Court.
On 27 April 2005 the investigators again questioned the applicant, who reiterated the description of his brother’s abduction by officers from the Urus-Martan ROVD during the special operation and his subsequent handing over by the police officers to military servicemen under the command of General Nedobitko.
On 15 November 2005 the investigators questioned officer Mr I.S., who had participated in the special operation in Gekhi and the arrest of local residents, including the applicant’s brother. The officer confirmed that the special operation had been conducted but could not recall any details because of the passage of time.
On 21 November 2005 the investigators questioned officer Mr Oleg Ye., who had participated in the special operation in Gekhi and the arrest of local residents, including the applicant’s brother. The officer confirmed that the special operation had been conducted but could not recall any details.
For details of the main investigative steps taken by the authorities between 2000 and 2006 in criminal case no. 24047 opened in connection with the abduction of four residents of Gekhi during the special operation and the subsequent discovery of their bodies, see Musayeva and Others v. Russia, no. 74239/01, §§ 31-48, 26 July 2007. The steps taken by the authorities in respect of the applicant’s brother within the framework of the criminal case may be summarised as follows.
On several occasions in August 2000 the applicant complained to various law-enforcement agencies about his brother’s abduction during the special operation. On 18 September and 28 October 2000 the Urus-Martan district prosecutor’s office criticised the ROVD for failing to open a search file in connection with the abduction.
On 18 September 2000 the ROVD refused to initiate criminal proceedings in connection with the discovery on 13 September 2000 of four male corpses on the outskirts of Gekhi.
On 27 September and 21 December 2000 the military prosecutor’s office of military unit no. 20102 denied any involvement by servicemen in the abduction.
On 16 October 2000 the applicant yet again requested that the Chechnya military prosecutor open a criminal case to investigate the abduction. He submitted to the Court that officer Yefimenko had informed him that the police had handed Mr Aldan Eldarov over to servicemen of the 245th mechanised infantry regiment of the Ministry of Defence under the command of General Nedobitko. It is unclear whether this information was examined by the authorities.
On 18 October 2000 the district prosecutor’s office quashed the ROVD’s decision of 18 September 2000 and opened criminal case no. 24047 in connection with the discovery of the bodies. Subsequently the bodies were referred to in the case file as being those of Mr A. Musayev, Mr U. Musayev, Mr R. Lorsanukayev and Mr R. Abukhadzhiyev. No official identification was carried out.
On 21 April 2005 the applicant was informed that the investigation had been resumed. From the documents submitted it appears that prior to that date he was not informed as to the progress of the proceedings and that the first applicant in the case of Musayeva and Others, cited above, was the only victim in the criminal case to whom the authorities provided information on the progress of the proceedings from time to time.
On 1 October 2005 the applicant was informed that the investigation of the criminal case had again been resumed, and then on 31 October 2005 he was informed that the investigation had been suspended.
From the documents submitted it appears that at some point between October and December 2005 the authorities concluded that four residents had been abducted as a result of the special operation: Mr A. Musayev, Mr U. Musayev, Mr R. Lorsanukayev and the applicant’s brother Mr Aldan Eldarov, and that a Mr R. Abukhadzhiyev had been killed when resisting arrest during the special operation. The four bodies discovered in September 2000 were those of Mr A. Musayev, Mr U. Musayev, Mr R. Lorsanukayev and an unidentified person.
On 18 August 2006 the applicant was informed that the investigation had been resumed. Then on 18 September 2006 he was informed that it had been suspended.
Between November 2007 and July 2008 the investigation was resumed and suspended on several occasions. The applicant was not informed thereof.
On 2 June 2008 the investigation was again resumed and on 23 June 2008 the investigating authorities prepared a plan of operational search measures to be taken in the criminal case. The plan concerned primarily the investigation into the Musayev brothers’ abduction and their subsequent killing and made no mention of a search for Mr Aldan Eldarov.
On 18 August 2008 the investigators were instructed by the supervisory prosecutor to take a number of steps in respect of the applicant’s brother.
In August 2008 the investigators received a reply to their request for information from the Central Archives of the Internal Troops of the Russian Ministry of the Interior, according to which any information pertaining to the special operation in Gekhi in August 2000 and the possible arrest of Mr Aldan Eldarov and the other residents of the village was classified as a State secret.
On 16 September 2008 the investigation was again suspended and then resumed on 20 October 2008, then again suspended on 20 November 2008. The applicant was not informed thereof.
On various dates in 2008 and 2009 the investigators questioned a number of local residents who confirmed that a special operation had been conducted in Gekhi between 8 and 10 August 2000. No information pertinent to the whereabouts of Mr Aldan Eldarov was received.
According to the information received by the investigators, Mr Aldan Eldarov had not been arrested or detained on State premises.
On 27 January and 30 April 2009 the applicant requested that the Chechnya Prosecutor’s Office inform him of the progress of the investigation and resume it if it had been suspended.
On 5 May 2009 the investigators agreed to provide the applicant with copies of a few procedural decisions.
The investigation was again suspended and resumed on a number of occasions. The last suspension took place on 16 December 2009. The criminal proceedings are still pending
The applicants are:
(1) Ms Malika Usumova, who was born in 1960,
(2) Ms Aminat Usumova, who was born in 1985,
(3) Mr Zaur Usumov, who was born in 1988,
(4) Mr Zurab Usumov, who was born in 1994, and
(5) Ms Laura Usumova, who was born in 1993.
The applicants live in Kurchaloy, Kurchaloy district, the Chechen Republic. They are represented before the Court by lawyers from Memorial Human Rights Centre.
The first applicant is the wife of Mr Moul Usumov, who was born in 1960; the other applicants are his children.
At the material time Mr Moul Usumov worked at the Kurchaloy FSB. The Kurchaloy district military commander’s office and the Kurchaloy FSB were situated on the eastern outskirts of Kurchaloy, close to the 33rd regiment (33 бригада) of the Russian armed forces stationed at the premises of the State Road Construction Department (дорожно-ремонтно-строительное управление, ДРСУ).
On 30 June 2001, at 3.30 a.m., a group of fifteen to twenty armed servicemen in camouflage uniforms with dogs cordoned off the applicants’ neighbourhood using APC no. L119 (Л119), a UAZ car and two Ural lorries. Seven servicemen broke into the applicants’ house and ordered the applicants in unaccented Russian to lie down on the floor. After searching the premises, the servicemen took away money, a number of valuables and Mr Moul Usumov’s military service card. One of the servicemen hit him with his rifle butt, demanding that he spell out his name. Then the servicemen handcuffed Mr Moul Usumov, took him outside, put him in the APC and drove away.
The first applicant and a relative, Mr Sheykhi Usumov, followed the APC and the other vehicles and saw them entering the premises of the 33rd regiment. The applicant also saw other Kurchaloy residents driving towards the regiment. She learnt that seven other men had been arrested that day.
Later on the same day the Kurchaloy district military commander and the head of the Kurchaloy FSB, Mr Viktor Ivanovich, agreed to talk to the first applicant and seven other women. The military commander acknowledged that the servicemen of the 33rd regiment had arrested their relatives but denied the involvement of his subordinates in the abduction. The head of the FSB told the first applicant: “It comes as a shock to me to hear that Mr Moul Usumov has been arrested. He is one of us. Don’t worry, he will be released by 4 p.m.” He replied to the other women: “You should have cried earlier, not now. Your sons are up to their necks in blood and they will be held liable.” Mr Moul Usumov was not released on that day.
On 1 July 2001 the head of the FSB informed the first applicant that the servicemen of the 33rd regiment could detain Mr Moul Usumov for up to ten days. He asked the applicant to bring some clothes for her husband. However, a day later, the officer told her that he could not help her as superior power structures had taken charge of Mr Moul Usumov. The applicant was no longer allowed to talk to him.
Sometime later the deputy military commander informed the applicants that Mr Moul Usumov had been released between 15 and 18 July 2001 along with the seven other detainees. Those individuals later confirmed that they had been detained together with Mr Moul Usumov but that he had not been released with them.
The applicants have not seen Mr Moul Usumov since 30 June 2001.
On various dates in July 2001 and 2002 the investigators questioned the applicants, Mr Sheykhi Usumov, the applicants’ relatives and a number of other residents of Kurchaloy whose relatives had been abducted on the same date. The witnesses provided similar detailed accounts of the abduction and consistently stated that their relatives, including Mr Moul Usumov, had been detained by military servicemen during a security operation. They provided detailed descriptions of the abductors’ vehicles and related the details of their conversations with the military commander, who had promised to release their relatives.
On 18 and 27 July 2001 the investigators questioned four military officers from military unit no. 3526, all of whom confirmed that as a result of the special operation in Kurchaloy eight men had been detained and taken to military unit no. 3526. From there the detainees had been taken elsewhere by helicopter.
Between 5 and 19 December 2001 the investigators questioned seven police officers who had participated in the special operation in Kurchaloy. All of them stated that they had participated in the operation, visited and searched the houses of local residents and taken several local residents to the premises of military unit no. 3526 and left them there.
On 27 March 2002 the investigators questioned the deputy commander of military unit no. 12016, officer S.V., who confirmed that on 30 June 2001 a special operation had been carried out in Kurchaloy and that as a result of that operation several men had been detained and taken to the premises of military unit no. 3526.
On 28 May 2002 the investigators questioned the deputy head of the headquarters of military unit no. 12016, colonel K.I., who stated that private V.Z. had used physical force against Mr Moul Usumov and the other men detained as a result of the special operation on 30 June 2001; the private had been killed on 8 July 2001.
On various dates in 2001 and 2002 and then in 2009 the investigators questioned a number of servicemen, whose statements may be summarised as follows: they confirmed the fact of the special operation and the detention of the local residents, including the applicants’ relative, but they had no information as to their subsequent whereabouts.
On 9 July 2001 the Argun district prosecutor’s office opened criminal case no. 39038. In the documents submitted this case was also referred to under no. 14/00/0020-01D and no. 34/33/0406-01D.
On 20 July 2001 the military prosecutor of military unit no. 20102 in Khankala took over the investigation. The applicant was informed thereof on 16 April 2004.
On 27 July 2001 the investigators examined the crime scene at the dugout situated on the premises of military unit no. 12016, where eight residents of Kurchaloy had been detained after their apprehension on 30 June 2001.
On 17 December 2001 the investigators received information from the military counterintelligence unit of the Russian FSB that Mr Moul Usumov, as well as five other persons detained “during the same special operation of 30 June 2001” in Kurchaloy, had been involved in illegal armed groups.
On 7 June 2004 the military prosecutor’s office of military unit no. 20102 denied the involvement of servicemen in the abduction.
On 20 June 2004 the military prosecutor’s office of the North Caucasus military command informed the applicants of the following:
“During the investigation of criminal case no. 14/00/0020-01D ..., it has been established that Mr Moul Usumov was among the persons arrested by servicemen of the first united squadron (первый сводный отряд) on suspicion of involvement in illegal armed groups. The servicemen took the arrested men in APCs to a heliport, and then they took them by helicopter to the squadron’s premises in the Novogroznenskiy settlement. The servicemen then placed the arrested men in an empty engineering warehouse and kept them there until 15-17 July 2001. Since the arrested men’s involvement in illegal armed groups had not been confirmed, between 15 and 17 July 2001 they were released and driven to the Gudermes district. All the arrested men, except Mr Moul Usumov, returned home. Although it was confirmed that the federal servicemen had released Mr Moul Usumov, it has been impossible to establish his whereabouts. On 8 July 2002 the criminal investigation opened in connection with the abduction of the Kurchaloy residents was terminated on the grounds of the death of the suspect ...”
From the documents submitted it appears that no investigative steps were taken in the criminal case between July 2004 and December 2008. Meanwhile, on 3 November 2006, 3 March 2008, 20 August 2008 and 1 November 2008 the first applicant wrote to the Kurchaloy district prosecutor’s office and the military prosecutor’s office of military unit no. 20102, asking them to inform her of the progress of the investigation and grant her victim status in the criminal case.
On 27 January 2009 the investigation in case no. 14/00/002001D in connection with Mr Moul Usumov’s abduction was resumed. On an unspecified date in 2009 the first applicant was granted victim status.
On 2 March 2009 the investigations committee of the Prosecutor General’s office at the Znamenskiy Garrison of the Strategic Missile Troops (Ракетные войска стратегического назначения) suspended the investigation in case no. 34/33/040601D and discontinued the part of the criminal proceedings concerning the involvement of officer Mr Yu.K.. In so far as relevant, the decision stated as follows:
“On 30 June 2001, as a result of a special operation conducted by servicemen of the Kurchaloy military commander’s office under the supervision of Colonel V.I. Pelishchenko, servicemen arrested Mr Moul Usumov [and seven other men] and took them to the premises of the first united squadron stationed at military unit no. 12106 in Novogroznenskiy. Following the orders of Mr Yu.K., the squadron commander, and Mr V.M., the deputy commander of the United Group Alignment (“the UGA”) for special operations, the servicemen placed the arrested men in pits. Mr Yu.K. cannot be held responsible ... since he acted on the orders of Mr V.M. and in the context of counter-terrorist operations in the North Caucasus aimed at the identification of members of illegal armed groups which were conducted by power structures legally authorised to carry out investigative search measures in Chechnya, namely the Special Early Response Unit (Специальный отряд быстрого реагирования, СОБР) of the East-Siberian Anti-Organised Crime Department (РУБОП) and the special purpose unit of the Federal Service for the Execution of Sentences (ГУИН) at the Ministry of Justice. Moreover, on 9 July 2002 the criminal proceedings brought against Mr V.M. on suspicion of abuse of authority ... were terminated for lack of corpus delicti.”
On 2 March and 3 April 2009 the investigator informed the applicants of the decision of 2 March 2009.
The criminal proceedings are still pending.
The applicant is Mr Ovkhad Tamayev, who was born in 1940 and lives in Roshni-Chu, UrusMartan District, the Chechen Republic. He is represented before the Court by Mr Suleyman Visengereyev, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
The applicant is the father of Mr Akhdan Tamayev, who was born in 1972.
At the material time Mr Akhdan Tamayev lived with his family and the applicant in the settlement of Roshni-Chu. The settlement was under curfew. According to the documents he submitted, between 4 and 6 January 2001 Russian servicemen conducted a sweeping-up operation in RoshniChu. The operation’s head office was stationed on the outskirts of the settlement.
On 6 January 2001, at around 9 a.m., the applicant went to the local administration, taking Mr Akhdan Tamayev’s passport with him. Meanwhile, a group of servicemen arrived at the applicant’s house and took Mr Akhdan Tamayev with them because he had failed to show his passport. They put him in a GAZ-66 lorry and drove to the outskirts of Roshni Chu.
The abduction took place in the presence of Mr Akhdan Tamayev’s wife, who immediately ran to the local administration, where she found the applicant and told him about the events. When the applicant returned home, Akhdan was not there. The house was surrounded by servicemen armed with machine guns, accompanied by the head of the administration, Mr Mamatsuyev. A serviceman took Mr Akhdan Tamayev’s passport and assured the applicant that his son would soon be released. Shortly thereafter, Mr G. Gadzhiyev, the military commander for the Urus-Martan district, and Mr Z. Kuryayev, the head of the Urus-Martan ROVD, arrived at the scene. They informed the applicant that Mr Akhdan Tamayev would be taken to the ROVD for an identity check and then released.
On the same day, the servicemen arrested two other residents, the brothers Mr Muslim Movkayev and Mr Alikhan Movkayev. After their release that evening, the brothers informed the applicant that Mr Akhdan Tamayev had been arrested with them. The servicemen had taken the three men to the town’s outskirts in the GAZ-66 lorry, kept them there until 5 p.m. and then taken them to the ROVD. At around 6 p.m. Mr Muslim Movkayev and Mr Alikhan Movhad been released, but Mr Akhdan Tamayev had remained at the police station.
On 7 January 2001 Mr Mamatsuyev told the applicant that he had gone to the ROVD, where he had been promised that Mr Akhdan Tamayev would be released at 10 a.m. on that day. However, he was not released.
On 5 February 2001 the applicant went to the police station. An officer informed him that Mr Akhdan Tamayev’s detention there had been officially registered and that he had been transferred to a department of the FSB.
The applicant has not seen Mr Akhdan Tamayev since 6 January 2001.
Between 27 January and 15 February 2001, in April 2001 and between 23 July and 7 August 2003, the investigators questioned the applicant, Mr Akhdan Tamayev’s wife, Mr Muslim Movkayev and Mr Alikhan Movkayev, five neighbours and relatives, and six officers, namely Mr A.K., a police officer, officers V.N. and N.Su. of the Penza ROVD who were at the material time working at the Urus-Martan ROVD, Mr T., Mr Kuryayev who was the head of the police, and Mr Mamatsuyev. All the witnesses corroborated the applicant’s version of the events.
In particular, when questioned, the six officers acknowledged that Russian servicemen had conducted a sweeping-up operation on 6 January 2001. According to Mr Kuryayev, Colonel L. had been in charge of the operation. As a result of the operation three men had been taken to the ROVD but their detention had not been officially registered. After a call from the Urus-Martan FSB at around 5 p.m., four or five FSB officers had come to take Mr Akhdan Tamayev with them. The other two detainees had been released.
On 10, 12, 15, 22, 25 and 26 January 2001 the applicant and his wife complained to various law-enforcement agencies about the abduction.
On 27 January 2001 the Urus-Martan district prosecutor’s office opened criminal case no. 25014.
On 5 March 2001 the district prosecutor’s office decided to transfer the investigation to a military prosecutor’s office, given that servicemen had been involved in the abduction. Referring to witness statements, the decision stated that Mr Akhdan Tamayev had been arrested during a sweeping-up operation, and taken to the police station and then to the FSB.
On 24 March 2001 the military prosecutor’s office of military unit no. 20102 took over the investigation, assigning number 14/33/0168-01-D to the case file.
On 9 April 2001 the FSB military counter-intelligence unit of the North Caucasus Circuit denied having any information about Mr Akhdan Tamayev’s arrest and reported that their forces had not participated in the special operation of 6 January 2001.
On 27 April 2001 the investigation was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators. The applicant was not informed thereof.
On 27 June 2001 the military prosecutor’s office of the North Caucasus military command transferred the investigation back to the district prosecutor’s office, as the involvement of FSB servicemen in the abduction had not been confirmed.
On 29 December 2001 the district prosecutor’s office took over and resumed the investigation.
On 6 January 2002 the Urus-Martan ROVD reported to the investigators that they had no information as to the identity of the servicemen who had been on duty at the ROVD on 6 January 2001, and that it was impossible to establish their whereabouts.
On 29 January 2002 the district prosecutor’s office refused to initiate criminal proceedings against the ROVD officers in connection with Mr Akhdan Tamayev’s abduction, as they had been “acting within the scope of their duties” in handing him over to the FSB officers. On the same date, the investigation was suspended. The applicant was not informed thereof.
Since that time the investigation has been resumed and suspended on numerous occasions. On several occasions supervising prosecutors criticised the progress of the proceedings, ordering the investigators to take a number of basic steps, such as questioning the ROVD officers, checking the reasons for the officials’ failure to register Mr Akhdan Tamayev’s detention at the police station, and verifying the theory of the involvement of FSB officers in the abduction. In particular, on 2 August 2004 the district prosecutor wrote to the Chief Military Prosecutor asking him to take disciplinary measures in respect of the military prosecutor of military unit no. 20102, who had failed to comply with his numerous requests to assist the investigation. The applicant was not informed as to the progress of the criminal proceedings.
On 9 and 23 August 2005 and 23 December 2006 the Urus-Martan district FSB denied having any knowledge of Mr Akhdan Tamayev’s arrest or his involvement in illegal armed groups, or any information as to the identity of the district FSB officers who had been on duty on 6 January 2001.
On 31 August 2006 the applicant’s wife, Ms A.T., requested that the investigators provide her with an update on the criminal proceedings. In reply, on 11 October 2006 the investigators informed the applicant and his wife that a search for their son, as well as a search for the perpetrators, was in progress.
On 11 and 26 August 2009 the applicant requested information on the progress of the investigation, asked to be granted victim status and requested permission to familiarise himself with the witness statements in the investigation file. On 26 August 2009 his request was granted and he was allowed to access certain documents from the investigation file.
On 12 September 2009 the investigation was suspended again. It is still pending.
The applicants are:
(1) Mr Vakhita Ibragimov, who was born in 1960,
(2) Mr Ilyas Ibragimov, who was born in 1984,
(3) Ms Satsita Sakhabova, who was born in 1963,
(4) Ms Toita Sadulayeva, who was born in 1935,
(5) Ms Zara Aduzova, who was born in 1976,
(6) Mr Umar Sadulayev, who was born in 2002, and
(7) Mr Abdul-Vakhid Sadulayev who was born in 1957.
The first, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth applicants live in Shali, Shali district, the Chechen Republic. The seventh applicant lives in Grozny, the Chechen Republic. The applicants are represented before the Court by lawyers from SRJI/Astreya.
The first and third applicants are the parents of Mr Islam Ibragimov, who was born in 1982; the second applicant is his brother. The fourth applicant is the mother of Mr Apti Sadulayev, who was born in 1976; the fifth applicant is his wife, the sixth applicant is his son and the seventh applicant is his brother.
At the material time Mr Islam Ibragimov and Mr Apti Sadulayev resided in two neighbouring houses in Shali with the applicants and their respective families.
On 17 January 2003, at 4 a.m., a group of armed and masked servicemen arrived at the applicants’ homes in seven APCs with obscured registration plates. They burst into the two houses, ordered everyone in unaccented Russian to lie down on the floor, and checked the identity documents of Mr Islam Ibragimov, Mr Apti Sadulayev and the first applicant. Then the servicemen took them outside, along with the second applicant and Mr Apti Sadulayev’s cousin, Mr Rashid Sadulayev, forced them into an APC, pulling their T-shirts over their heads, and drove away. Three wooden ammunition boxes dropped off one of the APCs. One of the servicemen told the third applicant to look for their relatives at the ROVD. After the abductors’ departure the applicants found, along with the ammunition boxes, several pieces of fog light glass from one of the APCs.
At first, Mr Islam Ibragimov and the first and second applicants were placed in the same APC, together with Mr Apti Sadulayev and Mr Rashid Sadulayev. After about twenty-five minutes the servicemen pulled over, took the arrested men outside, made them lie down on the ground, then put them back in the APC, save for the second applicant, who was put in another APC, which continued to drive. The servicemen drove the second applicant to Tsotsy-Yurt (also spelled as Tsotsan-Yurt) and released him. As to the other four arrested men, their APC pulled over again and the men were put on the ground, asked to say their names and then placed in a wagon. Forty minutes later the servicemen put Mr Rashid Sadulayev and the first applicant in a Ural lorry and drove away. After about thirty minutes the two men arrived at a garage-like building where they were kept until 18 January 2003. According to the applicants, the two men must have been detained in a windmill in Staryie Atagi, which was used as a filtering point by Russian servicemen (see the case of Arzu Akhmadova and Others v. Russia, no. 13670/03, § 195, 8 January 2009 concerning detention in the mill). After that, the men were taken in an APC to the vicinity of the town of Argun and released.
In the days following the abduction, the applicants and their relatives and neighbours contacted various authorities. In particular, in Khankala the applicants’ relative Mr Khasin Abkayev met with Generals Said-Selim Tsuyev and Ibragim Suleymanov, both of whom promised their assistance in the release of the abducted men, and Generals Abrashin and Pospelov, who said that the matter was not within their competence. Further, another of the applicants’ relatives, Mr Bachal Baysuyev, talked to the Chechen President Akhmed-Khadzhi Kadyrov and to General Makarov, both of whom promised to help solve the matter within a week but failed to do so. According to officials, a criminal investigation had been opened against Mr Islam Ibragimov and Mr Apti Sadulayev and both of them were being questioned by the prosecuting authorities. Mr Fedorov, the Shali military commander, confirmed this on local television, adding that they were safe and sound. The applicants did not manage to obtain a recording of the television programme.
The applicants have not seen Mr Islam Ibragimov or Mr Apti Sadulayev since 17 January 2003.
On 30 January 2003 the investigators questioned the second applicant, who provided a detailed description of the abduction. In particular, he stated that he had been abducted along with a number of his relatives, taken away in an APC and then released near to Tsotsi-Yurt.
On the same date, the investigators granted the fourth applicant victim status and questioned her. She described in detail the circumstances of her son’s abduction. In particular, she stated that the abductors had taken her son away in an APC and that a number of other local residents had been abducted by the same group on the same night.
On 31 January 2003 the investigators granted victim status to the first applicant and questioned him. He provided a detailed description of the abduction. In particular, he stated that he had been placed in the same APC as his two sons, Mr Islam Ibragimov and Mr Ilyas Ibragimov, and that he had been taken to a building where he had spent about twenty-four hours, with his t-shirt pulled over his head and next to Mr Rashid Sadulayev, whom he had been able to identify by his voice. Both of them had been released somewhere near to Argun.
On 21 October 2006 the investigators again questioned the first applicant, who described in detail the circumstances surrounding the abduction. In particular, he stated that at first he had been taken by the abductors to the premises of checkpoint no. 112 manned by a Special Police Task Force from the Primorskiy region, and then to a garage for more than one day, where he had been handcuffed and questioned about members of illegal armed groups.
On various dates in October 2006 the investigators questioned five of the applicants’ relatives, who gave statements similar to the ones given by the applicants in 2003.
On an unspecified date the head of the Shali district administration stated that Mr Islam Ibragimov and Mr Apti Sadulayev had been “driven away in the direction of Khankala by unidentified servicemen in seven APCs, a UAZ car and other vehicles”.
On 17 January 2003 investigators from the Shali district prosecutor’s office (“the district prosecutor’s office”) examined the crime scene, questioned the eyewitnesses and collected the three wooden ammunition boxes and the pieces of fog light glass left behind by the perpetrators. The applicants believed that an expert evaluation would enable the identification of the power structure to which the servicemen and their vehicles belonged. No such evaluation was ordered or carried out.
On 27 January 2003 the district prosecutor’s office opened criminal case no. 22017 in connection with the abduction of Mr Islam Ibragimov and Mr Apti Sadulayev “by federal forces servicemen who were armed with machine guns”. On 30 and 31 January 2003 respectively the fourth and the first applicants were granted victim status.
On 22 April 2004 the military prosecutor’s office of military unit no. 20116 informed the applicants that no servicemen under their supervision had either conducted special operations or arrested or taken anyone to a law-enforcement agency.
On 4 September 2003 the first and fourth applicants wrote to the investigation team stating that they had been informed by the Shali military commander, who had himself been informed by General Pospelov, that after the abduction their sons had been taken to the headquarters of the Russian federal forces in Khankala, Chechnya. At some later point General Pospelov denied having provided that information to the Shali military commander and told the applicants that the information “was not verified”. The investigators took no further steps to verify that information.
On 2 November 2006 the Shali ROVD informed the applicants that they were taking a number of investigative steps, including forwarding information requests to power structures in Chechnya, examining unidentified bodies against the ROVD’s databases and checking the details of admissions to hospitals in the Shali district.
The investigation was suspended and resumed on several occasions, without producing any tangible results. The last suspension took place on 22 October 2006. The applicants were not informed thereof.
On 9 October 2008 the first and the fourth applicants requested permission to access the investigation file. On 18 October and 21 November 2008 respectively the request was granted in part and they were allowed to make copies of the decisions opening and suspending the criminal investigation and granting victim status.
On an unspecified date in September 2009 the first applicant again requested permission to access the investigation file, but to no avail.
On 26 January 2010 the applicants’ representatives wrote to the investigator, asking him to inform them of the progress of the investigation. No reply was given.
On 20 March 2010 the applicants were informed that the Chechnya Investigations Committee had taken over the investigation of the criminal case.
The criminal proceedings are still pending.
The applicants are Ms Malkan Anayeva, who was born in 1959, and Ms Rayana Elmurzayeva, who was born in 2002. They live in Stariye Atagi, Grozny district, the Chechen Republic. They are represented before the Court by lawyers from SRJI/Astreya.
The first applicant is the mother of Mr Ziyavdi (also referred to as Ziyavdin) Elmurzayev, who was born in 1979; the second applicant is his daughter.
At the material time the applicants resided in Stariye Atagi with their family, including Mr Ziyavdi Elmurzayev and Mr Zayndi Elmurzayev, the first applicant’s husband.
On 21 April 2002, at around 7.30 a.m., a group of about fifty or sixty armed servicemen in camouflage uniforms arrived at the applicants’ house in APC no. 422 BB and two armoured infantry combat vehicles nos. 344 and 346. They were of Slavic appearance and spoke unaccented Russian. The servicemen broke into the house, arrested Mr Ziyavdi Elmurzayev and Mr Zayndi Elmurzayev, dragged them outside, put them in the APC and departed towards the outskirts of Stariye Atagi. After about a hundred metres they had to let Mr Zayndi Elmurzayev go as he was having a stroke. Then the servicemen continued driving until they arrived at a windmill on the outskirts of Stariye Atagi where a Russian military unit was stationed.
The applicants and their relatives and neighbours followed the servicemen. When they approached the windmill, they saw the three abductors’ vehicles parked on the premises of the military unit. When the servicemen’s noticed the visitors they obscured the registration plates with mud. The deputy head of the Stariye Atagi administration was refused permission to enter the premises.
At around 3 p.m. on the same day servicemen left the military unit in two APCs, one of which had registration number 422 BB, a white VAZ2106 car and a khaki UAZ “tabletka” minivan with blackened windows. They drove in the direction of Grozny. The applicants have not seen Mr Ziyavdi Elmurzayev since his abduction on 21 April 2002.
On 30 April 2002 the investigators questioned the first applicant and her husband Mr Zayndi Elmurzayev, both of whom provided a detailed description of the abduction similar to the one furnished to the Court. In particular, they stated that the abductors had ordered the head of the village administration to come to the local police station to pick up Mr Ziyavdi Elmurzayev, and that the abductors had taken their son away in an APC registration number 422 BB and two armoured infantry combat vehicles nos. 344 and 346.
On 2 May 2002 the investigators questioned the applicant’s relative Mr A.E., whose statement concerning the abduction was similar to the one given by the first applicant and her husband. In addition, he stated that when he had arrived at the police station with the relatives and the head of the administration, Mr Ziyavdi Elmurzayev had not been there. On 26 April 2002 he had spoken with the local journalist Mr R.T., who had given him a copy of a report by the regional headquarters of the counter-terrorist operation in the North Caucasus covering 21 and 22 April 2002. The witness furnished the investigators with the document; its text included the following:
“An active member of illegal armed groups, Mr Ziyavdi Elmurzayev (call name “Bayram”) was eliminated resisting [arrest]. According to the available information, he was a member of the illegal armed unit of Mr M. Sadayev, which belonged to the illegal armed group of Khattab”.
On 15 January 2007 the investigators questioned the applicants’ neighbours, Ms L.B. and Mr M.B., both of whom stated that they had learnt in 2002 of Mr Ziyavdi Elmurzayev’s abduction by federal servicemen from fellow villagers, and that prior to the abduction Mr Ziyavdi Elmurzayev had been suspected of illegal activities.
On 29 April 2002 the Grozny district prosecutor’s office opened criminal case no. 56060.
On 30 April 2002 the investigation requested that the military authorities inform them of any special operations conducted on 21 April 2002 in Stariye Atagi. According to the replies, no such operations were carried out.
On 22 June 2002 the FSB denied the involvement of Chechnya FSB officers in the abduction.
On 29 June 2002 the investigation of the criminal case was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators. The applicants were not informed thereof.
By a letter of 13 July 2002 the head of the criminal investigations department at the Chechnya Prosecutor’s Office informed the applicants that Mr Ziyavdi Elmurzayev was alive and was serving a sentence. However, at some later point an officer from the prosecutor’s office told the applicants that the letter had been sent to them by mistake. The applicants did not keep a copy of the letter.
On 23 July 2002 the district prosecutor’s office stated that “... Mr Ziyavdi Elmurzayev was abducted by federal servicemen, who put him in APC no. 422 BB, and, accompanied by two infantry combat vehicles, nos. 344 and 346, took him to the windmill near to Stariye Atagi. After that, the same servicemen departed in the direction of Grozny in two APCs, one of which was APC no. 442, a white VAZ-2106 and a khaki UAZ “tabletka”.
On 30 April 2003 the investigation of the criminal case was resumed. The applicants were informed thereof on 25 May 2003.
On 20 June 2003 the investigation was again suspended. The applicants were informed that the investigation had been suspended but the police were taking operational search measures to identify the perpetrators. It appears that no investigative steps were taken until 18 December 2006, when the investigation was resumed and the applicants were informed thereof.
On 12 January 2007 the first applicant’s husband was granted victim status in the criminal case.
On 18 January 2007 the investigation of the criminal case was again suspended and the applicants were informed thereof.
In the autumn of 2007 the Grozny Investigations Department took over the investigation. The applicants were informed thereof on 17 March 2010.
The criminal proceedings are still pending.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and practice and for international and domestic reports on disappearances in Chechnya and Ingushetia, see Aslakhanova and Others v. Russia, (nos. 2944/06, 8300/07, 50184/07, 332/08 and 42509/10, §§ 4359 and §§ 69-84, 18 December 2012).