The case originated in an application (no. 13363/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Khasan Tsoroyev (“the applicant”), on 22 January 2011.
The applicant was represented by lawyers from EHRAC/Memorial Human Rights Centre, a non-governmental organisation with offices in Russia and the United Kingdom. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 6 March 2013 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Ordzhenikidzevskaya, Ingushetia. He is the father of Mr Beslan Tsoroyev, who was born in 1985. At the material time Beslan Tsoroyev worked at the local furniture factory.
At about 7.15 a.m. on 7 December 2009 the applicant’s house was surrounded by agents of the Federal Security Service (FSB) (Федеральная служба безопасности). The applicant was at home with his wife Ms A. and his son Beslan Tsoroyev. They were ordered to go outside. In the street, they saw around 200 armed FSB servicemen in balaclavas and camouflage uniforms, three armoured personnel carriers (“APCs”), three minivans, and one off-road vehicle. The street was cordoned off.
The FSB agents announced through a loudspeaker that they had arrived for an identity check, and requested that all residents come out onto the street with their identity documents. The applicant went outside with the passports of his wife and son, and saw that they had been put next to the courtyard wall with their hands up and searched. Nothing was found on them.  The FSB officers then ordered the applicant to get his own passport from the house; the applicant went inside, then returned with his documents and joined his wife and son at the wall. The FSB officers then took Beslan Tsoroyev back inside the house, saying that they wanted him to show them additional documents.
Meanwhile, the applicant and his wife were taken to one of the minivans, where they were questioned by two FSB agents about their and their family members’ personal details and occupation.  About twenty minutes later another FSB agent took from the boot of the minivan two large boxes covered in camouflage fabric, a package, and two stretchers. After about one hour, the boxes were returned to the boot and the applicant and his wife were ordered to move to the back seat of the minivan. From the back seat, the applicant could see that the FSB agents were going into and coming out of the courtyard of his house.
The applicant was allowed to make phone calls. He used this opportunity to contact several persons, including his older brother, who soon arrived at the scene with Mr D. (the head of the local police department) and his deputy. They were not allowed to enter the cordonedoff area. For the duration of the operation, none of the residents in the neighbourhood were allowed to leave their houses.
At around 9 a.m. the FSB agents exited the applicant’s house and left the scene. The applicant went inside and saw the body of his son in a bedroom. An AK-47 machine gun was next to it.
One of the local police officers told the applicant and the head of the local police station Mr D. that according to the FSB agents, the applicant’s son had been asked to lift a sofa cushion in the context of an inspection, but he had pulled the machine gun out from under the sofa and fired a number of shots at the agents. Those agents had immediately shot back and killed him with three defensive shots to the head.
The body of the applicant’s son was taken to the morgue for examination. It was released to his relatives later on that day; in the evening the relatives buried Beslan Tsoroyev.
Investigation into the killing of Mr Beslan Tsoroyev
On 7 December 2009, shortly after the incident, the applicant complained to the police that his son had been unlawfully killed. Subsequently, the complaint was transferred to the Ingushetia prosecutor’s office, in accordance with the rules on jurisdiction.
On 7 December 2009 the police took a statement from the applicant in relation to the incident. According to him, the search of his house had not been authorised, as no one had shown him a search warrant and the FSB agents had come on the pretext of carrying out an identity check. He and his wife had been asked to give statements in a van parked nearby, where they had remained for about two hours. After that, he had found out that his son had been killed during the house search. He had never seen a firearm in his son’s possession.
On the same day, 7 December 2009, the police interviewed the applicant’s brother, Mr A.Ts., who stated that he had learnt from the applicant that his family’s house had been searched by FSB agents who had made the applicant and his wife leave the house and had then taken Beslan Tsoroyev to one of the rooms and shot him there.
On 7 December 2009 the investigators examined the body of Beslan Tsoroyev at the crime scene in the presence of two attesting witnesses, Mr T. and Mr B., and a forensic expert, Mr M. According to their report of the same date, there were bullet holes in Beslan Tsoroyev’s head: one in the back of the head measuring 1 by 0.7 cm, one on the left cheek measuring 1.5 by 1 cm, one on the lower right jaw measuring 3 by 1 cm, and one in the right temple. No traces of gunshot wounds were found on the other parts of the body. No swabs for gunshot residue were taken from the hands.
The documents submitted indicate that a crime-scene inspection was carried out on 7 December 2009, which established that the machine gun had been found on the left side of Beslan Tsoroyev’s body. The chamber of the machine gun contained four 5.45 mm calibre bullets. On the floor of the room a specific number of casings were found – some of them were 5.45 mm calibre, some were 7.62 mm calibre (those in the body of the sofa), and some were 9 mm calibre. No damage to the walls, furniture or other items in the room as a result of the exchange of gunfire was noted. The documents submitted indicate that no expert examination of the casings collected was commissioned, nor were fingerprints taken from the machine gun.
On 7 January 2010 the Sunzhenskiy district prosecutor’s office (“the investigators”) refused to initiate a criminal investigation into the applicant’s complaint of the unlawful killing of his son, as it had been concluded that Beslan Tsoroyev had died as a result of the FSB officers returning fire during his attempt to kill them. No copy of that decision was provided to either the applicant or the Court.
On 3 February 2010 the above decision was overruled by the investigators’ superiors and a further inquiry was ordered. The applicant was informed of that on 1 March 2010.
The documents submitted indicate that the inquiry ordered on 3 February 2010 did not lead to the opening of a criminal case concerning the killing of the applicant’s son. It is unclear whether any procedural decision was issued in that regard. The applicant was not informed of the outcome of that inquiry.
On 9 September 2013, along with his comments on the Government’s observations on the admissibility and merits of the application, the applicant submitted a statement by Mr J.B., who had been the applicant’s neighbour at the material time and had witnessed the incident. According to Mr J.B., on the morning of 9 December 2009 he had been leaving his house when he had been stopped at the gate by officers who had pointed their guns at him and ordered him to go back inside. He had obeyed and gone inside. From the window of his house, which was about fifteen to seventeen metres from the applicant’s house, he had seen the applicant and his wife being taken to a van by officers, and Beslan Tsoroyev standing near the wall holding a passport in his hand. He had been surrounded by many armed officers who had been talking to him about something. A few minutes later, the officers had put black handcuffs on Beslan Tsoroyev and, pushing him from behind, had taken him into the courtyard and out of Mr J.B.’s sight. After that, about five minutes later, Mr J.B. had heard gunfire from a machine gun. Then, after a while, he had seen the officers carry boxes and a stretcher into the applicant’s courtyard.
On 8 December 2009 the applicant complained to the Military Investigations Department of Military Division No. 68799 (“the military investigators”) that his son had been unlawfully killed, as in accordance with the rules on jurisdiction, crimes involving FSB agents were investigated by the military prosecutor’s office.
On 8 December 2009 the anti-banditry unit of the Ingushetia FSB (ЗКС и БТ УФСБ РФ по Республике Ингушетия) informed the military investigators that according to their operational information, Beslan Tsoroyev had been:
“the leader of an organised gang, under whose leadership the bombing of a car on 27 November 2009 and the bombing of shop in Ordzhenikidzevskaya on 2 December 2009 had been organised. [In connection with that,] on 7 December 2009 an identity check had been carried out during which B. Tsoroyev had offered resistance and sustained fatal injuries.”
The documents submitted indicate that on an unspecified date in December 2009 the military investigators commissioned an expert examination of the AK-47 machine gun with which Beslan Tsoroyev had allegedly opened fire on the FSB officers. According to the conclusions of that examination, the machine gun had the serial number 2726801985 and was in working condition. It appears that no analysis of the fingerprints left on the machine gun was either ordered or carried out.
On 11 December 2009 the military investigators refused to initiate a criminal investigation into the killing of Beslan Tsoroyev, for lack of corpus delicti in the actions of the FSB officers who had shot him – Mr P. and Mr A. It appears that the decision was based on statements given by the FSB officers and material taken from the preliminary inquiry carried out by the Sunzhenskiy district prosecutor’s office (see paragraphs 13-18 above).
The decision not to initiate a criminal investigation (“the refusal”) referred in detail to the almost verbatim statements of the FSB officers who were implicated: Mr P., Mr A. and their colleague Mr S., who had been present in the room when Beslan Tsoroyev had allegedly opened fire. According to the officers, they had been armed with pistols and automatic 9 mm calibre pistols. During the search of the room, Beslan Tsoroyev had lifted one side of the sofa and “with one hand, [had] managed to pull out an AK machine gun and, having aimed at the FSB officers, [had] fired at least ten shots in a burst of gunfire”. According to the officers, “one of the bullets” had hit the protective armoured shield of one of the officers, and the officer had hid behind it while the two others had opened fire on Beslan Tsoroyev and killed him. The officers did not specify how many shots each of them had fired, or whose bullets had hit Beslan Tsoroyev and killed him. The officers stated that they had neither planted the AK machine gun next to his body nor staged the shooting to cover up his alleged execution. According to them, the lethal force had been used to protect themselves against his unlawful actions.
Without specifying what their statements said, the refusal also briefly mentioned that the following individuals had given statements in the context of the inquiry: the chief of the FSB group, Colonel K.; the head of the support group, Officer Pe.; and a medical professional, Mr V. The refusal also mentioned that the protective armoured shield referred to by the officers had been inspected, and it had been concluded that the shield had indeed been hit by a bullet. Lastly, the refusal also mentioned, in general terms, the statements of the applicant and his brother given on 7 December 2009 (see paragraphs 13-14 above).The applicant was informed of the refusal on 3 February 2010.
On 27 February 2010 the applicant appealed against the refusal to the Nalchik Garrison Military Court (“the Military Court”), and requested that the shortcomings of the inquiry be remedied by the opening of a fullyfledged criminal investigation into his son’s killing. He stated, in particular, that his son had not had any criminal record, had been a lawabiding citizen, and had never been sought or wanted by the authorities. There had been no explanation for the FSB’s unlawful search of the applicant’s house, a search during which Beslan Tsoroyev had been executed by FSB agents who had shot him in the head three times. He stressed that the preliminary inquiry carried out by the military investigators had limited itself to questioning the officers implicated in the incident, and that the officers had come to their house on the pretext of carrying out an identity check, whereas they had planned an unlawful search and his son’s execution. For some reason, the investigators had failed to explain why Beslan Tsoroyev had come out of the house with his hands up and only after he had gone back inside for additional documents had he allegedly decided to open fire on the officers. The applicant stressed that the unlawful refusal to initiate a fully-fledged criminal investigation had deprived him of his victim status, which he would have had if a criminal case had been opened. The lack of such status precluded him from having access to the investigation, and therefore from properly appealing to a court against actions or decisions of the investigators.
On 12 April 2010, the Military Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint as unsubstantiated and upheld the refusal by stating, in particular, as follows:
“... the conclusion of the investigator Ib. concerning the lack of corpus delicti in the actions of the FSB officers P. and A. is based on the material of the preliminary inquiry and explanations given by the eyewitnesses to the death of Beslan Tsoroyev, and therefore cannot be deemed to be unsubstantiated.
There were no procedural violations, therefore in that regard the lawfulness of the refusal cannot be questioned.
Therefore, the court concludes that there are no grounds for granting the appeal of [the applicant] Mr Kh. Tsoroyev and declaring the impugned refusal unlawful and unsubstantiated.”
The applicant appealed against the above decision to the North Caucasus Military Circuit Court (“the Military Circuit Court”), stating, amongst other things, that the decision had failed to examine his allegations that the refusal had been based on the statements of the implicated FSB officers and that the military investigators had failed to take steps to examine the evidence objectively. Furthermore, the investigators had failed to establish the reasons for the unlawful search of his house and the grounds for the allegations about his son’s alleged illegal activities.
On 22 July 2010 the Military Circuit Court upheld the decision of 12 April 2010 and dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
The Government did not dispute the circumstances of the case as submitted by the applicant.
In reply to the Court’s request for a copy of the entire contents of the files relating to the pre-investigation inquiries opened into the death of Beslan Tsoroyev, the Government provided some of the documents – seventy-nine pages. As for the rest of the documents which had been requested, they stated that those documents could not be provided, as they were “documents which contain[ed] [the] personal data of the servicemen [who had] participated in the counterterrorism operations i.e. the data comprising the State secret”.
For a summary of relevant domestic law, see Dalakov v. Russia, no. 35152/09, §§ 51-53, 16 February 2016.