The case concerns allegations that the applicant’s life was put at risk by medical personnel from the ambulance service and hospitals, who refused to administer his insulin treatment despite his precarious condition. It also concerns allegations that the applicant was unlawfully deprived of his liberty when he was taken against his will to hospital for testing, in disregard of his actual medical condition.
The applicant was born in 1982 and lives in Timişoara. He was represented by Ms R. Bercea, a lawyer practising in Timişoara.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms O.F. Ezer, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant has been insulin-dependent since 1996 when he was first diagnosed with type-1 diabetes, and, on those grounds, has been in receipt of disability benefits.
While at home on 30 March 2017, the applicant was feeling ill – he had already been taking medication for a cold for ten days, but his state was not improving. He phoned his diabetologist, C.H., who advised him to go to the pharmacy and told him what to buy. At about 11 a.m. he went to the closest pharmacy, some 200 meters from his home. On arrival he had to sit down as he was feeling weak. He explained his situation to the pharmacist and she called an ambulance to help him.
An ambulance arrived at around noon. The paramedic team consisted of two nurses: M.G. and M.E., a medical student who was working as a volunteer, A., and their driver, B. M.G. suspected that the applicant had taken drugs and confronted him. The applicant denied having taken drugs and informed the paramedics about his medical condition. A blood test performed in the ambulance confirmed an imbalance in the applicant’s glucose level. As there was no insulin available in the ambulance, the applicant asked the paramedics to help him walk home to take his treatment. They refused and allegedly told him that they would first take him to hospital to check what prohibited drugs he had taken, and only after that would he receive insulin.
The applicant called the emergency number again, but was refused assistance when he told the call centre that an ambulance was already present on the spot.
The applicant refused to be taken to the hospital. According to him, the paramedics then closed the ambulance door and restrained him on a stretcher. M.E., who was standing outside the ambulance, called the police for help. In the commotion, the applicant managed to alert his wife.
When two police officers arrived, the applicant told them that he needed to take his insulin from his home and reiterated that he was not under the influence of drugs. He asked the police officers to accompany him to his home. They refused, but assured him that he would get his insulin at the hospital. They accompanied the ambulance to the Timişoara municipal hospital (hereinafter “the TMH”).
When he arrived at the TMH, the applicant told O.T., the doctor on duty, that he had diabetes and needed to take his insulin. The ambulance paramedics told the doctor that the applicant was on drugs. O.T. refused to administer the insulin, asking the applicant to take a blood test for prohibited drugs first. The applicant refused to take the test.
O.T. decided that the applicant’s state did not qualify for emergency treatment and sent him to the Timişoara psychiatric hospital (hereinafter “the TPH”). He was taken there by the same ambulance under the same police escort.
At the TPH the applicant was again restrained on a stretcher and the medical personnel tried to inject him with medication to calm him down. The applicant refused the medication and eventually managed to untie himself.
The applicant telephoned C.H., his diabetologist (see paragraph 5 above). When he told her about his situation, she tried to talk to the medical personnel in TPH, but they refused to take the call. C.H. phoned a nurse whom she knew was working in the same medical facility and asked her to explain the applicant’s situation to the medical team attending him.
Meanwhile, the applicant’s wife arrived at the hospital. She was informed that the applicant would be transferred to another psychiatric hospital, JH, outside town, where he would receive appropriate treatment for his drug addiction. Together with the nurse sent by the applicant’s diabetologist, she insisted that the applicant’s situation had been caused by his chronic disease and that he was not a drug addict.
Eventually, the applicant relented and accepted to be tested for drugs. To that end, he was taken back to the TMH by the same ambulance and police escort.
Back in the TMH, O.T. tested the applicant’s blood and confirmed that he had not taken any prohibited drugs. The applicant then received insulin, but in a dose that was different from his prescribed treatment. The blood test also revealed that the applicant was severely anaemic. Because of that, and since the applicant still had a fever, he was advised to go to the hospital for infectious diseases “VBT”. He refused to go by ambulance and left with his wife, stopping at his home to take his insulin, and then went to VBT where he received adequate treatment.
The TMH records stated that the applicant had been suffering from hypothermia, headache, bronchial asthma and anaemia, and was insulindependent.
The TPH records also indicated that the applicant had shown “psychomotor agitation with clear consciousness, hetero-aggressive verbal and physical behaviour, vindictive and oppositionist”. It stated that “the patient had been sent back to the [TMH] for medical tests and blood sugar rebalancing”.
According to the applicant, he remained under police custody for about six hours.
On 4 April 2017 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint against the four members of the ambulance team (see paragraph 6 above) who, in his view, had withheld medical treatment on 30 March 2017, thus putting his life in danger. He described in great detail the sequence of events of 30 March 2017 (see paragraphs 5 to 16 above) and explained how his life had been put at risk.
On 18 April 2017, police officer E.P. called the applicant to give a statement. According to the applicant, E.P. advised him to withdraw his complaint on the grounds that the acts allegedly committed by the paramedics did not constitute crimes. She also allegedly pointed out that the applicant would not be able to produce evidence to support his assertions. The applicant refused to withdraw his complaint and insisted that the police take his statement.
On 16 May 2017 the applicant was fined by the police for verbal abuse against the ambulance service team on 30 March 2017. On 13 October 2017, following an objection lodged by the applicant, the Timişoara District Court annulled the police report on the grounds that the acts allegedly committed by the applicant had not been proved (netemeinicia faptei). Consequently, the fine was cancelled.
The applicant complained about E.P.’s behaviour during the investigation. His complaint was examined together with his initial complaint against the ambulance team (see paragraph 20 above).
On 19 June 2017 C.H. gave an out-of-court statement describing the applicant’s medical history and the events of 30 March 2017. According to the applicant, her statement was not taken into account in the investigation. C.H. explained that the applicant attended regular medical check-ups for his disease, was aware of his condition and was able to detect and correct signs of blood sugar imbalance. He followed an intensive treatment scheme, with three doses of insulin during the day and another one in the evening. He had experienced one low-blood-glucose diabetic coma in 1996, two months after his initial diagnosis.
C.H. described as follows the events of 30 March 2017:
“On 30 March 2017, at about noon, while I was seeing patients in my surgery ... I was contacted by phone by the patient Mihai Aftanache. I should point out that all my patients have my phone number and I promptly answer, especially to those with type-1 diabetes, as is [the applicant]’s case. He was crying and was extremely agitated. ... He told me that he had been taken by force to the hospital and had not been allowed to take his insulin. I asked him where he was. I heard him over the phone asking: ‘police officer, police officer, where am I?’. He had to repeat his question several times before someone finally answered. He was eventually told that he was in the [TPH]. He told me that he had a fever and his blood sugar level was 300 mg/dl and that he was not allowed to take his insulin. I asked to talk on the phone with someone from the medical personnel, even shouted through the phone to make myself heard, but they all refused ...
Desperate, and as I was too far to reach the hospital on time, I called a nurse who works [in the same medical complex] and who is also a patient of mine ... and asked her to go to the psychiatric ward and explain that [the applicant] was diabetic and that most certainly his metabolism was unbalanced and he needed urgent treatment to rebalance his diabetes. Unfortunately [the nurse] ... could only arrive one hour later ...”
On 26 October 2017 the applicant was interviewed by the prosecutor’s office. The next day, he returned to the prosecutor’s office with a CD containing the recording of a telephone conversation he had had about the events of 30 March 2017 with one of the paramedics present during those events.
The prosecutor also interviewed E.P. (see paragraphs 21 and 23 above) and her office colleague. They both denied that any pressure had been put on the applicant during his interview of 18 April 2017.
M.E., one of the nurses of the ambulance team, declared that the applicant had not been abused by anyone. He had been verbally aggressive and agitated, and had refused treatment. Because of his behaviour, the police officers had had to handcuff him. She said that because of his aggressive behaviour and lack of cooperation, the doctor on duty in the TPH had decided to send him for confinement in JH, but that the applicant’s wife, who had meanwhile arrived at the hospital, had opposed the transfer. M.E. also alleged that throughout the incident, the applicant had refused to state his identity.
M.G., the other nurse of the ambulance team, declared that when the ambulance had arrived at the pharmacy they had found the applicant, who had told them that he was diabetic and was not feeling well. The team had dispensed medical care and had taken the decision to take the applicant to the TMH. At that moment, he had become uncooperative, and tried to stand up from the stretcher with the intention of hitting M.G. in the head. M.E. had then called the police for support. He claimed that the applicant had been aggressive in the hospitals as well.
A. and B., the other two members of the ambulance team (see paragraph 6 above), were also interviewed by the prosecutor. Their statements were similar to those given by M.E. and M.G.
The prosecutor’s office also received the TPH records (see paragraph 18 above) and the police report on the events of 30 March 2017, whereby it had been recorded that the applicant “[had been] aggressive and [had] refused a medical examination”.
On 22 May 2018 the prosecutor’s office decided to end the investigation (clasarea sesizării). In so far as E.P. was concerned, the prosecutor considered that the evidence did not support the applicant’s allegations. The prosecutor’s office reached the same conclusion concerning the allegations against the paramedics. The reasoning in this respect reads as follows:
“In the light of the above [reference to the description of the witness statements and medical evidence], the allegations about the ambulance team cannot be accepted, as they are not supported by evidence.”
On 9 July 2018, following an objection lodged by the applicant, that decision was upheld by the prosecutor-in-chief of the same prosecutor’s office. The applicant was also ordered to pay 50 Romanian lei (RON, approximately 10 euros (EUR) at that time) representing costs.
The applicant lodged a complaint with the Timişoara District Court against the decision of the prosecutor’s office of 9 July 2018 (see paragraph 33 above), arguing that the prosecutor had failed to investigate the case properly. In particular, no relevant evidence had been collected and the decision had been based exclusively on the statements made by the persons under investigation. He also complained that the medical evidence had been disregarded, even though it had proved without doubt that because of his medical condition at that time, he could not have been violent with the paramedics or the police. He appended to his request the statement made by his diabetologist (see paragraph 25 above). The applicant reiterated that, in his view, he had been the victim of aggravated deprivation of liberty and of attempted murder, the latter insofar as his life had been put in danger by the refusal to administer emergency medical treatment.
On 23 August 2018 the pre-trial judge of the Timişoara District Court upheld the prosecutor’s decision, holding that the evidence presented by the prosecutor had not supported the applicant’s allegations. The applicant was also ordered to pay RON 50 (approximately EUR 10 at that time) to the State, representing costs, and RON 500 (approximately EUR 100 at that time) to each of the five persons he had named in his complaint: the four members of the ambulance team and the police officer he had accused, representing their lawyers’ fees.
On 29 November 2018 the Timişoara Court of Appeal declared inadmissible an appeal lodged by the applicant as the decision in question was final and not amenable to appeal. The applicant was ordered to pay RON 100 (approximately EUR 20 at that time) to the State, representing costs, and RON 500 (approximately EUR 100) to each of the five accused persons, representing lawyer’s fees.
On 22 May 2017 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Directorate for Public Health of County Timiş. He reiterated his allegations of professional misconduct and violence at the hands of the medical professionals who had received him on 30 March 2017.
On 20 June 2017 the Directorate for Public Health informed the applicant that the medical records issued by the hospitals had not confirmed his allegations. It also informed him that his allegations concerning medical negligence had been forwarded to the Commission for Monitoring and Professional Competence.
On 3 July 2017 the Commission informed the applicant that he was required to pay RON 9,000 (approximately EUR 1,900 at that time) for experts’ fees. The fee was due within five working days.
The applicant could not afford to pay the fee, which exceeded his monthly income at the time (RON 375, approximately EUR 80, from disability benefits).
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure concerning the possibility of attaching a civil claim to a criminal complaint read as follows:
Article 20
“(1)  A victim may bring civil claims during criminal proceedings until the court has started hearing the case [cercetarea judecătorească]. The judicial authorities must inform the victim of this right.”
Article 376
“(1)  The court starts hearing the case when the case is ready for examination.”
Article 31 of the Police Act (Law 218/2002 on the organisation and functioning of the Romanian police) provides that police officers have, inter alia, a duty to:
“(b)  escort to the police station anyone who, by his or her actions, poses a danger to others, to public order or other social values, as well as anyone suspected of having committed a criminal act and whose identity could not be verified in accordance with the law; ... the situation of such a person must be verified and legal measures taken, if necessary, within twenty-four hours, as an administrative measure;”...
Non-voluntary confinement is provided for by the Mental Health Act (Law no. 487 of 11 July 2002 on mental health and the protection of people with mental disorders) published in Official Gazette no. 589 of 8 August 2002. That law was amended by Law no. 600/2004 and subsequently by Law no. 129/2012. The relevant provisions read as follows:
Article 12
“Evaluation of an individual’s mental health is carried out at that individual’s request, in the case of voluntary confinement in a psychiatric unit, or, in the case of non-voluntary admission, at the request of the persons mentioned in Article 56.”
Article 49
“(1) An individual will be admitted to a psychiatric unit only for medical reasons, that is for diagnosis and treatment.”
Article 56
“(1)  Non-voluntary admission must be requested by:
(a)  the family doctor or the psychiatrist who is treating the individual in question;
(b)  the family of the individual concerned;
(c)  representatives of the local administration responsible for socio-medical issues or public order;
(d)  the police, gendarmerie, fire department, or prosecutor;
(e)  a civil court, if it considers that the person appearing before it requires hospitalisation for mental health issues.
(2)  The reasons for confinement must be certified in writing by the persons listed in paragraph (1) above, specifying their own identity data, the circumstances which led to the request for confinement, the identity data of the individual whose confinement is requested and his or her medical record.”
Article 57
“(1)  Transportation to the psychiatric hospital is normally done by ambulance. If the behaviour of the individual in question renders him or her dangerous for himself or others, transportation to the psychiatric hospital is done by the police, gendarmerie or fire department ...”