The applicant complains under Article 2 of the Convention about a death in police custody and the absence of an effective investigation thereof.
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in Batumi, the Ajarian Autonomous Republic of Georgia. She was represented by Mr R. Papidze, a lawyer practising in Batumi.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Meskhoradze, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 15 August 2008 the applicant’s husband, R.Sh., who was a military officer stationed at a military base in Khelvachauri, a town in the Ajarian Autonomous Republic, was summoned for questioning by the Department of Constitutional Security of the Ministry of the Interior (“the DCS”). When he returned home in the evening of the same day, he told the applicant that the officers from the DCS had asked him questions regarding the role he had played, in his official military capacity, in the five-day war that had taken place between Georgian and Russian military forces a few days earlier, between 8 and 12 August 2008 (“the five-day war”).
The following day, 16 August 2008, R.Sh. was arrested on a street in Batumi by, as it later transpired, a unit of security forces attached to the DSC. There were a number of independent eyewitnesses to his arrest who subsequently reported that more than twenty law-enforcement officers, heavily armed and wearing balaclava-like masks, had taken part in the operation to arrest the applicant’s husband. According to the same eyewitnesses, the law-enforcement officers, prior to putting him in a police van, had ferociously beaten R.Sh. in the street, loudly shouting such statements as “a traitor to this country” and, apparently referring to the fiveday war, “a scam responsible for the death of scores of our boys”.
Approximately six hours after R.Sh.’s arrest, the applicant learnt from a local police officer that her husband was dead, and that his body had been taken to the town’s morgue.
According to the applicant’s version of events, which was disputed by the Government, her husband had been subjected to severe illtreatment by the officers of the DCS after his arrest, as a result of which he had died. In support of that version, the applicant claimed that, after the authorities had returned the body of her dead husband to her, it had displayed clearly distinguishable marks of torture. Furthermore, she claimed that, shortly after her husband’s death, she had started receiving regular telephone calls from unknown people who had either threatened her with “prison” if she attempted to press for details regarding her husband’s death or offered her money in exchange for her silence.
According to the official version of the events, submitted by the Government, law-enforcement officers of the Ministry of the Interior had arrested R.Sh. on 16 August 2008 in relation to a drug offence. However, after they had taken him into custody and arranged for his escorting from Batumi to Tbilisi, R.Sh. had attempted an unlawful escape, and the escorting officers had been obliged to resort to lethal force, fatally injuring the suspect. No further details about the official version of the fatal incident were provided.
The applicant submitted a video-footage of the visual examination of R.Sh.’s body. The footage shows the naked body which bears bruise-like discolouration, with clearly distinguishable marks of a post-mortem autopsy of the thorax and abdomen. It also shows multiple penetrating wounds on the shoulders, chest, abdomen and both thighs of the body; the index and the middle fingers of the left hand appear to be severely deformed, suggesting possible fractures of the bones. The Government did not submit any parts of the investigative case-file. In particular, they did not produce a report on the forensic examination of R.Sh.’s body which, according to their own account, had taken place at an early stage of the investigation (see paragraph 11 below).
On the same day, 16 August 2008, the Ministry of the Interior opened a criminal inquiry into the circumstances surrounding R.Sh.’s death, classifying it as murder under Article 108 of the Criminal Code. According to the Government (see also paragraph 30 below), all the preliminary investigative measures, including the questioning of the escorting officers and the forensic examination of R.Sh.’s body and of the scene where it had been discovered, were conducted over the following two days by the Ministry of the Interior’s own investigators. As was further explained by the Government, the results of the initial investigative measures were transmitted to the Office of the Public Prosecutor of the Ajarian Autonomous Republic on 18 August 2008 (“the regional prosecutor’s office”), which henceforth took charge of the investigation.
On 25 August 2008 the applicant requested to be granted civil-party status in relation to the investigation into her husband’s killing. On 8 September 2008 the regional prosecutor’s office replied that her request could not be granted, given the early stage of the investigation. She reiterated her request at least eight times in the period between September 2008 and January 2010, each time receiving identically worded answers from the prosecution authority to the effect that it was premature to decide on the question of civil-party status because a certain number of important investigative measures needed to be carried out first.
On 13 January 2010 the applicant inquired with the regional prosecutor’s office about the progress in the investigation and requested access to the criminal case file. The authority replied on 16 January 2010 that her requests could not be examined because she was not a civil party in the proceedings.
Between September 2010 and May 2011 the applicant repeatedly complained to both the regional prosecutor’s office and its hierarchical superior, the Chief Prosecutor’s Office of Georgia, to be granted the requisite civil-party status that would enable her to be involved in the investigation of her husband’s death, but the regional prosecutor’s office always replied that her request was premature and that it could only be examined after a certain number of specific investigative measures had been carried out.
On 11 May 2011 the applicant requested the regional prosecutor’s office to give her access if not to the entirety of the criminal case file then at least to the report on the forensic medical examination of her husband’s body following its discovery on 16 August 2008. The regional prosecutor’s office replied in the form of a letter dated 18 May 2011, stating that in order to be able to consult the material in the criminal case file, the applicant first needed to obtain civil-party status.
Between September 2011 and December 2016, the applicant complained on numerous occasions to the Chief Prosecutor’s Office of the inadequacy of the investigation conducted by the regional prosecutor’s office, requesting it to speed up the proceedings.
According to the information in the case file, the investigation into the killing of the applicant’s husband has still not been terminated. It is not apparent from the available material in the criminal case file whether, apart from the measures mentioned above (see paragraph 11 above), any other specific investigative steps have been taken and whether the applicant has been granted civil-party status.
Pursuant to Article 62 §§ 1 and 2 of the CCP, as in force at the material time, although criminal investigations were usually carried out by the Ministry of the Interior, an investigation into an offence implicating, inter alia, a police officer, an investigator or a senior military or special law-enforcement officer of the Ministry of the Interior was to be entrusted to the Public Prosecutor’s Office.
Pursuant to Article 68 § 2 of the CCP, if a crime resulted in the death of the victim, civil-party status was to be granted to one of his or her close relatives.
The other relevant provisions of the CCP read as follows:
Article 25 § 1
“The civil party and their counsel shall have the right to join the proceedings brought by the public prosecutor.”
Article 69
“The civil party ... shall have the right:
...
(i)  to take part in the investigative measures carried out at their request;
(j)  to have access to a copy of the full criminal case file and all the evidence once the case has been referred for trial;
...
(m)  to take part in the judicial examination of the case, by submitting evidence and by examining the evidence produced by the other parties ...”
In 2009 the Human Rights Center of Georgia, a domestic nongovernmental organisation specialising in the investigation of human rights abuses, published a report entitled “Licence to Kill” providing an overview of cases involving the excessive use of force by State agents in the period between 2004 and 2009. The relevant excerpt from the report, which concerned the killing of the applicant’s husband, read as follows:
“On 16 August 2009 officers from a special forces unit of the Ministry of the Interior arrested [R.Sh.], a military officer with the rank of sergeant, on a central street in Batumi and started to beat him on the spot. This occurred on the second day after [R.Sh.]’s discharge from the 2008 Russia-Georgia war in the South Ossetia region, where he had been serving in a special military intelligence department. After the special-forces officers had arrested [R.Sh.], his whereabouts were unknown. Later the same day he was found dead with marks of severe torture [on his person]. The authorities told the family that [R.Sh.] had been shot by the police in an attempt to prevent his fleeing from the scene of a drug-related crime. ...
[As reported to the Human Rights Center by eyewitnesses to the arrest of R.Sh.], ‘the law-enforcement officers were beating him so ruthlessly in the street that some of the passers-by wanted to intervene to stop the beating but the officers of the special forces shouted in reply that [R.Sh.] was a traitor and that many soldiers had died because of his treason’. The deceased’s family members and their lawyer further reported that [R.Sh.]’s body had clear marks of ill-treatment – ‘there were at least twenty-seven bullet holes in his body, his limbs were broken, and the flesh was torn off in several places’. ...
[R.Sh.]’s widow told the Human Rights Center that her husband’s army friends who had fought alongside him had refused to come to the funeral – ‘So many lies were intentionally spread about his treason that many of his friends did not even come to say farewell to him. Some of them simply telephoned me to apologise for not coming to the funeral. ...’
A criminal investigation has been opened into the death of [R.Sh.]. However, notwithstanding numerous requests, the investigative authorities have not yet granted civil-party status to the next of kin of R.Sh.; there exists no basis in the domestic law for denying this status to the deceased’s next of kin, and by doing so the investigative authorities are effectively blocking the family access to the material in the case file ..., it is impossible for the family or for any third party to exercise public scrutiny of the actions of the investigative authorities.”