The case originated in four applications against Russia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on the various dates indicated in the appended table. The application numbers and the applicants’ personal details are also listed in the appended table.
The applicants were represented by various NGOs, as indicated in the appended table. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 5 February and 16 May 2018 notice of the applications was given to the Government.
The applicants are Russian nationals who, at the material time, lived in Ingushetia, Dagestan and other regions of the Northern Caucasus. They are close relatives of individuals who disappeared after allegedly being unlawfully detained by service personnel. The applicants have not seen their missing relatives since the alleged arrests. Their relatives’ whereabouts remain unknown.
The applicants reported the abductions to lawenforcement bodies, and official investigations were opened. The proceedings remained pending for several years without any tangible results being achieved. The perpetrators have not been established by the investigating bodies. It appears that all of the investigations are still pending or ongoing.
Summaries of the facts in respect of each application are set out below. Each account is based on statements provided by the applicants and their relatives and/or other witnesses to both the Court and the domestic investigative authorities.
The first, second, third, fourth and fifth applicants are close relatives of Mr Akroman Ugurchiyev, who was born in 1984. The six, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh applicants are close relatives of Mr Umalat Bersanov, who was born in 1978.
At about 6 p.m. on 23 August 2011 Mr Akroman Ugurchiyev and Mr Umalat Bersanov were abducted near the latter’s house in the Sunzhenskiy District of the Republic of Ingushetia by a group of about ten armed men in black and camouflage uniforms and balaclavas, who drove a white GAZelle minibus with tinted windows and a silver Lada-Priora model car. The registration number of the minibus contained digits 491 and that of the Lada-Priora started with the digit 2.
On the day of the abduction, the applicants saw those vehicles on the premises of the Federal Security Service (“the FSB”) in Magas, Ingushetia.
On 24 August 2011 the first applicant, his son and the sixth applicant applied to the authorities for assistance with the search for their abducted relatives.
On 24 August 2011 the investigators examined the crime scene. Samples of a dark-red substance and some other items were collected.
On 29 August 2011 the Sunzhenskiy District Investigative Committee of Ingushetia opened criminal case no. 11600046 under Article 126 of the Criminal Code of Russia (abduction).
On the same day the first applicant was granted victim status in the criminal case.
On 2 September 2011 the second applicant and one of her sons were questioned. They stated that Mr Ugurchiyev had been working with Mr Bersanov on a construction site. On the day of the incident he had gone to Mr Bersanov’s house to take the latter’s car. The witnesses further stated that one of the abductors had not been wearing a balaclava and had a Slavic appearance. The abductors had hit Mr Ugurchiyev on the head with a machine gun and he had fallen unconscious. The witnesses denied Mr Ugurchiyev’s involvement in illegal armed groups.
On 4 September 2011 the sixth applicant was granted victim status and questioned. He stated that his son had been sentenced by the Sunzhenskiy District Court for drug dealing. His mobile telephone with the number 8-960-435-75-75 had been switched off since the incident. The rest of the applicant’s statements were similar to the account of events submitted by the applicants before the Court.
On 9 September 2011 the eleventh applicant and one of Mr Bersanov’s brothers were questioned but provided no new information.
On 13 September 2011 the first applicant was questioned. He stated that he had heard about his son’s abduction from I., who was a minor and whose parents had witnessed the abduction but had refused to give statements to the investigators. The first applicant further stated that in 2011 the Sunzhenskiy District Court had given his son a suspended sentence of a year’s imprisonment for participation in illegal armed groups. The rest of his statements were similar to the account of events submitted by the applicants to the Court.
On 21 September 2011 the third applicant was questioned. Her statements were similar to those given by the other applicants.
The investigators requested information from the law-enforcement authorities on Mr Ugurchiyev’s possible affiliation with illegal armed groups. On 22 September 2011 the Ministry of the Interior of Ingushetia informed the investigators that until 13 July 2010, Mr Ugurchiyev had been a member of the illegal armed group “Jamaat” based in Ingushetia. As for Mr Bersanov, they said that he had been charged with various crimes, including drug dealing. They further stated that Mr Bersanov was suspected of disseminating the ideas of a radical religious movement, Wahhabism.
On 22 September 2011 Mr Bersanov’s neighbours, Ms M.M. and Ms A.Kh., were questioned. The latter stated that she had seen a pair of spectacles and a pair of slippers left at the crime scene.
On 23 September 2011 the sixth applicant asked the investigators whether they had been able to identify the owners of the vehicles used by the abductors. He also asked them to save the video recordings from the closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras located near the local police station and the FSB’s headquarters in Ingushetia.
On 26 September 2011 the sixth applicant wrote to the authorities asking them to expedite the investigation into the abduction of his son.
On 13 October 2013 the first applicant applied to the President of the Chechen Republic, for assistance with the search for his missing son. His request was forwarded to the Ingushetia prosecutor’s office.
In October and November 2011 a number of officers from the traffic police were questioned. They stated that on the day of the incident, they had been on duty at the checkpoints “Angara 120”, “Volga 17” and “Kursk 1”, but that neither a GAZelle minibus with registration number 491 nor any vehicles without registration numbers had been stopped.
On 14 and 25 February 2012 two owners of GAZelle minibuses with a registration number starting with 491 were questioned, but they provided no relevant information.
On 29 February 2012 the investigation was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators. The first applicant was informed of this.
On 18 April 2012 the first applicant asked the investigators to inform him about any progress in the case. The investigators granted his request.
On 12 May 2012 the investigators’ superior criticised the investigators’ inaction and resumed the proceedings.
On 10 June 2012 the eleventh applicant was granted victim status and questioned. She reiterated her earlier statements. In addition, she informed the investigators that on 28 October 2011 Mr Bersanov’s brother had been found shot dead near the village of Galashki in Ingushetia.
On the same day the sixth applicant was questioned but provided no new information.
On 11 June 2012 one of Mr Bersanov’s sisters was questioned. She stated that she had heard rumours that members of the Ugurchiyev family were involved with illegal armed groups.
On the same day the third applicant was granted victim status and questioned. Her statements were similar to the account of events described above.
On 12 June 2012 the tenth applicant was questioned but provided no new information.
Between 12 and 14 June 2012 the officers from the traffic police were questioned again. No new information was obtained.
On 25 June 2012 the investigation was suspended. It was subsequently resumed and then suspended again on 28 October 2012.
On 22 May 2013 the first applicant asked the investigators to resume the proceedings and allow him access to the investigation file.
On 24 May 2013 the investigators granted the first applicant’s request to study the case file but refused to resume the proceedings.
On 24 September 2013 the investigation was resumed. It was then suspended again on 24 October 2013.
On 20 November 2013 the first applicant requested information on the progress in the proceedings. In reply he was provided with the decision of 24 October 2013 to suspend the proceedings. It appears that the investigation is still ongoing.
On 21 May 2012 the first applicant complained to the Sunzhenskiy District Court of the investigators’ inaction in respect of his information request of 18 April 2012. He subsequently withdrew his complaint.
On 23 August 2013 the first applicant lodged yet another complaint with the Sunzhenskiy District Court against the investigators’ refusal of 24 May 2013 to resume the proceedings.
On 26 September 2013 the District Court terminated the proceedings as the investigation had been resumed on 24 September 2013.
The applicants are the father and the mother of Mr Vakha Zhovbatyrov, who was born in 1990.
According to a statement of 21 December 2011 provided by the Ingushetia Federal Security Service, Mr Vakha Zhovbatyrov was suspected of being an active member of Sunzhenskaya, an illegal armed group specialised in attacks on representatives of the authorities (see paragraph 65 below).
At about 10 p.m. on 4 August 2011 Mr Vakha Zhovbatyrov was detained in Sheripova street, Ordzhonikidzevskaya, Ingushetia, during a passport check carried out by law-enforcement personnel in camouflage uniforms without insignia. He was forced into one of two GAZelle minibuses, one of which had a registration number containing the digits 903 or 904 and the region number 06. During the special operation, the entire neighbourhood was cordoned off by law-enforcement personnel.
According to the applicants, the special operation was carried out not by the Sunzhenskiy district police – they had also been there but had left after being shown documents by the alleged abductors – but by some other law-enforcement agency.
On 5 August 2011 the first applicant lodged a request with the head of the local police for assistance in the search for his missing son.
On the same date the second applicant was interviewed. Her account of events was the same as that submitted to the Court.
On 5 August 2011 the investigators examined the crime scene. No evidence was collected.
On 9 August 2011 the Sunzhenskiy district investigative department opened criminal case no. 11600041, under Article 126 of the Criminal Code (abduction).
On 10 August 2011 the first applicant was granted victim status and questioned. He stated that he had heard about his son’s abduction from his older son, Mr V.Zh. He reiterated the account of events described above and added that Mr Zhovbatyrov’s mobile phone had been disconnected since the incident.
On 17 August 2011 the second applicant was questioned. Her statement was similar to that of the first applicant.
On 9 September 2011 the Sunzhenskiy District Court authorised the investigators to request from the telecommunication service provider a list of all incoming and outgoing calls for Mr Zhovbatyrov’s mobile number for the period between 4 and 5 August 2011 and within a radius of 500 metres from the crime scene.
On 21 September 2011 the applicants’ neighbour, Ms Dz. L., was questioned. She stated that on the day of the incident she had been at home and had heard someone calling for help in the Ingush language. She had gone out and seen around fifteen armed men wearing balaclavas and camouflage uniforms who had been forcing a young man into a GAZelle minibus. The next day she had learnt that the young man had been her neighbours’ son.
On 22 September 2011 Mr Zhovbatyrov’s uncle, Mr Zh.I., was questioned. He stated that when leaving his house at around 9.20 p.m. on 4 August 2011, he had seen a white GAZelle minibus with the registration number 903 near the applicants’ house. Later he had learnt that his nephew had been abducted.
On 24, 25 and 26 October 2011 a number of officers from the traffic police were questioned. All of them stated that on the day of the incident, they had been manning the checkpoint “Angara 120”. They had not stopped either a GAZelle minibus with the registration number 903 or 904, or any other vehicles without registration numbers.
On 31 October 2011 the Ministry of the Interior of Ingushetia informed the investigators that, according to their operational information, Mr Zhovbatyrov was an active member of the Sunzhenskaya illegal armed group, under the command of M.B., which specialised in attacks on lawenforcement officers and other representatives of the authorities.
On 23 November 2011 the investigators transferred the case file to the investigation department of military unit no. 68799, as the investigators had established the involvement of FSB officers in the abduction of the applicant’s son. In particular, they had found that the two GAZelle minibuses with the registration numbers 903 and 904 had belonged to the Ingushetia FSB.
On 29 November 2011 the investigators additionally questioned the second applicant and Mr Zh.I. No new information was obtained.
On 2 December 2011 the investigators questioned Mr S.Yu., the head of the Ingushetia FSB. He confirmed that the two GAZelle minibuses with registration numbers R903TK06 and R904TK06 belonged to the Ingushetia FSB. He further stated that between 9 a.m. and 6 p.m. on 4 August 2011 those vehicles had been used for unknown purposes and that he did not know who had been the commanding officer of the unit which had used the vehicles. In addition, Mr S.Yu. stated that vehicles were not allowed to leave the headquarters between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. He denied that on 4 August 2011 the FSB had carried out a special operation in Sunzhenskiy District in respect of members of illegal armed groups.
On 5 December 2011 the Ingushetia FSB informed the investigators that on 4 August 2011 a counter-terrorism operation had been carried out around the settlements of Nesterovskaya and Nizhniy Alkun, a few kilometres from Ordzhonikidzevskaya.
On 6 December 2011 Mr G.A., a head of department at the Ingushetia FSB, was questioned. He stated that officers on duty did not always register the departure of vehicles from the FSB’s headquarters, for which several duty officers had been subjected to disciplinary penalties. He stated that the fact that the departure of vehicles had not been indicated in the registration book did not mean that the vehicles had not left the FSB headquarters.
According to information from the Ingushetia FSB, documents nos. 004261 and 004262 showed that the GAZelle minibuses had been on mission between 9 a.m. and 6 p.m. on 4 August 2018. During that time, they had been driven 45 kilometres. Mr K. was indicated in the logbooks as the driver of both vehicles.
On 15 December 2011 Mr K. was questioned and stated that on 4 August 2011, he had driven both vehicles alternately to Nazran; this had taken until 6 p.m. He had not been to Ordzhonikidzevskaya.
On 21 December 2011 the Ingushetia FSB informed the investigators that Mr Zhovbatyrov was an active member of the Sunzhenskaya illegal armed group, specialised in attacks on lawenforcement officers and other representatives of the authorities, as well as on businessmen refusing to allocate money for the jihad. On 4 August 2011 Mr Zhovbatyrov had left his house to join an illegal armed group under the command of Mr U. operating in the mountains of Sunzhenskiy District.
On 22 December 2011 the investigators of military unit no. 68799 refused to institute criminal proceedings in respect of Mr K. concerning the abduction of Mr Zhovbatyrov under Article 126 of the Criminal Code.
On 23 December 2011 the criminal case was remitted to the Ingushetia Investigative Committee.
On 9 January 2012 the investigation was suspended and then resumed on 25 January 2012.
On 2 March 2012 criminal case no. 11600041 was joined to two other criminal cases, nos. 11600061 and 116000050, on the abduction of two other people in the same region. The new case was registered as no. 11600050.
On 15 March 2012 the first applicant requested information on the progress of the investigation and access to the case file. On 18 March 2012 his request was granted.
On 25 May 2012 the proceedings were suspended. They were subsequently resumed and then suspended again on 20 July 2012 without any tangible results having been achieved.
On 26 September 2012 the first applicant asked the investigators to inform him about the progress in the case and the results of any investigative measures taken. On 3 October 2012 she was provided with a summary note.
On 10 November 2012 the investigators’ superior overturned the decision to suspend the proceedings, and they were resumed. Subsequently, the investigation was suspended on 10 December 2012.
On 30 December 2012 the second applicant was granted victim status.
On 23 May 2013 the second applicant asked the investigators to allow her to study the case file and make copies of documents in the file. On 27 May 2013 her request was granted. Subsequently, the investigators of the Sunzhenskiy District investigative department informed her that the case file had been transferred to the Ingushetia department of the Investigative Committee for a supervisory review and that she would be able to study it after its return. Despite a number of unsuccessful requests submitted to the investigators, the applicant was not able to study the case file.
On 12 February 2014 the first applicant asked the investigators to allow him to make copies of all the documents in the case file. His request was partially granted.
On 12 August 2016 the investigation was resumed, suspended and then resumed again on 22 June 2018. It appears that the proceedings are still ongoing.
On 11 December 2014 the second applicant complained to the Grozny Military Garrison Court under Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the investigators’ failure to take all possible steps to verify the involvement of the FSB in the abduction. The outcome of these proceedings is unknown.
The applicant is the brother of Mr Omar Valibagandov, who was born in 1975.
At around lunch time on 22 August 2013 Mr Omar Valibagandov left his relative’s flat in Makhachkala, Dagestan, to go to work. He then stopped answering his mobile phone. That night Mr Valibagandov, who had been shot in the thigh with a rubber bullet, was taken by ambulance to Izberbash hospital, handcuffed and under FSB surveillance.
On 23 August 2013 a group of about twenty to twenty-five police officers waited at Izberbash hospital for the ambulance with Mr Valibagandov.
In the hospital, during the removal of the bullet, Mr Valibagandov told the doctors that he had been abducted, beaten up and shot at by lawenforcement officers. Shortly after the medical procedure, he was taken to a police car and driven off. He has been missing ever since.
On 23 August 2013 a surgeon from Izberbash hospital informed the local police about Mr Valibagandov’s hospitalisation.
On 23 August 2013 the police interviewed Mr Valibagandov, who allegedly gave them a statement he had written himself, the authenticity of which was subsequently questioned by the investigation into his disappearance (see paragraphs 111, 114, 118-120, 122, 124 and 129 below). According to the statement, earlier that day he had found an airgun on Izberbash beach and had shot himself accidentally with it. He had then gone to the hospital on his own. He had no complaints on account of the aforementioned incident. The statement contained neither the name of the interviewing police officer nor any other indication of who had carried out the interview.
On the same day the applicant applied to the local police for assistance with the search of his missing brother.
On 23 August 2013 police officers examined the beach and found a bullet cartridge. From the documents submitted to the Court, it follows that that item was not collected as evidence (see paragraph 105 below).
On 26 August 2013 a police officer in charge of the inquiry into the incident involving Mr Valibagandov, in view of the latter’s explanations, refused to institute criminal proceedings for lack of evidence of a crime.
On 30 August 2013 the head of Izberbash hospital informed the investigators that after Mr Valibagandov’s medical treatment at the hospital’s surgery department, he had been taken away by the police.
On 4 September 2013 the applicant was interviewed. He stated that on 22 August 2013 his brother Omar Valibagandov had taken their relative’s car and had left the flat in Makhachkala to go to the office. He had planned to collect his salary arrears and to borrow money from the director of the company he worked for. At around 4.30 p.m. on the same day their relative, Mr G.R., had received a text message from Omar’s mobile phone number stating that Omar had had problems and would not be available for a couple of days, and telling him where the car could be found. Later the same day, the applicant and Mr G.R. had found the car at the location specified in the text message. They had subsequently collected a video recording from CCTV cameras at that location. The video footage had shown an unidentified man parking Mr G.R’s car, then another man arriving in a Lada vehicle and leaving Mr G.R’s car keys in its front-left wheel.
On 25 October 2013 the Izberbash prosecutor overruled the refusal to institute criminal proceedings of 26 August 2013 and ordered that an additional investigation be carried out.
On 30 October 2013 the applicant lodged another complaint with the Investigative Committee and the Izberbash district prosecutor’s office. In his request, the applicant stated that his brother had been abducted by the FSB and the Izberbash police. He further requested that criminal proceedings be instituted in respect of those officers and that they be questioned about the abduction.
On 7 November 2013 the Izberbash inter-district department of the Investigative Committee opened criminal case no. 305182 under Article 126 of the Criminal Code (abduction).
On 10 November 2013 the applicant was granted victim status and questioned. He stated that his brother had been working in a local company as a debt collector. He had had money issues with the director of the company, Mr P., who had owed his brother money for a sold car and a plot of land. He further stated that after Mr Valibagandov’s abduction, he and his other brother, Mr I.B., had talked to Mr A., an FSB officer, Dr R., a surgeon from Izberbash hospital, and the ambulance doctor. All of them had confirmed that Mr Valibagandov had been taken to Izberbash hospital by armed men in an FSB vehicle. He had been handcuffed and only in underwear. The applicant finally stated that Mr D.R., an officer accompanying Mr Valibagandov, had told him that after leaving the hospital, Mr Valibagandov had asked him to release him, which he had done.
On 13 November 2013 the Izberbash Town Court, at the request of the investigators, ordered the mobile phone service provider to furnish the records of Mr Valibagandov’s mobile phone calls.
On 14 November 2013 Dr R., the surgeon from Izberbash hospital, was questioned. He stated that on the night of 22 to 23 August 2013 he had been on duty. At around 7 a.m. on 23 August 2013 Mr D.R, a police officer, had entered the surgery with other men, one of whom had been in uniform. Officer D.R. had asked whether a wounded man had been brought to the hospital. Meanwhile, an ambulance from the Karabudakhkent district had arrived with a handcuffed man who had been wounded by gunshot. The ambulance doctor had told him that the man had been found at Achi train station, and the ambulance staff had immediately informed the police about the man. They had then taken the man to the surgery and, with the help of a medical assistant, Ms G.L., and a nurse had extracted a rubber bullet. During the medical treatment Mr Valibagandov had informed Dr R. that a group of men in balaclavas had beaten him up and had demanded something. After finishing the surgery, Dr R. had given the rubber bullet to the head of the hospital, along with the report on the surgery. When Dr R. had left the surgery unit, he had seen seven to eight police officers taking Mr Valibagandov away in one of the two police vehicles.
On 19 November 2013 a nurse from Izberbash hospital was questioned. She provided no new information.
On 25 November 2013 the Ministry of the Interior of Dagestan informed the investigators that police officers, Mr M.A. and Mr Kh.T., had gone to Izberbash hospital after receiving information on Mr Valibagandov’s hospitalisation. The letter further referred to the explanation Mr Valibagandov had given about the incident of 23 August 2008 (see paragraph 84 above).
On 27 November 2013 Mr G.R. was questioned. His statements were similar to the account of the events described above.
On 29 November 2013 the investigators examined Izberbash hospital’s registration log. According to the log, Mr Valibagandov had arrived at the hospital with multiple injuries on his body, including a gunshot wound.
On 3 December 2013 FSB officer A. was questioned. He stated that a doctor from Izberbash hospital had told him that Izberbash police officers had taken Mr Valibagandov with them.
On 5 December 2013 Mr D.R., the deputy head of Izberbash police, was questioned. He stated that upon arrival at the hospital, he had entered the surgery unit and seen Mr Valibagandov in bed. He had talked to him and ascertained that Mr Valibagandov had received his injuries accidentally. He had left after a group of police officers had arrived at the hospital.
On 7 December 2013 Mr P., the director of the company, was questioned. He stated that Mr Valibagandov had wanted to borrow money to buy a car, but he had refused to lend it. Shortly afterwards, he had received a video message from Mr Ka., the head of an illegal armed group, threating to kill his son if he did not transfer the money to him. Mr P. had immediately informed Mr Valibagandov about the incident and had urged him to settle the issue, but to no avail. In early October 2013 he had received a text message from Mr Valibagandov’s mobile phone number threatening to retaliate.
On 7 December 2013 Mr P.’s son and two employees of the company were questioned, but they provided no new information. On the same day Mr G.T., the deputy head of the company, was questioned. He stated that they had been threatened regularly by the local criminal groups. Before his abduction, Mr Valibagandov had informed him that the same criminal groups had threatened him as well.
On 8 December 2013 Mr Valibagandov’s cousin and wife, and the applicant’s wife were questioned. None of them provided any new information.
On 11 December 2013 two police officers, Mr P.Ya. and Mr Ma.A., were questioned. Officer P.Ya. stated that on the instructions of his superior, he had examined the crime scene and found a bullet cartridge. He had taken a photograph of the crime scene and a bullet cartridge, but had not collected it as evidence. Officer Ma.A. stated that on the day of the incident he had left for Izberbash hospital having received information about the hospitalisation of a wounded man. When he had arrived at the hospital, he had met officers D.R. and I.Kh. He had then gone to the X-ray unit, where Mr Valibagandov had been waiting for treatment. After the operation, Mr Valibagandov had left.
 106.  On 11 December 2013 the head doctor of Izberbash hospital was questioned. He stated that on 30 August 2013 a police officer, Mr Sh.Sh., had requested information about Mr Valibagandov’s treatment at the hospital. In reply, he had provided a written explanation along with copies of the registration log as well as the rubber bullet extracted from Mr Valibagandov’s thigh.
On 12 December 2013 one of the police officers, Mr Ma.A, was questioned again. He stated that he had seen Mr Valibagandov in the operating room without handcuffs. The rest of his statement did not provide any new information.
On 12 December 2013 the investigators asked the head of the Izberbash police to provide CCTV footage of the police station for the period between 22 and 24 August 2013. In reply, the police stated that the recording for that period had been deleted owing to the expiry of the mandatory storage period.
On 23 December 2013 the investigators questioned the applicant, who stated that he had both the CCTV recording of the location where Mr Valibagandov had parked the car (see paragraph 89 above) and Mr G.R.’s mobile phone. Subsequently, the investigators collected the recording and the mobile phone, and examined both.
On 28 December 2013 Ms Sh.G., the ambulance doctor, was questioned. She stated that on 23 August 2018 ambulance unit no. 3 had received a call from a police officer, who had informed them about an injured man near a highway to Izberbash. When the ambulance crew had arrived at the place of the incident, three to four vehicles and around ten armed men had been waiting there. Some of the armed men had been wearing uniforms with the FSB insignia. One of them, who had introduced himself as the head of the FSB group, had ordered the ambulance crew to take the injured man, Mr Valibagandov, to Izberbash hospital. The ambulance crew had then taken Mr Valibagandov out of a white minibus and placed him in the ambulance. He had been handcuffed, wearing only underwear and had had a number of bruises and injuries on his arms and hips. The white minibus had escorted the ambulance to the hospital, where around fifteen to twenty police officers had already been waiting. Mr Valibagandov had been taken to the operating room, where an old man had approached him and had started speaking in a language Ms Sh.G. could not understand. That man had remained in the operating room. She further stated that Mr Valibagandov had told her that he had been abducted and tortured severely, but some “kind people” had helped him to get free. He had then asked if the people in uniforms were from the FSB, to which she had answered affirmatively. Subsequently, the ambulance crew had left Izberbash hospital. On their way to the ambulance headquarters the white minibus which had escorted them to the hospital had overtaken them. When the ambulance had been passing the place of the incident, the ambulance crew had seen four to five vehicles there, along with the white minibus and people in civilian clothing and camouflage uniforms.
On 10 January 2014 the investigators seized Mr Valibagandov’s handwritten explanation of the account of events (see paragraph 84 above) for forensic examination.
On 15 January 2014 the Izberbash Town Court granted a request by the investigators to collect as evidence the incoming call list for the ambulance telephone number.
On 15 January 2014 the ambulance driver and a police officer were questioned but provided no new information.
On 16 January 2014 the investigators received samples of the handwriting of police officers D.R., P.Ya., B.K., M.A. and Kh.T.
On 20 January 2014 the investigators ordered a graphological examination of Mr Valibagandov’s handwritten explanation.
On 8 February 2014 the investigators collected the video recording showing the threats being made to company director Mr P.
According to information received from the Ministry of the Interior in Dagestan, Mr Valibagandov had been known as a person disseminating the ideas of a radical religious movement.
A forensic examination carried out on 5 February 2014 concluded that Mr Valibagandov’s interview of 23 August 2013 had been carried out by Officer P.Ya. The handwriting of the text belonged neither to Mr Valibagandov nor to the police officers mentioned above (see paragraph 114 above).
On 17 February 2014 Mr A.M., another police officer, was questioned. He stated that on 23 August 2013 he had met Mr Valibagandov in Izberbash hospital and questioned him about the incident. In reply, Mr Valibagandov had told him that he had injured himself with an air pistol and that he had no complaints. He had then proposed that Mr Valibagandov sign an explanation statement to that effect, which Mr Valibagandov had done in the police car and then left. Officer A.M. contended that he had forgotten to put his name and service rank on Mr Valibagandov’s statement.
On 17 February 2014 the investigators decided to collect handwriting samples from Officer A.M. The forensic examination, carried out on 27 February 2014, found that A.M.’s handwriting and that on the explanation statement did not match.
On 18 February 2014 the Izberbash Town Court granted a request by the investigators to collect the list of incoming calls from Officer D.R.’s mobile phone.
On 20, 23 and 24 February 2014 police officers Kh.T, D.R., M.A, A.M. and P.Ya refused to undergo a polygraph test to verify their statements given to the investigation.
On 23 February 2014 Dr P. and Officer D.R. were cross-examined. They gave conflicting statements concerning the officer’s arrival at the hospital. The doctor reiterated that Officer D.R. had arrived at the hospital and waited until Mr Valibagandov had been brought in by the ambulance crew, whereas the officer contested that account of the event.
On 24 February 2014 Officer P.Ya. was questioned. He stated that when he had been given the file on Mr Valibagandov’s hospitalisation along with his explanation statement, the field on the statement where information on the interviewer should have been filled in had been left blank. Therefore, he had filled in the form himself, but had not put his name as the interviewer, since he personally had not carried out that interview (see paragraph 84 above).
On 26 February 2014 Mr Sh.R., a police officer from the Makhachkala police, was questioned. He stated that on 25 August 2014 he had received the file on Mr Valibagandov’s hospitalisation and his subsequent disappearance. The file included a rubber bullet extracted from Mr Valibagandov’s thigh. He had then sent all the materials, including the rubber bullet, to Izberbash police station by regular post.
On 4 March 2014 Officer D.R. was additionally questioned. His statements concerned the phone numbers he had contacted on 23 August 2013. Those numbers had belonged to his fellow colleagues from the Izberbash police, officers Kh.T, G.A., M.Sh, and O.N.
On 5 March 2014 all of the aforementioned officers and Officer G.M., also from the Izberbash police, were questioned. They all stated that they did not remember whether they had talked to Officer D.R. on the day of the abduction. All of the officers refused to undergo a psychophysiological examination.
On 7 March 2014 the investigators examined the rubber bullet. No new information was revealed.
On 25 March 2014 the investigators ordered a comparative forensic examination of Mr Valibagandov’s signature on the statement of 23 August 2013 and in his passport. The forensic examination report, provided on the next day, did not contain any conclusive findings on the possible match of the signatures.
On 26 March 2014 an expert examined the CCTV footage of the car park on 23 August 2013, which the applicant had provided to the investigators, but was unable to identify either the cars or the individuals on it (see paragraph 109 above).
On 2 April 2014 the investigators examined the crime scene – the surgery unit of Izberbash hospital. No evidence was collected.
On the same date the investigators decided to collect the footage of the CCTV cameras in Izberbash hospital. However, given that the mandatory storage period for the recordings had expired, they were unable to obtain any information.
On 4 April 2014 the investigation was suspended for failure to establish the perpetrators. The applicant was informed.
On 27 May 2014 the applicant’s representative asked the investigators to grant him access to the case file and allow him to make copies of some documents. On 30 May 2014 that request was refused on the grounds that the investigation was still pending.
On 21 July 2014 the decision to suspend the investigation was overruled by the Izberbash district prosecutor as unlawful and premature, as the investigators had failed to take a number of basic steps, such as establishing the circumstances in which Mr Valigabandov had been wounded.
On 5 August 2014 the investigators refused to institute criminal proceedings in respect of police officers P.Ya. and A.M. due to the absence of corpus delicti in their actions.
On 1 September 2014 the investigation was suspended again. The applicant was informed.
On 10 October 2014 the applicant’s representative wrote to the investigators, seeking information on the progress of the case and asking to make copies of some documents. In reply, the investigators informed the applicant’s representative that the proceedings had been suspended and he could obtain copies of the documents sought from the Dagestan department of the Investigative Committee.
On 18 November and then on 17 December 2014 the applicant’s representative lodged a complaint with the Izberbash district prosecutor’s office about the investigators’ inaction. He received no reply to either complaint.
On 17 November 2015 the investigators’ superior overruled the decision of 1 September 2014 to suspend the proceedings.
On 7 December 2015 the investigators granted a request by the applicant’s representative that information on the mobile telephone numbers used near the crime scene be obtained in order to identify possible witnesses.
On 24 December 2015 the investigation was suspended and then resumed on 14 May 2016. The applicant was informed.
On 10 June 2016 Dr R. from Izberbash hospital and police officer M.A. were cross-examined. They each reiterated their earlier statements.
On 14 June 2016 the investigation was suspended again. The applicant was informed.
On 25 May 2018 the Dagestan prosecutor’s office overruled the decision to suspend the proceedings. It appears that the criminal proceedings are still ongoing.
Proceedings against the investigators
On an unspecified date in June or July 2014, the applicant brought proceedings before the Izberbash Town Court challenging the investigators’ decision of 30 May 2014 to suspend the investigation (see paragraph 133 above).
On 23 July 2014 the court dismissed the complaint as unsubstantiated.
On an unspecified date in February or March 2015 the applicant brought proceedings before the Izberbash Town Court challenging the investigators’ inaction in respect of his request of 17 December 2014 (see paragraph 139 above).
On 27 March 2015 the court granted the applicant’s complaint and ordered the investigators to examine his request.
On an unspecified date in 2015 the applicant lodged yet another complaint with the Izberbash Town Court, challenging the investigators’ refusal to allow him to make copies of all documents in the case file.
On 17 July 2015 the court dismissed the complaint and upheld the investigators’ refusal. The applicant appealed against that decision.
On 6 October 2015 the Supreme Court of Dagestan upheld the decision on appeal.
On an unspecified date in 2015, the applicant’s representative brought proceedings before the Izberbash Town Court challenging the investigators’ decision of 1 September 2014 to suspend the proceedings (see paragraph 137 above).
On 18 November 2015 the court dismissed the complaint, as the investigation had been resumed on 17 November 2015. That decision was upheld on appeal by the Supreme Court of Dagestan.
On an unspecified date in 2015, the applicant brought proceedings before the Izberbash Town Court challenging the investigators’ decision of 24 December 2015 to suspend the proceedings (see paragraph 142 above).
On 16 May 2016 the court dismissed the complaint, as the investigation had been resumed on 14 May 2016.
The applicant is the mother of Mr Rustam Aushev, who was born in 1988.
On 17 February 2012 Mr Rustam Aushev left home to go to Belgium to visit his sister. He was to take a train from Nazran, Ingushetia, to Mineralnye Vody train station in the Stavropol Region, another train from that station in the direction of Brest, Belorussia, and then proceed to Europe.
Between 1 and 7 p.m. he was at Mineralnye Vody train station, where a group of four to five men approached him, showed him their service identity cards and then forced him into their white GAZelle minibus. Mr Rustam Aushev has been missing ever since. On that day one of the abductors had introduced himself to a security guard at the train station as Officer V. from the FSB, and had shown him his service identity card (see below).
The abduction was recorded on a CCTV camera at the train station.
Shortly before the abduction on 17 February 2012, a lawenforcement officer had asked the ticket office in Nazran, Ingushetia, to inform him of anyone who had purchased a ticket from Mineralnye Vody to Brest, Belorussia.
Mr Rustam Aushev was taken from Mineralnye Vody train station in the Stavropol Region to the FSB unit in Magas. According to the applicant’s submission, her son’s passage was registered in the log of the regional border checkpoint.
On 19 February 2012 Mr Aushev’s cousin, Mr Ak.Akh. complained of Rustam Aushev’s disappearance to the Mineralnye Vody police, asking them to assist him with the search for his missing relative.
On the same day, Mr Ak.Akh. was interviewed by the police. He stated that the applicant had called him on 18 February 2012 and had told him that her son Rustam had left for Brest via Mineralnye Vody and that she had lost contact with him. He had then gone to the Mineralnye Vody police and reported the incident. The police had told him to go to the transport police. Later, he had learnt from his relatives that Mr Aushev had not arrived in Brest. Subsequently, he had gone to Mineralnye Vody train station and had learnt from the station personnel that Mr Aushev had asked another passenger, Mr K.M., to look after his luggage while he stepped outside. He had then left the waiting hall and had never returned. Afterwards, Mr Ak.Akh. had studied CCTV recordings of the train station premises and had seen four men forcing Mr Aushev into a white GAZelle minibus with tinted windows. Its number plate had been covered with mud. Mr Ak.Akh. provided Mr Aushev’s mobile phone number to the investigators.
On the same day the police also interviewed the applicant, who stated that she been in contact with her son Rustam Aushev until he had reached Mineralnye Vody. During his last call, Mr Aushev had told her that he had met a young man, Mr K.M., and had left his luggage with him while he had stepped out to pray and make a phone call.
On the same day, 19 February 2012, Mr K.I., a security guard at Mineralnye Vody train station, was interviewed. He stated that on the day of the incident a man of Slavic appearance had come to the train station checkpoint and had shown an FSB identity card in the name of V. He had asked to be allowed to park in the off-limit zone. As FSB officer V. had been from another region, Ingushetia, the witness had told him to obtain permission from the local FSB. After talking to the local FSB by telephone, Officer V. had returned to the GAZelle minibus.
On 20 February 2012 investigators examined the crime scene. During the examination, they studied the CCTV recording showing four men getting into a white GAZelle minibus with tinted windows, and then leaving the station’s police parking area. The recording did not reveal the abduction of Mr Aushev. A copy of the recording was collected.
On 20 February 2012 Mr Aushev’s wife, Ms Al. A., wrote to the Ingushetia Prosecutor, the Human Rights Defender of Ingushetia and various non-governmental organisations, asking them to help her find her missing husband.
On the same day Ms Al.A. was interviewed but did not provide any new information.
On 21 February 2012 Mr Ak.Akh. was interviewed again. He reiterated his earlier statements, adding that at some point in 2007 Mr Aushev had been detained by the FSB for unknown reasons, but released on the same day.
On the same day Mr Aushev’s brother, Mr Au.Akh., was interviewed. His statements were similar to those of Mr Ak.Akh..
On the same day Mr K.I. was interviewed again and reiterated his earlier statements (see paragraph 166 above).
On 22 February 2012 another FSB officer, Mr G.I., was interviewed. He confirmed the account of events as given by Mr K.I.
On 22 February 2012 the investigation file was transferred to the Stavropol Region inter-district department of the Investigative Committee.
On 27 February 2012 Mr Au.Akh. wrote to the Nazran district prosecutor asking for assistance in the search for his missing brother.
On 29 February 2012 Mr Ak.Akh. asked the investigators to inform him about the progress of the investigation and to provide a copy of the CCTV footage. In reply, he was informed that a copy would be available only upon completion of the investigation.
On 6 March 2012 the investigators ordered an expert examination of the CCTV camera recordings, seeking to identify Mr Aushev. On 7 March 2012 the experts replied that it was impossible to do so because of the poor quality of the recording.
On 6 March 2012 Mr Au.Akh received a telegram from Mr K., an investigator at the Ingushetia FSB, informing him that his brother, Rustam Aushev, had been arrested by the FSB and taken to the FSB headquarters in Ingushetia. The case file and the video recordings had been sent there as well. Rustam Aushev’s crossing of the checkpoint at the regional border had been recorded in their registration log. Mr Aushev had been charged with banditry and membership of illegal armed groups under Articles 209 and 210 of the Criminal Code of Russia.
Between 8 and 21 March 2012 the investigation file was transferred back and forth between the Mineralovodskiy transport investigative department of the southern transport investigative committee (Минераловодский следственный отдел Южного следственного управления на транспорте Следственного Комитета Российской Федерации) and the Stavropol Region inter-district department of the Investigative Committee.
On 13 March 2012 Mr Aushev’s legal counsel wrote to the NGO the Memorial Human Rights Centre asking for assistance with meeting Mr Aushev. He stated that after being informed of the abduction by Mr Aushev’s brother, he had gone to the FSB headquarters in Ingushetia. An officer at the reception desk had told him that he could not meet Mr Aushev as the latter had not been there.
On 16 March 2012 Mr B.S., one of two police officers from the checkpoint at Mineralnye Vody train station was interviewed. He stated that on the day of the incident he had been on duty at the station. He had seen a white GAZelle minibus parked near the checkpoint. When he had approached it, a man in it had shown him from the window a special permit. As the vehicle’s windows had been tinted, it had been impossible to see who was inside the car. He had noticed the digit 15 on its number plate. Later on, he had learned from a security guard at the train station that FSB officers had been in that vehicle.
On the same day the second police officer, K.A., was interviewed. He reiterated the information provided by officer B.S.
On 16 March 2012 Mr Ak.Akh. was interviewed again. He reiterated his previous statements. When subsequently questioned on 11 April 2012, he reiterated his submission.
On 27 March 2012 the lawyer of Rustam Aushev’s wife complained to the transport prosecutor of the investigators’ inaction and asked him to institute criminal proceedings.
On 2 April 2012 the Mineralovodskiy transport investigative committee opened criminal case no. 1250126 under Article 126 of the Criminal Code (abduction).
Between 2 and 9 April 2012 the investigators made a composite sketch of the man who had introduced himself at the checkpoint as FSB officer V.
On 9 April 2012 Mr A.Ye., a security guard from the train station, was questioned. He stated that he could identify the FSB officer V., who was a lieutenant of the FSB.
On 10 April 2012 Mr K.I. was questioned again. He reiterated his earlier statements (see paragraphs 166 and 172 above).
On the same day Mr K.A. and Mr B.S., police officers from the station checkpoint, were questioned. Their statements were similar to those of 16 March 2012 (see paragraphs 181 and 182 above).
On the same day the investigators again questioned Mr Au.Akh. In addition to his earlier statements, he stated that in 2007 Rustam Aushev and he had been taken to the FSB on suspicion of involvement in illegal armed groups. They had been released after a short detention, whereas men who had been detained as active members of illegal armed groups had been killed by the FSB officers.
On 11 April 2012 Rustam Aushev’s wife, Ms Al.A., was granted victim status and questioned. She stated that the day after the incident, she had gone to the ticket office at Nazran station, where her husband had bought his train tickets. The cashier, Ms Al.Am, had told her that on the day of her husband’s disappearance, a man of Slavic appearance had asked the cashiers if anyone had bought a ticket to Brest.
On 12 April 2012 Mr M.A., an officer of the Mineralovodskiy transport police, was questioned. He stated that he had received information from the train station security guards that at around 6.30 p.m. on 17 February 2012 Mr K.M. had gone to the checkpoint at Mineralnye Vody train station and informed the officer on duty that he had arrived from Nazran with Mr Aushev and that the latter had left his luggage with him and had gone to pray. Since Mr Aushev had not returned, Mr K.M. had decided to leave Mr Aushev’s luggage at the checkpoint. He further stated that he had informed the headquarters of the Mineralovodskiy transport police and had left the luggage with the personnel on duty.
On 19 April 2012 the investigators applied to the Mineralovodskiy Town Court for permission to obtain from the mobile phone service provider a list of incoming and outgoing calls for Mr Aushev’s phone, as well as for the phones of Mr Ak.Akh., Mr Au.Akh. and Ms Al.A., for the period between February and April 2012. The investigators also applied for permission to conduct surveillance.  On the same date the court rejected the investigators’ request in respect of Mr Ak.Akh. and Mr Au.Akh and granted their request in respect of Mr Aushev. There is no information about the court’s ruling in respect of Ms Al.A.
On 23 April 2012 the supervising prosecutor criticised the investigation of the criminal case and pointed out a number of defects in the proceedings, which needed to be remedied.
On 27 April 2012 the investigators questioned the applicant, but she provided no new information.
On the same day the investigators received operational information that Mr Au.Akh, Mr Aushev’s brother, was a member of an illegal armed group.
On 4 May 2012 the investigators collected the list of incoming and outgoing calls for Mr Aushev’s mobile phone.
On 20 June 2012 the investigators ordered a forensic examination of the CCTV recording to identify Mr Aushev on it (see paragraph 203 below).
On 26 June 2012 the investigators applied to the Mineralnye Vody Town Court for permission to obtain from the service provider a list of all the telephone calls and text messages sent and received on the premises of Mineralnye Vody train station on the day of the abduction. On the same date the court granted the investigators’ request.
It appears that on 29 June 2012 Mr Au.Akh was arrested along with three other men during a special counter-terrorist operation.
On 22 August 2012 Mr G.I., an FSB officer, was questioned. He reiterated his statements of 22 February 2012 (see paragraph 173 above).
On 31 July 2012 the Ingushetia FSB replied to the investigators that Mr Aushev had not left the country as he had not had a passport. They also stated that Mr Aushev was a member of an illegal armed group headed by his brother, Mr Au.Akh. Lastly, they stated that there was no officer V. in the Ingushetia FSB.
On 15 August 2012 the experts informed the investigators that they had been unable to identify Mr Aushev on the CCTV recordings owing to the poor quality of the video footage.
On 2 November 2012 the investigation was suspended, resumed and then suspended again on 29 December 2012.
On 23 July 2013 the investigators’ superior overruled the decision to suspend the proceedings.
On 15 August 2013 the Mineralnye Vody inter-district prosecutor criticised the investigation of the criminal case and pointed out a number of defects in the proceedings, which needed to be remedied.
On 23 August 2013 the investigators ordered a forensic examination of the CCTV recordings of Mineralnye Vody train station from different locations to identify Mr Aushev and the alleged abductors. However, the experts were unable to carry out the examination owing to the poor quality of the recording.
On 28 August 2013 Ms K.V., another security guard from the train station, was questioned. He provided no new information.
On the same date a cashier from Nazran train station ticket office was questioned. She stated that she had spoken with a young woman who had arrived at the ticket office with a man and who had asked whether Mr Aushev had arrived at Mineralnye Vody train station. According to the witness, nobody else had asked her that question.
On 29 August 2013 Mr O.D., an inspector from the State Courier Service was questioned. He stated that at 5 p.m. on the day of the abduction a GAZelle minibus with registration number O177OO had left their car park. The driver had been Mr T.S., who had been on leave.
On the same date Mr Au.Akh and Mr D.Z. were questioned again. They stated that Mr Aushev was a bomb-maker for an illegal armed group.
On 2 September 2013 the investigators questioned Mr K.M., who had looked after Mr Aushev’s luggage at the train station. His statements were similar to those of police officer M.A. (see paragraph 192 above).
On 9 September 2013 the investigation was suspended.
On 28 November 2013 the investigators’ superior overruled the decision to suspend the proceedings.
On 18 December 2013 the supervising prosecutor criticised the investigation of the criminal case and pointed out a number of defects in the proceedings that needed to be remedied. In particular, the prosecutor pointed out the procedural drawbacks while obtaining the applicant’s DNA samples (see paragraph 209 above).
On 24 December 2013 the investigators examined the CCTV footage from Mineralnye Vody train station. The recording confirmed the account of events as described in the applicant’s submission before the Court.
On 9 and 10 January 2014 the investigators applied to the Mineralnye Vody Town Court for authorisation to tap the telephones of the applicant, Ms Al.A. and Mr Ak.Akh. and to obtain the call list for Mr Aushev’s mobile number from the service provider. The court rejected the investigators’ request for telephone surveillance as unsubstantiated, but granted the request in respect of Mr Aushev’s phone. Subsequently, the investigators obtained the list of calls and requested information on the owners of certain phone numbers which had contacted Mr Aushev the most.
On 27 January 2014 the investigators ordered yet another forensic examination of the CCTV recordings from Mineralnye Vody train station.
On 28 January 2014 the investigators again questioned Mr A.Ye., a security guard from Mineralnye Vody train station. He stated that the name of the FSB officer was Mr V.A.
On 31 January 2014 the FSB confirmed to the investigators that Mr V.A. had worked at the FSB from 1994 to 2007, but had since left.
On 6 February 2014 the investigation was suspended and then resumed on 18 March 2014.
On 18 April 2014 the investigators examined the CCTV recordings with an expert, who stated that it was impossible to identify individuals on the video owing to the poor quality of the recording.
On 18 April 2014 the investigators conducted a photo identification of Mr V.A. by Mr A.Ye., who identified him as the FSB officer he had met at the train station (see paragraphs 166 and 187 above).
On the same date the investigators suspended the proceedings for failure to identify the perpetrators.
On 6 June 2014 the investigators’ superior overruled the decision to suspend the investigation and ordered that basic steps be taken.
On 31 July and on 30 October 2014 the supervising prosecutor pointed out a number of defects in the investigation, including the investigators’ failure to comply with the orders given on 6 June 2014.
On 18 November 2014 the investigation was resumed. It was again suspended on 18 December 2014 and then resumed again on 9 April 2015.
On 25 April 2015 Mr V.A. was questioned at the place of his residence in Kazan, the Republic of Tatarstan. He stated that on the day of the incident he had been in Kazan, and that his relatives and a neighbour could confirm it. He refused to take a lie-detector test and to be further questioned by the investigators.
On 30 April 2015 the Mineralnye Vody Town Court granted a request lodged by the investigators for authorisation to carry out a search of Mr V.A.’s flat.
On 12 May 2015 the investigation was suspended. On the same date, the investigators’ superior overruled that decision.
On 14 May 2015 the investigators again questioned Mr V.A. He stated that he had worked in the FSB from 1994 to 2007 and had carried out operations in respect of illegal bomb makers. He had never been to Mineralnye Vody and on 17 February 2012, as it had been his wife’s birthday, and he had been at home.
On the same date, the investigators carried out a cross-examination of Mr V.A. and Mr A.Ye. Both reiterated their earlier statements.
On the same date Mr V.A.’s neighbour, Mr Sh.A., was questioned. He stated that on 17 February 2012 he had been at V.A.’s flat to celebrate his wife’s birthday.
On 26 May 2015 the supervising prosecutor pointed out a number of defects in the investigation, which needed to be remedied. In particular, the prosecutor ordered the investigators to cross-examine Mr Sh.A. and Mr A.Ye. and question Mr V.A.’s wife.
On 12 June 2015 the investigation was suspended and then resumed on 9 November 2015.
On 1 December 2015 the investigators questioned Mr V.A.’s wife, Ms V.V. She stated that six people had been at her birthday celebration on 17 February 2012, but did not specify whether Mr Sh.A. had been among them. She refused to take a polygraph test.
On 8 December 2015 the investigators questioned Ms V.V.’s parents, both of whom stated that on 17 February 2012 they had been at the birthday dinner and Mr Sh.A. had not been among the guests. They stated that Mr V.A. had been in Kazan on that day.
On 8 December 2015 Ms N.E., Ms V.V.’s friend who had been at the birthday dinner on 17 February 2012, was questioned. Her statement was similar to that of Ms V.V.
On 9 December 2015 the investigation was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators.
On 13 April 2016 the investigators’ superior overruled the decision to suspend the proceedings. On 4 May 2016 the investigation was resumed.
On 6 May 2016 the investigators yet again examined the CCTV recording from the train station. No new information was revealed.
On 12 May 2016 the investigators decided to transfer the criminal case to the southern investigative department of the Investigative Committee (Южное следственное управление на транспорте Следственного комитета Российской Федерации) for further investigation.
On 4 June 2016 the investigation was suspended. It was subsequently resumed and suspended several times without attaining any tangible results. The last suspension took place on 5 July 2017. It appears that the investigation is still pending.
Proceedings against the investigators
On 2 December 2015 the Ms Al.A.’s lawyer complained of the investigators’ inaction to the Mineralnye Vody Town Court and requested permission to study the case file.
On 21 January 2016 the court dismissed the complaint, stating that Ms Al.A. could study the case file only upon completion of the investigation. Ms Al.A.’s representative appealed against the court’s decision. The outcome of the appeal is unknown.
On an unspecified date in 2016 Ms Al.A.’s representative lodged another complaint about the inaction of the investigators.
On 22 July 2016 the Mineralnye Vody Town Court rejected the complaint on procedural grounds.
On 9 December 2016 the Stavropol Regional Court quashed the above decision and remitted the complaint for a fresh examination.
On 23 October 2017 the Town Court dismissed the complaint as unsubstantiated.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and international and domestic reports, see Makayeva v. Russia (no. 37287/09, §§ 67-77, 18 September 2014); Aslakhanova and Others v. Russia (nos. 2944/06, and 4 others, §§ 80-84, 18 December 2012); and Akhmadova and Sadulayeva v. Russia (no. 40464/02, §§ 67-69, 10 May 2007).