The case originated in an application (no. 40458/08) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ukrainian nationals, Mr Anatoliy Andreyevich Tuchin and Ms Svetlana Aleksandrovna Tuchina (“the applicants”), on 29 July 2008.
The applicants were represented by Mr V.V. Sudakov, a lawyer practising in Odessa. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Acting Agent, most recently Ms Olga Davydchuk.
The applicants alleged that there had not been an effective investigation into the death of their daughter.
On 3 June 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1943 and 1942 respectively and live in Odessa.
On 30 April 2002 the applicants’ daughter was struck by a car driven by P. as she was crossing the street. She died in hospital following the accident.
Between April 2002 and October 2010 the prosecution authorities delivered at least ten decisions refusing to institute or discontinuing criminal proceedings in respect of P. owing to a lack of corpus delicti in his actions. All those decisions were quashed by the supervising authorities as unsubstantiated and further investigations were ordered.
On 9 July 2009 the first applicant lodged a civil claim against P. within the criminal proceedings. On 15 July 2009 he was attributed the status of an aggrieved party in those proceedings.
On 26 October 2010 the Odessa Suvorivskyy District Court discontinued the criminal proceedings against P. as time-barred. On 21 December 2010 and 20 November 2012 the Odessa Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) and the Higher Specialised Court for Civil and Criminal Matters (“the Higher Specialised Court”), respectively, upheld that decision.
On 20 November 2012 the Higher Specialised Court also issued a separate ruling, by which it brought to the attention of the Court of Appeal and the Odessa regional prosecutor’s office a number of shortcomings in the proceedings. It stated, in particular, that the pre-trial investigation had been perfunctory and lengthy. Since 2002, there had been hardly any investigative measures. The numerous refusals by the investigating authorities to institute criminal proceedings in respect of the accident had been unfounded and had eventually been quashed. Guidelines as regards remedying shortcomings in the investigation had been ignored. The overall duration of the investigation, over ten years, had been unjustified. In summary, the Higher Specialised Court held that the criminal investigation in question had not complied with domestic legislation or the Convention. It therefore instructed the aforementioned authorities to take measures to prevent similar violations in the future.