The case originated in an application (no. 10544/17) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Ms Diana Tumėnienė (“the applicant”), on 30 January 2017.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Matulionytė, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms L. Urbaitė.
On 22 June 2018 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Kėdainiai.
On 7 July 2005 the applicant’s twenty-two-year-old brother, M.K., was hospitalised in Klaipėda with serious injuries. According to a police report drawn up on that day, he refused to be examined by doctors or to talk to the police. On the evening of 10 July 2005 M.K. died at the hospital. His body was examined by a court medical expert, who found that the cause of M.K.’s death had been an injury to the head which had fractured the skull and led to swelling of the brain. The expert found multiple contusions and bruises all over M.K.’s body which had likely been caused by blows from hard blunt objects. Another expert later found that M.K. had had a blood alcohol level of 3.85 per mille.
On 7 July 2005 the authorities in Tauragė opened a pre-trial investigation concerning M.K.’s injuries. After his death, the legal grounds for the investigation were changed to murder. On various dates the applicant and her mother and siblings were granted victim status and questioned as witnesses.
The applicant’s mother told the pre-trial investigation officers that on the evening of 6 July 2005 M.K. had left her house without telling her where he was going. At around 2 a.m. that night she had been woken by the doorbell and had seen M.K. sitting outside the house, bleeding. She had called an ambulance, which had taken M.K. to hospital.
On 7 July 2005 the Tauragė authorities also examined the courtyard of the applicant’s mother’s house, where they found bloodstains and a single cigarette. They also spoke to several neighbours, but were unable to obtain any useful information.
On the same day the authorities questioned one of M.K.’s acquaintances, V.S. He stated that in the past he and M.K. had gone abroad together to commit burglaries, but he had not seen M.K. for about a month. V.S. also told officers that he had previously attempted to commit suicide and was planning to do it again because he did not wish to live anymore.
On 11 July 2005 the applicant’s mother was questioned again and she stated that M.K.’s mobile phone and jewellery had disappeared after the assault. She also stated that when M.K. had been at the hospital, a man whom she did not know had come to see him. However, a nurse working at the hospital later told the officers that nobody had come to see M.K.
In July 2005 the authorities searched the applicant’s mother’s house and two cars which had been used by M.K., obtained records of telephone conversations, and questioned further witnesses. Several of M.K.’s siblings and acquaintances stated that M.K. had previously been assaulted by V.S. (see paragraph 9 above), or that they had heard that V.S. had played a part in M.K.’s death. In addition, some witnesses expressed their belief that the assault on M.K. might have been related to his alleged involvement in human trafficking.
On 5 August 2005 a hospital in Tauragė informed the authorities that from 2 to 28 July 2005 V.S. had been hospitalised in its psychiatric ward (an open facility) after a suicide attempt, but he had subsequently left the hospital. On 28 August 2005 V.S. committed suicide.
Between August 2005 and August 2006 the authorities questioned six more witnesses. When questioned on 12 April 2006, M.K.’s sister A. stated that in July 2005 M.K. had had a heated argument with his acquaintance T.D., but she had not mentioned it during her previous questioning because at that time she had not considered it to be important.
On 22 November 2006 the authorities ordered a forensic examination of the cigarette which had been found near the applicant’s mother’s house (see paragraph 8 above). On 29 June 2007 the expert reported that the cigarette did not contain traces of human blood, and that it was not possible to determine if it contained any human biological traces.
On 28 November 2006 the Tauragė district prosecutor ordered the pre-trial investigation officers to, inter alia, locate and question T.D. (see paragraph 13 above). On 2 January 2007 the police questioned T.D.’s mother and on 10 January 2007 T.D. was apprehended.
On 10 January 2007, in the presence of his lawyer, T.D. confessed to the murder of M.K. and was served with an official notice that he was a suspect. In a written confession, T.D. stated that on the night of 67 July 2005 he had arrived at M.K.’s house with the intention of asking him to give back car wheels which he had borrowed. M.K. had pointed a gun at T.D. and had started threatening him, so T.D. had hit M.K. with a baseball bat and consequently M.K. had dropped the gun. M.K. had then grabbed a metal stick from his car and the two men had begun fighting. When the fight had subsided, T.D. had taken M.K.’s metal stick and taken it with him to his mother’s house. T.D. stated that he had hit M.K. because he had been aware of M.K.’s impulsive character and had been afraid for his own life.
On the same day T.D. was taken to M.K.’s house and he showed where the fight had occurred and how he had hit M.K. He stated that after the fight, on his way home, he had thrown the baseball bat out of the car window, but he could not remember where exactly. T.D. was then taken to his mother’s house, where he showed the metal stick which he had taken from M.K. and had kept in storage.
T.D. was questioned again on 18 January, 19 January and 12 July 2007, and on each occasion he stood by his previous statements.
On 22 January 2007 the applicant’s mother and her live-in partner told the authorities that, to their knowledge, M.K. had not owned any guns or sticks. They were shown photographs of several metal sticks, including the one which had been taken from T.D. (see paragraphs 16 and 17 above), but did not recognise any of them.
T.D. was kept in pre-trial detention from 12 to 27 January 2007. On 26 January 2007 he was released from detention, his passport was taken from him, he was prohibited from leaving the country, and he was ordered to periodically register at the local police station.
On 20 August 2007 the district prosecutor observed that only some of the instructions which had been given to the pre-trial investigation officers on 28 November 2006 (see paragraph 15 above) had been carried out. He ordered the officers to locate and question three other acquaintances of M.K., identify the individual who, according to the applicant’s mother, had come to see M.K. at the hospital (see paragraph 10 above), and examine the circumstances of the disappearance of M.K.’s personal belongings (see paragraph 10 above).
Subsequently the applicant’s mother was shown photographs of several men, but she was unable to recognise the individual who had come to see M.K. at the hospital.
One of the witnesses identified by the prosecutor (see paragraph 21 above) was questioned and stated that, to his knowledge, M.K. had been assaulted by V.S. and T.D.
Another individual identified by the prosecutor was serving a prison sentence in Ireland. He was questioned in Ireland on 12 November 2008 and stated that he had seen M.K. on the day of the assault, but he did not know anything about the circumstances of the assault and did not know who T.D. was. It appears that the witness statement was sent to the Lithuanian authorities on 27 February 2009.
On 30 May 2008 the district prosecutor ordered the pre-trial investigation officers to question certain other witnesses and examine the circumstances under which M.K. had consumed alcohol before the assault (see paragraph 5 above), as several witnesses who had seen M.K. on the day of the assault had stated that he had been sober and that he had rarely drunk alcohol.
On 20 March 2009 the victims’ lawyer was informed that the pretrial investigation had been completed and that he could consult the case file.
On 6 May 2009 T.D. was questioned again at his request. He withdrew his previous statements (see paragraphs 16-18 above) and denied having assaulted M.K. He stated that he had falsely incriminated himself under pressure from police officers. T.D. was questioned again on 4 June 2009 and again stated that the text of his confession had been dictated to him by police officers.
In June 2009 one of the two police officers who had recorded T.D.’s confession was questioned as a witness. He stated that T.D. had been apprehended after operational information had been received about his involvement in the assault on M.K., and denied that there had been any pressure on T.D. to confess.
Between July and October 2009 four witnesses, including the applicant and her mother, were questioned again. Two of them gave statements similar to those they had given before, namely that M.K. had previously been injured by V.S. and that they had heard that V.S. had contributed to M.K.’s death (see paragraph 11 above). The applicant’s mother additionally stated that a few days after M.K.’s funeral V.S. had come to her house, kneeled in front of her and apologised, saying that “they had not meant it”. She also stated that, in her opinion, M.K. had been assaulted by several individuals, because when she had found him outside her house, he had said to her “they [wanted] to steal the car”. The applicant confirmed that she had been at her mother’s house when V.S. had come and that she had heard his words. She further stated that when M.K. had been at the hospital, she had seen the man who had come to visit M.K. and had recognised him as V.S.’s brother, N.B.; however, according to the applicant’s mother, the man at the hospital had not looked like N.B. The applicant also claimed that she had spoken to police officers soon after the assault, but her statements had not been recorded.
In November 2009 the authorities contacted N.B. by telephone (see paragraph 29 above). N.B. stated that he lived in Ireland and did not intend to return to Lithuania. He also stated that he had known M.K., but had not been in touch with him. From the documents in the Court’s possession, it does not appear that N.B. was specifically asked about the circumstances of the assault on M.K., or his alleged visit to the hospital.
On 28 December 2009 the district prosecutor discontinued the pretrial investigation on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence that the suspect, T.D., had committed the crime.
The applicant and the other victims appealed against that decision to a senior prosecutor, who on 17 February 2010 reopened the investigation. The senior prosecutor stated that insufficient evidence against T.D. was only grounds for discontinuing the investigation in respect of T.D. However, the investigation as such had to continue, because not all the circumstances of M.K.’s death had been uncovered. In particular, there had been suspicions that M.K. had participated in smuggling or human trafficking (see paragraph 11 above), but they had not been investigated; at least two witnesses had not been questioned (see paragraph 21 above); the motive for the murder had not been identified; and certain contradictions in witness testimonies concerning M.K.’s final hours had not been clarified, including those concerning his alcohol consumption.
The applicant and the other victims appealed against the senior prosecutor’s decision, arguing that there was sufficient evidence against T.D. and that charges against him should be transferred to a court for examination. On 19 April 2010 the Tauragė District Court allowed the appeal in part and reopened the investigation in respect of T.D. It held that the senior prosecutor had correctly decided to reopen the investigation, but the decision to discontinue the investigation in respect of T.D. had been unfounded. The court noted that T.D. had initially given consistent statements about his guilt as regards M.K.’s murder (see paragraphs 16-18 above) but had later withdrawn them, claiming that police officers had pressured him to incriminate himself. However, his allegation of undue police pressure had not been sufficiently investigated, and only one of the two officers who had questioned him had been questioned (see paragraph 28 above). Furthermore, it had not been established whether T.D. had an alibi for the night of the assault. The court therefore held that although there was not enough evidence to draw up an indictment against T.D. and transfer the case to a court for examination, T.D. had to remain a suspect and his role in M.K.’s murder had to be further investigated.
In May 2010 the authorities questioned the other police officer who had recorded T.D.’s confession. Like the first officer (see paragraph 28 above), he stated that T.D. had been apprehended after operational information had been received about his involvement in the assault on M.K., and denied that there had been any pressure on T.D. to confess. The officer stated that T.D., in the presence of a lawyer, had voluntarily confessed and had expressed remorse for killing M.K., which the officers had found honest.
In the meantime, in February 2010 T.D. had left for the United Kingdom, and in May 2010 he declared that that was his official place of residence. In June 2010 the Lithuanian authorities announced an official search in respect of him, and in November 2010 they issued a European arrest warrant. In May 2011 T.D. was surrendered to the Lithuanian authorities and was placed in detention on remand.
Before T.D.’s arrest (see paragraph 35 above), the applicant’s lawyer sent a letter to the Prosecutor General’s Office, complaining that the search was not being pursued and that the victims were not being informed of the developments in the investigation. The lawyer asked the Prosecutor General to verify whether the Tauragė district prosecutor was acting in line with his legal obligations.
In December 2010 the Prosecutor General’s Office informed the applicant’s lawyer that an internal inquiry had been carried out and that it had been found that the pre-trial investigation into M.K.’s murder was being conducted sluggishly (ikiteisminis tyrimas atliekamas vangiai) and in breach of procedural requirements, that the prosecutors in charge of the investigation had likely failed to ensure that it was being conducted in a thorough and intensive manner, and that they had failed to properly control the investigation, which had caused an excessive delay. Disciplinary proceedings were opened in respect of the two prosecutors who had been in charge of the investigation.
In January 2011 the Prosecutor General’s Office issued the conclusions of the disciplinary proceedings. It found that the prosecutor who had been in charge of the pre-trial investigation from July 2005 to December 2009 had not taken all available measures to investigate the criminal offence within the shortest possible time. As a result, many potential witnesses had gone abroad, one important witness had died (see paragraph 12 above), and others had “clearly withheld evidence”, and the investigation had become very difficult. It was therefore doubtful whether an appropriate and objective investigation of M.K.’s murder was possible at all. The Prosecutor General further held that because of the inappropriate and insufficient investigation during the initial stages, a great deal of important data of potential evidentiary value had been lost, and thus it was questionable whether the evidence which had been gathered was sufficient to transfer the case to a court for examination on the merits. However, since the relevant prosecutor had retired from office, the Prosecutor General discontinued the disciplinary proceedings against him.
As for the prosecutor who had taken over the pre-trial investigation afterwards, the Prosecutor General held that he had not taken all available measures in order to examine M.K.’s alleged involvement in smuggling and human trafficking and uncover the motive of the crime; although the case file included reports stating that those circumstances had been investigated, those reports were “uninformative and formalistic”. Furthermore, the prosecutor had not taken sufficient measures to clarify what M.K. had been doing during the last few hours before the assault and under what circumstances he had consumed alcohol; the prosecutor had also failed to determine in good time that T.D. had gone abroad, and had failed to promptly announce the search in respect of him (see paragraph 35 above). As a result, the length of the pre-trial investigation had been excessive. However, the Prosecutor General concluded that in view of the fact that the investigation had been conducted inappropriately from July 2005 to December 2009, the subsequent shortcomings had not had a significant effect on the overall course of the investigation. Taking into account the prosecutor’s positive character references, the Prosecutor General decided not to give him a disciplinary penalty.
After T.D.’s apprehension in the United Kingdom and surrender to the Lithuanian authorities (see paragraph 35 above), he was questioned again in May 2011. T.D. denied his guilt and alleged that M.K. could have been killed by V.S., although he did not have any proof of that. T.D. also participated in a formal confrontation with one of the police officers who had recorded his initial confession. During the confrontation, T.D. claimed that the officers had pressured him to confess by threatening to detain him with criminals who had known M.K., by threatening his family, and by promising that if he confessed, he would not go to prison. The officer denied T.D.’s allegations and stated that T.D. had confessed of his own free will.
In July 2011 the Lithuanian authorities requested that the relevant United Kingdom authorities extend the scope of the European arrest warrant against T.D. (see paragraph 35 above) in order to add a charge of theft of a firearm by means of physical violence, for his theft of M.K.’s gun. The United Kingdom authorities gave their consent in October 2011.
On 8 December 2011 the authorities informed the victims’ lawyer that the pre-trial investigation had been completed and that he had the right to consult the case file.
On 21 December 2011 an indictment was drawn up against T.D. and the case was transferred to the Klaipėda Regional Court for examination. The applicant and the other victims lodged civil claims.
Between March 2012 and February 2014 twelve hearings were scheduled before the Klaipėda Regional Court. Four of them were adjourned because of the illness or absence of a judge.
On 20 February 2014 the Klaipėda Regional Court acquitted T.D. on the grounds of insufficient evidence. It observed that the charges against him had essentially been based on his own confession given during the pretrial investigation (see paragraphs 16-18 above). However, that confession had been unpersuasive and illogical – the court found it particularly unlikely that T.D. might have hit M.K. with a baseball bat while the latter had been holding a gun. The court also considered, on the basis of the report of the court medical expert (see paragraph 5 above) and the expert’s testimony at the hearing, that it was likely that M.K. had been injured by several different objects, but from T.D.’s confession it was not clear how the metal stick had found its way into M.K.’s hands and how T.D. could have hit M.K. with both the baseball bat and the metal stick.
The court further observed that several witnesses, including M.K.’s family members, had testified that M.K. had referred to his attackers as “them” (see paragraph 29 above), which indicated multiple perpetrators, but that hypothesis had never been investigated. One of the pre-trial investigation officers testified before the court that she had had the impression that M.K. had been assaulted by several individuals, but since T.D. had confessed and no other suspects had been identified, that line of investigation had not been pursued. Another officer testified that T.D. had been identified as a suspect after the police had received operational information, but the officer was unable to explain to the court why the person who had provided that information had not been questioned as a witness; the officer stated that after T.D. had confessed, “it had not been considered necessary”.
The court held that there was no objective evidence linking T.D. to the crime. The baseball bat with which he had allegedly beaten M.K. had not been found, and the metal stick in T.D.’s storehouse had not contained any traces linking it to the crime. The court also considered it illogical that T.D. would have thrown away his baseball bat but kept M.K.’s metal stick  the murder weapon – in storage at his mother’s house.
The court lastly held that when T.D. had confessed almost two years after the murder, investigative measures had been carried out hastily (skubotai) and no objective evidence had been gathered either before the discontinuation of the investigation (see paragraph 31 above) or after it had reopened (see paragraph 33 above). In particular, M.K.’s personal belongings which had allegedly been stolen from him on the night of the murder (his mobile phone and jewellery) and his gun had not been found.
After acquitting T.D., the court dismissed the civil claims lodged by the applicant and the other victims.
The applicant lodged an appeal against the Klaipėda Regional Court’s decision. She argued that the court had not assessed the evidence in its entirety and, without good reason, had refused to rely on T.D.’s confession, which had been detailed, consistent and corroborated by witness testimonies.
The prosecutor lodged an appeal as well, arguing that there was sufficient evidence to convict T.D. and that there were no objective grounds to believe that there might have been multiple perpetrators.
Between April 2014 and May 2016 seven hearings were scheduled before the Court of Appeal. One of them was adjourned because a judge was ill, and another one was adjourned because of the absence of a witness.
On 10 May 2016 the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeals. It upheld the lower court’s findings that T.D.’s confession had been unreliable and that there had been no objective evidence of his guilt.
The Court of Appeal considered that, when questioned on each occasion, T.D. had given a slightly different account of the night of the assault, which gave grounds to doubt his confession. In particular, T.D. had provided contradictory details as to where exactly he and M.K. had met that night; at what moment M.K. had pointed a gun at him; when the metal stick had appeared and where it had come from; where the gun, the baseball bat and the metal stick had been dropped during the fight; whether, after the fight, T.D. had gone to his mother’s house or to his own rented flat; and whether he had hidden the metal stick in storage at his mother’s house immediately that night or sometime later. The contradictions had not been clarified at the scene of the crime, nor had any additional investigative measures been carried out to credibly establish the circumstances of the crime. The court pointed out that between T.D.’s questioning on 12 July 2007 (see paragraph 18 above) and March 2009, when the parties to the proceedings had been informed about the end of the investigation (see paragraph 26 above), no investigative measures had been taken in order to promptly and thoroughly examine the circumstances of the crime.
The court further stated that between the start of the pre-trial investigation in July 2005 and T.D.’s arrest in January 2007 no other suspects had been identified. Police officers had testified before the court that during the investigation they had obtained operational information that T.D. had murdered M.K., yet no evidence collected in line with the domestic law on operational activities had been presented in the proceedings and none of the officers had identified the source of such information. It remained unclear whether an operational investigation had been conducted, and, if so, when and on what grounds, what information had been obtained and how it had been used. The court also emphasised that the crime had been committed in July 2005 and that T.D. had been arrested in January 2007, but the officers had not mentioned the operational information allegedly received about T.D. until 2009. The court considered that, in the absence of details about the source of the operational information, the officers’ testimony in that regard could not be considered credible.
The court also stated that the investigation had not established what car T.D. had been driving on the night of the murder, whether there had been phone calls between T.D. and other individuals which could have confirmed or denied his guilt, or whether on the night of the assault M.K. had actually had a gun or any other personal belongings which had allegedly been taken from him, since no such items had been found.
The court remitted the case to the prosecutor for further investigation and identification of the perpetrator.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, but on 29 August 2016 the Supreme Court refused to accept it for examination, on the basis that it raised no important legal issues.
On 30 June 2016 the Tauragė police informed the prosecutor that the pre-trial investigation was ongoing, but that the investigative measures which had been taken to date had not identified any more witnesses or potential suspects. On 18 July 2016 the prosecutor discontinued the investigation.
On 14 September 2018 a senior prosecutor quashed the decision to discontinue the investigation, finding that there were no legal grounds to do so. However, the senior prosecutor suspended the investigation, on the grounds that thirteen years had passed since the criminal offence, the investigation had lasted six years and all available measures had been carried out, but it had not been possible to identify the perpetrator. The applicant and the other victims were informed about the senior prosecutor’s decision. It was also explained to them that if new relevant circumstances came to light, the investigation would be resumed.
From 1 May 2003 until 1 October 2010 Article 176 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereafter “the CCP”) provided that a pretrial investigation had to be completed within the shortest possible time. Article 176 § 2 of the CCP provided that the prosecutor was under an obligation to control compliance with that requirement.
Since 1 October 2010 Article 176 § 1 (3) of the CCP has provided that a pre-trial investigation concerning serious and very serious crimes has to be completed within nine months. Article 176 § 2 of the CCP provides that that time-limit can be extended by a senior prosecutor when the case is complex or of a large scope, or when there are other important circumstances.