The case originated in an application (no. 34056/02) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mrs Myroslava Gongadze (“the applicant”), on 16 September 2002.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Preuss-Laussinotte, a lawyer practising in . The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mrs V. Lutkovska and Mrs Z. Bortnovska.
The applicant alleged that the State authorities had failed to protect the life of her husband and investigate his disappearance and death, which caused her serious anguish and distress.
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 22 March 2005, the Chamber declared the application admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in .
Events prior to the disappearance of the applicant's husband
The investigation into the disappearance and murder of the applicant's husband
The political context
“–  the disappearance of Lieutenant-General Pukach; the leaking of information that disrupted the work of Ukrainian and Israeli agencies who were preparing to detain him; the lack of any public scrutiny of that potentially criminal action; and the absence of any investigation into the process by which Lieutenant-General Pukach was previously released and the Pukach case closed in December 2003;
–  the death of former Minister of the Interior Mr Kravchenko, who could have provided important information about the link between the conversations recorded by Melnychenko and the murder; and the lack of any public scrutiny of the possible negligence of the GPO in its handling of the Kravchenko case and in protecting him as a witness;
–  the failure to interview numerous witnesses in the Ministry of the Interior with a knowledge of the system of surveillance operated there; and the failure to investigate thoroughly the links between the 'werewolves' and Honcharov cases with the Gongadze case;
–  the failure to resolve the problems surrounding the Melnychenko tapes, with a view to using them as primary evidence in court, caused mainly by the mistakes and sluggishness of the GPO;
...”
The investigation into the disappearance and murder of the applicant's husband
The political context
Recent events
Article 3
“The human being, his or her life and health, honour and dignity, inviolability and security are recognised in  as having the highest social value. ...”
Article 27
“Every person has the inalienable right to life.
No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of life. The duty of the State is to protect human life. ...”
Article 28
“Everyone has the right to respect for his or her dignity.
No one shall be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment that violates his or her dignity. ...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure provide:
Article 28 
A civil claim in a criminal case
“Anyone who has suffered material damage as a result of a crime shall be entitled to lodge an application to join the criminal proceedings as a civil party claiming damages ..., which shall be considered by the court at the same time as the criminal case ...”
Article 49 
An aggrieved party
“Anyone who has suffered ... damage as a result of a crime may be recognised as an aggrieved party. ...
A citizen who has been recognised as an aggrieved party in respect of the crime shall be entitled to give evidence in the case. An aggrieved party, or his or her representative, shall be entitled to ... make requests; study all the materials of the case file when the pre-trial investigation is completed; ... [and] lodge complaints against the actions of the inquirer, investigator, prosecutor and court ...
In cases where the crime has caused the death of the victim, the rights provided for in this Article shall be conferred upon the deceased's next of kin.”
Article 94 
Grounds for instituting a criminal action
“A criminal action shall be instituted on the following grounds:
(1)  applications or communications from ... individuals;
...
(5)  direct detection of signs of a crime by a body of inquiry or investigation, a prosecutor or a court.
An action may be instituted only when there is sufficient evidence that a crime has been committed.”
The relevant provisions of the Prosecution Service Act, in the 1995 version, provided:
Section 5 
Main functions of the Prosecution Service
“The main functions of the Prosecution Service are:
...
supervision of compliance with the law by the bodies that combat crimes and other offences and investigate circumstances indicating that a crime has been committed;
investigation of circumstances indicating that a crime has been committed;
...”