The case originated in an application (no. 8351/17) against the Kingdom of Belgium lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Spanish nationals (“the applicants”), on 16 January 2017. The applicants’ personal details are set out in the Appendix.
The applicants were represented by Ms M.L. García Blanco, a lawyer practising in Madrid. The Belgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms I. Niedlispacher, of the Federal Justice Department.
Relying on the procedural aspect of Article 2 of the Convention, the applicants complained of the Belgian authorities’ refusal to execute the European arrest warrant issued by the Spanish authorities against N.J.E., the person suspected of involvement in the death of their father, in that it prevented a prosecution from being brought against N.J.E.
On 14 March 2017 the Government were given notice of the application. The applicants and the Government each filed written observations on the admissibility and merits of the case (Rule 54 § 2 of the Rules of Court). The Spanish Government exercised their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (a)). Third-party comments were also received from N.J.E. and from the association Colectivo de víctimas del terrorismo (COVITE), who had been given leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 (a)).
The applicants are the children of Lieutenant Colonel Ramón Romeo, who died following an attack carried out on 19 March 1981 in Bilbao (Spain) by a commando unit claiming to belong to the terrorist organisation ETA. An alleged member of the commando unit, N.J.E., a Spanish national of Basque origin, was suspected of shooting the applicants’ father at pointblank range.
One of Ramón Romeo’s children joined proceedings in Spain as a civil party. In May 2007 all the members of the commando unit were convicted by the Spanish courts, with the exception of N.J.E., who had reportedly fled to Mexico following the events of 1981 and later moved to Belgium.
A Spanish investigating judge of the Audiencia Nacional issued two European arrest warrants in respect of N.J.E. on 9 July 2004 and 1 December 2005 for the purpose of bringing criminal proceedings, respectively, on charges of attempted murder and terrorism committed in Bilbao on 14 June 1981, and participation in a criminal organisation, terrorism, intentional killing, infliction of serious bodily harm, and murder, committed in Bilbao on 19 March 1981.
By an order of the investigating judge of the Ghent Court of First Instance of 9 October 2013, N.J.E. was placed in detention.
In an order of 16 October 2013 the Committals Division (chambre du conseil) of the same court declared the European arrest warrants enforceable.
N.J.E. appealed against that order. She argued at the outset that execution of the arrest warrants should be refused, since prosecution of the offences was time-barred under Belgian law and the facts came within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Belgian courts (section 4(4) of the European Arrest Warrant Act of 19 December 2003, see paragraph 25 below). She also submitted that there were substantial reasons for believing that execution of the European arrest warrants would infringe her fundamental rights under Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union (section 4(5) of the above-mentioned Act).
On 31 October 2013, referring to Articles 6 and 7 of the preliminary part of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 26 below), the Indictments Division of the Ghent Court of Appeal held that N.J.E. did not come within the jurisdiction of the Belgian criminal courts, taking the view that N.J.E. did not have her main residence in Belgium. The Indictments Division further noted that N.J.E. was not being prosecuted in Belgium for any of the offences provided for in Article 6 of the preliminary part of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Lastly, it observed that there had been no “complaint from the aggrieved foreign national or his or her family”, or any “official notice given to the Belgian authority by the authority of the country in which the offence [had been] committed” within the meaning of Article 7 § 2 of the preliminary part of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Nevertheless, the Indictments Division refused execution of the European arrest warrants on the basis of section 4(5) of the European Arrest Warrant Act. It held that the punishable acts needed to be viewed in the broader context of Spain’s contemporary political history and the personal background of N.J.E., who, having been active in the “Basque armed resistance movement” in her twenties, was now a 55-year-old professional woman living a normal life in Ghent. Furthermore, basing its finding in particular on a report by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) concerning the latter’s periodic visit to Spain from 31 May to 13 June 2011, the Indictments Division held that there were substantial reasons for believing that execution of the European arrest warrant would infringe N.J.E.’s fundamental rights under Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union. It found in particular as follows:
 “... persons charged with punishable offences with an alleged terrorist motive are held in Spain under a different custodial regime, in degrading conditions possibly accompanied by torture, and with very limited contact with the outside world (family, lawyer and assistance), as borne out by evidence ... The investigating judge and the public prosecutor’s office were wrong to assert that there exists a presumption of observance of fundamental rights in Spain including with regard to former members of the Basque resistance movements, as [N.J.E.] probably was.
Firstly, there can never be a presumption of observance of human rights.
Secondly, the law itself runs counter to the existence [of such a presumption], given that the person concerned by the [European arrest warrant] has the right to demonstrate and explain convincingly that there are substantial reasons to fear a human rights violation. This additional safeguard is afforded within a strictly European legal context.
Reports from international organisations support these genuine fears.
Thirdly, the law nowhere requires it to be demonstrated that fundamental rights would be breached as a matter of absolute certainty.”
Lastly, the Indictments Division ordered N.J.E.’s release.
The Belgian Federal Prosecutor’s Office lodged an appeal on points of law against this judgment. It argued that, regard being had to the principle of mutual trust between the member States of the European Union (“the EU”), any decision to refuse extradition on the grounds of a breach of the fundamental rights of the person concerned had to be supported by detailed evidence demonstrating the existence of a clear threat to his or her rights and capable of rebutting the presumption of observance of fundamental rights. The judgment of the Indictments Division had provided no specific evidence of a risk of a breach of N.J.E.’s fundamental rights, and had been drafted in such general terms that the presumption of observance of human rights in favour of the State issuing the European arrest warrant could not be rebutted.
In a judgment of 19 November 2013 the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal by the Federal Prosecutor’s Office. With regard to the principles applicable in the case before it, it observed the following:
 “Under section 4(5) of the Act of 19 December 2003, execution of a European arrest warrant must be refused if there are substantial reasons for believing that execution would infringe the fundamental rights of the person concerned as enshrined in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union, namely the rights guaranteed by the [Convention], which stem from the constitutional traditions common to the European Union Member States, as general principles of Community law.
Recital 10 of the preamble to Council Framework Decision 2002/584/JAI of 13 June 2002 on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States makes clear that the mechanism of the European arrest warrant is based on a high level of confidence between Member States. This high level of confidence entails a presumption of observance by the issuing State of the fundamental rights referred to in section 4(5) of the European Arrest Warrant Act of 19 December 2003.
In view of this principle of mutual trust between the Member States, any refusal to surrender the person concerned must be supported by detailed evidence of a clear threat to his or her fundamental rights capable of rebutting the presumption in favour of the issuing State of observance of those rights.
The judge has unfettered discretion to assess whether the detailed evidence relied on, pointing to a clear threat to the fundamental rights of the person concerned, is sufficient to rebut the aforementioned presumption. The Court [of Cassation] merely verifies that the judge has not drawn inferences from his or her findings that are unconnected to the latter or cannot be justified by them.”
Turning to the circumstances of the case before it, the Court of Cassation found as follows:
 “The judgment finds that there are substantial reasons for believing that the execution of the European arrest warrants would infringe the defendant’s fundamental rights because ‘persons charged with punishable offences with an alleged terrorist motive are held in Spain under a different custodial regime, in degrading conditions possibly accompanied by torture, and with very limited contact with the outside world (family, lawyer and assistance)’. In so finding, it refers to the 2011 reports of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment of the Council of Europe.
Hence, the judgment provides legal justification for refusing extradition, as there are substantial reasons for believing that execution of the European arrest warrants would infringe the fundamental rights of the person concerned under Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union.
This ground of appeal cannot be upheld.”
In a letter of 27 November 2014 in reply to one of the applicants, concerning the refusal to execute the European arrest warrant in respect of N.J.E., the President of the Court of Cassation specified that the refusal to execute a European arrest warrant did not necessarily mean that the person concerned would escape punishment. He added as follows:
 « [O]ther procedures exist which should be implemented by the competent authority, as appropriate, so that persons suspected of serious crimes who are no longer in the State where the crimes were allegedly committed can be put on trial. You may assess in that regard whether or not to make an application to the Federal Prosecutor’s Office.”
On 8 May 2015 a fresh European arrest warrant was issued against N.J.E. by an investigating judge of the Audiencia Nacional, concerning the acts committed in Bilbao on 19 March 1981 and classified, in particular, as “terrorist murder” in Spanish law. As to the risk of torture in Spain alleged by the Indictments Division, the investigating judge specified that the CPT’s information had been disputed by the Spanish Government in March 2012 and that, during its subsequent periodic visits in 2012 and 2014, the CPT had made no further mention of it. With regard to incommunicado detention, the judge stated that it was tightly regulated. It could be imposed only in exceptional cases concerning the investigation of armed gangs or terrorists; all persons subjected to such detention were guaranteed a forensic medical examination, and the national torture prevention mechanism included the possibility of unannounced visits by the Ombudsman; the person concerned was entitled to the assistance of a lawyer during the police and judicial proceedings; detention was always subject to judicial supervision, and the person concerned had the right to apply for a writ of habeas corpus; the communal areas were monitored by CCTV and interviews could be recorded; and the restrictions on communications with family and friends were limited to five days and had to be reviewed by a judge. Furthermore, the crime of torture under the Spanish Criminal Code encompassed any physical or psychological ill-treatment, and allegations of torture were examined by an independent judge. Lastly, the investigating judge observed that Spain had transposed the European directives strengthening existing safeguards in criminal matters.
Following the issuing of this arrest warrant, N.J.E. was re-arrested by the Belgian authorities on 20 June 2016 but was released on the same day.
In an order of 29 June 2016 the Committals Division of the Ghent Court of First Instance refused execution of the new arrest warrant.
On 14 July 2016, following an appeal by the Federal Prosecutor’s Office, the Indictments Division of the Ghent Court of Appeal upheld the order, ruling that the new arrest warrant did not contain any information that would lead to a different conclusion than that reached in its judgment of 31 October 2013. It based its finding on, among other things, the documents submitted by N.J.E. and, in particular, the United Nations Human Rights Committee’s concluding observations on the sixth periodic report of Spain (adopted at its session from 29 June to 24 July 2015), which recommended “once again” that the Spanish authorities put an end to incommunicado detention and guarantee the rights of all suspects to freely choose a lawyer whom they could consult in complete confidentiality and who could be present at interrogations.
On 15 July 2016 the Federal Prosecutor’s Office lodged an appeal on points of law, arguing in particular that there had been a breach of section 4(5) of the European Arrest Warrant Act on the grounds that the reference to the Human Rights Committee’s observations was insufficient to rebut the presumption of observance of human rights.
In a judgment of 27 July 2016 the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal, finding that the ground of appeal relied on had been based on an incomplete reading of the impugned judgment.
For the purposes of the present case the Court refers to its judgment in Pirozzi v. Belgium (no. 21055/11, §§ 24-29, 17 April 2018), which sets out the relevant provisions of Council Framework Decision 2002/584/JAI of 13 June 2002 on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States, together with a summary of the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union (“the CJEU”) in that regard.
Mention should also be made of the CJEU judgment in the case of Generalstaatsanwaltschaft (Conditions of detention in Hungary) (Case C220/18 PPU, judgment of 25 July 2018). This judgment expanded on the methodology set out in the judgment in Aranyosi and Căldăraru (Joined Cases C‑404/15 and C‑659/15, judgment of 5 April 2016) and determined the extent of the assessment which the executing member State had to undertake where it had evidence pointing to systemic or generalised deficiencies with regard to the conditions of detention in prisons in the issuing State. The CJEU held, in substance, firstly, that the executing judicial authorities were required only to assess the actual and precise conditions of detention of the person concerned that were relevant in determining whether he or she was at real risk of being subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment. Secondly, where the issuing authority had given assurances that the person concerned would not be subjected to such treatment, the executing authority, in view of the mutual trust between the judicial authorities of the member States, had to rely on those assurances, in the absence of any specific indications that the conditions of detention were in breach of Article 4 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
In Belgium, the above-mentioned framework decision was transposed by means of the European Arrest Warrant Act of 19 December 2003, the relevant provisions of which read as follows:
Section 2
“1.  The arrest and surrender of persons sought for the purposes of conducting a criminal prosecution or executing a custodial sentence or detention order between Belgium and the other Member States of the European Union shall be governed by this Act.
The arrest and surrender shall be carried out on the basis of a European arrest warrant.
The European arrest warrant is a judicial decision issued by the competent judicial authority of a European Union Member State, referred to as the issuing judicial authority, with a view to the arrest and surrender by the competent judicial authority of another Member State, referred to as the executing authority, of a person sought for the purposes of conducting a criminal prosecution or executing a custodial sentence or detention order.
...”
Section 3
“A European arrest warrant may be issued for acts punishable under the law of the issuing Member State by a custodial sentence or a detention order for a maximum period of at least 12 months or, where a sentence has been passed or a detention order has been made, for sentences of at least four months.”
Section 4
“Execution of the European arrest warrant shall be refused in the following cases:
If the offence on which the arrest warrant is based is covered by amnesty in Belgium, where Belgium had jurisdiction to prosecute the offence under its own law.
If it transpires from the information available to the judge that the requested person has been the subject of a final judgment in Belgium or in another Member State in respect of the same acts, provided that, where sentence has been passed, the sentence has been served or is currently being served or may no longer be executed under the law of the sentencing Member State, or where a final judgment has been given in respect of the requested person in Belgium or in another Member State in relation to the same acts, which prevents further proceedings.
If the person who is the subject of the European arrest warrant may not, owing to his or her age, be held criminally responsible for the acts on which the arrest warrant is based under Belgian law.
Where the criminal prosecution or punishment of the requested person is statute-barred according to Belgian law and the acts fall within the jurisdiction of the Belgian courts.
If there are substantial grounds for believing that execution of the European arrest warrant would infringe the fundamental rights of the person concerned under Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union.
...”
Section 11
“1.  Within twenty-four hours following the actual deprivation of liberty, the person concerned shall be brought before an investigating judge, who shall inform him or her (1) of the existence and content of the European arrest warrant; (2) of the possibility of consenting to his or her surrender to the issuing judicial authority; and (3) of the right to choose a lawyer and an interpreter.
This information shall be mentioned in the record of the hearing.
...”
Section 15
“If the investigating judge deems the information provided by the issuing Member State in the European arrest warrant to be insufficient to enable a decision to be taken on the person’s surrender, he or she shall make an urgent request for the additional information required and may stipulate a time-limit for receiving it, taking account of the need to comply with the time-limit laid down in section 16(1).
...”
Article 4 of the Belgian Criminal Code provides:
“Offences committed outside the territory of the Kingdom of Belgium by Belgians or foreign nationals shall be punishable in Belgium only in those cases stipulated by law.”
The relevant provisions concerning the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Belgian courts in criminal matters are contained in the preliminary part of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
Article 6
“Criminal proceedings may be brought in Belgium against any Belgian or any person whose principal residence is in the Kingdom of Belgium who, outside the country’s territory, commits one of the following:
 1.  a criminal offence against State security;
 1 bis.  a serious violation of international humanitarian law for the purposes of Title I bis of Book II of the Criminal Code;
 1 ter.  a terrorist offence under Title I ter of Book II of the Criminal Code.
 2.  A criminal offence against public confidence as laid down in Chapters I, II and III of Book II, Title III, of the Criminal Code or an offence under Articles 497 and 497 bis, if the offence in question concerns either the euro or other currencies which are legal tender in Belgium or objects intended for use in their manufacture, forgery, alteration or falsification, or the effects, papers, seals, stamps or marks of the Belgian State or public authorities or institutions.
 3.  A criminal offence against public confidence under the same provisions, if the offence in question concerns currencies which are not legal tender in Belgium or objects intended for use in their manufacture, forgery, alteration or falsification, or the effects, papers, seals, stamps or marks of another country.
In the latter case prosecution shall be possible only where the Belgian authority receives official notice from the authority of the country concerned.”
Article 7
“1. Criminal proceedings may be brought against any Belgian or any person whose principal residence is in the Kingdom of Belgium who, outside the country’s territory, commits an act classified as a criminal offence under Belgian law, if the act in question is punishable by the legislation of the country where it was committed.
If the offence was committed against a foreign national, a prosecution may be brought only on an application by the public prosecutor. It must also be preceded by a complaint from the aggrieved foreign national or his or her family, or by official notice given to the Belgian authority by the authority of the country in which the offence was committed.
If the offence was committed in wartime against a national of a country allied with Belgium for the purposes of the second paragraph of Article 117 of the Criminal Code, the official notice may also be given by the authority of the country of which the foreign national is or was a national.”
In its concluding observations on the sixth periodic report of Spain, adopted at its 3192nd meeting held on 20 July 2015, the United Nations Human Rights Committee addressed the issue of incommunicado detention in the following terms:
 “17.  The Committee reiterates its concern at the practice of court-authorized incommunicado detention. The Committee notes the initiative to reform the Code of Criminal Procedure and the information provided by the State party concerning the reduced use of incommunicado detention, but regrets that the reform does not abolish incommunicado detention or guarantee all the rights set out in article 14 of the Covenant, including the right to legal aid (arts. 7, 9, 10 and 14).
The Committee reiterates its previous recommendations (CCPR/C/ESP/CO/5, para. 14) and recommends once again that the State party should take the necessary legislative measures to put an end to incommunicado detention and to guarantee the rights of all detainees to medical services and to freely choose a lawyer whom they can consult in complete confidentiality and who can be present at interrogations.”