The applicant alleged that his son had died in detention as a result of torture by agents of the Ministry of National Security (“the MNS”) of the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic (“the NAR”), and that the domestic authorities had failed to carry out an effective investigation in that regard, in violation of Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1938 and lives in Nakhchivan. He was represented by Mr R. Mustafazade and Mr A. Mustafayev, lawyers based in Azerbaijan.
The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicant’s son, Turaj Zeynalov (T.Z.) who was born in 1980, worked as a driver at Nakhchivan International Airport at the time of the events in question.
According to the Government, on 24 August 2011 T.Z. was invited to the MNS of the NAR where he was questioned as a witness. The questioning began at 10.15 a.m. and ended at 12.40 p.m. On the same day at 4.30 p.m. he was arrested as a suspect and he was allowed to make a phone call informing his father and brother of his arrest. On the same day, from 5.25 p.m. until 6.35 p.m., T.Z. was questioned as a suspect in the presence of a State appointed lawyer. Following the questioning, he was taken to the Pre-trail Detention Facility of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the NAR. On 26 August 2011 he was taken to the MNS of the NAR where he was charged with the criminal offence of high treason as provided for by Article 274 of the Criminal Code and was questioned as an accused. It appears from the documents in the case file that he was accused of collaboration with the Iranian intelligence service. On the same day following the questioning he was taken to the Nakhchivan City Court which ordered his pre-trial detention. From 26 to 28 August 2011, he was detained at the Pre-trial Detention Facility of the Ministry of Justice of the NAR.
According to the Government, on 28 August 2011 the applicant was taken to the premises of the MNS of the NAR for questioning. However, he suddenly felt ill and an ambulance was called. T.Z. was provided with first aid, but his state of health continued to deteriorate and the ambulance took him to hospital. He died on his way to hospital. His family was immediately informed of his death. In support of their version of events, the Government relied on a record of a request for medical aid (tibbi yardımın çağırılması barədə protokol) prepared by an investigator at the MNS of the NAR and an explanation (arayış) from the emergency service of the Ministry of Health of the NAR. The record of a request for medical aid was dated 28 August 2011 and indicated that it was drawn up from 11.30 a.m. until 11.55 a.m.
Following T.Z.’s death, a video-recording of his body was given to the media by members of his family, who had filmed the corpse before the funeral ceremonies. From the video-recording, it appears that there were a number of visible bruises on T.Z.’s shoulders, elbows, knees and buttocks. Several tumours on various parts of T.Z.’s body were also visible. The incident was widely covered and commented on in the media.
The documents submitted by the Government in their observations indicate that on 28 August 2011 an investigator ordered a post-mortem examination of T.Z.’s body, which was carried out on the same day and, therefore, only several hours after his death. The expert drew up report no. 10 dated 5 September 2011 in which he concluded that the cause of death had been pulmonary embolism as a result of vascular thrombosis of the lower limbs (aşağı ətrafların venalarının trombozu hesabına əmələ gəlmiş ağciyar arteriyasının tromboemboliyası). The expert found that there was no injury or trace of injury or damage to T.Z.’s body or clothing, but noticed seven tumours (törəmə) on various parts of his body. He also indicated that post-mortem lividity (meyit ləkələri) had developed on the back of the corpse (gövdənin arxa səthində).
The documents submitted by the Government in their observations further indicate that by a decision of 9 September 2011 an investigator at the Nakhchivan City Prosecutor’s Office declined to institute criminal proceedings in connection with T.Z.’s death. The decision relied on the conclusions of report no. 10 and statements given by agents of the MNS. The decision also referred to statements given by the applicant, T.Z.’s wife and his two brothers, who had stated that there had been tumours on T.Z.’s body because he had been suffering from skin cancer and had been operated on several times because of this.
According to the applicant, on an unspecified date in 2011 T.Z.’s family asked the MNS to investigate the circumstances of his death.
On an unspecified date in 2011 T.Z.’s family was provided with a document entitled “extract from decision” and dated 26 November 2011. By means of this document, the chief investigator at the MNS of the NAR informed the family that on 24 August 2011 T.Z. had been arrested within the framework of criminal proceedings instituted under Article 274 of the Criminal Code, and on 26 August 2011 he had been charged with the criminal offence of high treason. However, on 8 September 2011 the criminal proceedings in question had been discontinued owing to T.Z.’s death. The document was silent as to the circumstances of T.Z.’s death.
On 12 December 2011 the lawyer of T.Z.’s spouse wrote to the Prosecutor General and the MNS of the NAR, asking them to provide him with all documents relating to the investigation into T.Z.’s death, such as forensic reports and procedural decisions, as well as the documents concerning the criminal proceedings instituted against T.Z.
On 19 December 2011 the lawyer wrote to the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Ombudsman, noting that T.Z.’s family had not been informed of any investigation into T.Z.’s death, and had not been provided with any document relating to the investigation into his death.
On 29 December 2011 the chief investigator at the MNS of the NAR sent a letter to the lawyer in which, without replying to the lawyer’s requests, he accused the lawyer and the deceased’s family of spreading defamatory information about the activity of the MNS.
By a letter of 30 December 2011, the Ombudsman informed the lawyer that following an investigation carried out by the prosecuting authorities of the NAR, it had been established that T.Z. had not been ill-treated by agents of the MNS and had died of a pulmonary embolism. In this connection, the Ombudsman relied on report no. 10 dated 5 September 2011. However, the Ombudsman did not provide T.Z.’s family with a copy of the above-mentioned forensic report or any other document relating to the investigation into T.Z.’s death.
On 5 March 2012 the lawyer wrote to the Prosecutor General and the MNS of the Republic of Azerbaijan, asking for documents relating to the investigation into T.Z.’s death.
On 19 March 2012 the Prosecutor General’s Office informed the lawyer that his request had been examined and he could apply to the prosecuting authorities of the NAR in order to obtain the relevant documents.
Relying on the letter of 19 March 2012 from the Prosecutor General’s Office, the lawyer applied to the Prosecutor General of the NAR, asking him to provide the deceased’s family with the relevant documents. However, he did not receive any reply to his request.
On 3 May 2012 the chief investigator at the MNS of the NAR sent a letter to the applicant, accusing him of defamation on account of the content of a complaint that he had sent to the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan concerning the activity of the MNS. The investigator further noted that T.Z. had not been ill-treated and had died of a pulmonary embolism. In this connection, he relied on report no. 10, but failed to provide the applicant with a copy of the report in question or any other document relating to the investigation into T.Z.’s death.
By a letter of 16 May 2012, the Prosecutor General’s Office informed the applicant that T.Z. had not been ill-treated in the MNS and his death had resulted from pulmonary embolism. It was also indicated that by a decision of 9 September 2011 the Nakhchivan City Prosecutor’s Office had declined to institute criminal proceedings in connection with T.Z.’s death. However, the Prosecutor General’s Office did not provide the applicant with a copy of the decision in question.
On 21 May 2012 the lawyer of T.Z.’s spouse lodged an application with the Sabail District Court, asking the court to declare unlawful the domestic authorities’ failure to provide T.Z.’s family with the documents relating to the investigation into his death, and to order them to provide the family with the relevant documents.
On 24 May 2012 the Sabail District Court refused to accept the application for examination. It found that it had been incorrectly lodged under the procedure for judicial review of prosecuting authorities’ actions or decisions, as provided for by Articles 449-450 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”). The court held that this type of complaint should be made in line with the procedure for administrative courts, in accordance with Article 2 of the Code of Administrative Procedure.
On 22 June 2012 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s decision.
On 12 October 2012 the applicant, represented by the same lawyer who had previously represented T.Z.’s spouse, lodged an application against the Prosecutor General’s Office and the MNS of the NAR with the Nakhchivan Administrative Economic Court. He asked the court to order the respondent parties to provide him with the documents relating to the investigation into the death of his son, and to declare their inaction in that regard unlawful.
By a letter dated 17 October 2012 and signed by its president, the Nakhchivan Administrative Economic Court informed the applicant that his application was outside its jurisdiction and that he could lodge a complaint with the relevant court under the procedure for judicial review of prosecuting authorities’ actions or decisions, in accordance with the CCrP.
On 2 November 2012 the applicant appealed against this letter to the Supreme Court of the NAR, reiterating his previous complaints. The applicant did not receive any reply to his appeal.
In December 2012 I.M., a person who claimed to be a former agent of the MNS of the NAR and who was in Russia at that time, stated in the media that T.Z. had been tortured on the premises of the MNS in Nakhchivan from 24 to 27 August 2011, and that he had died as result of torture.
In January 2013 I.M. applied for asylum in Russia, claiming to be a key witness to T.Z.’s death. The domestic proceedings giving rise to the refusal of his asylum request and an extradition request by the Azerbaijani authorities within the framework of criminal proceedings instituted against I.M. for fraud were the subject matter of the Court’s decision in Ibragim Musayev v. Russia (no. 55091/13, 23 September 2014).
The relevant provisions of the CCrP are described in detail in the Court’s judgment in Huseynova v. Azerbaijan (no. 10653/10, §§ 61-62, 13 April 2017).
On 18 July 2018 the Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) published the report on the visit to Azerbaijan carried out by the CPT from 13 to 20 December 2012. The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
“F. The Z. case
On 9 September 2011, the CPT wrote to the Azerbaijani authorities concerning the death in August 2011 of T. Z. (aged 31) who, at the time, was remanded in custody in the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic of Azerbaijan. The Committee had received allegations that Mr Z. had died as a result of injuries inflicted by officials of the Ministry of National Security.
This was the first in a series of letters from the CPT on the same subject, aimed at obtaining detailed information on investigations carried out into the death of Mr Z. as well as copies of all relevant medical/autopsy reports. Some of the information requested was subsequently provided by the Azerbaijani authorities but certain documents of a medical nature remained outstanding. As already indicated, much of this remaining information – and in particular the autopsy report – was finally provided during the 2012 visit.
According to the information provided by the Azerbaijani authorities, a protocol of detention was drawn up in respect of Mr Z. in the afternoon of 24 August 2011 and he was placed in the temporary detention facility of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic of Azerbaijan. He was subsequently remanded in custody on 26 August and transferred the same day to the Pre-trial detention facility of the Ministry of Justice. Apart from some skin deformations in the chest and navel areas, no marks were observed on his body on his admission to the facility, and the diagnosis during the preliminary examination carried out on 27 August after Mr Z.’s admission to the Pre-trial detention facility was "practically healthy". At approximately 9.00 on 28 August, Mr Z. was transferred from the Pre-trial detention facility to the Ministry of National Security of Nakhchivan "for the purposes of conducting necessary investigative activities", following a written request from an investigator of that Ministry. Mr Z. began to feel unwell en route to the Ministry of National Security and, on his arrival there, he was not able to make a statement. An ambulance was called and he was transferred to Nakhchivan City Medical Diagnostic Centre; on his arrival at the Diagnostic Centre, he was found to be dead (confirmed by a certificate issued by the Centre at 13.35 the same day).
A pre-investigative inquiry was opened by the Prosecutor’s Office of the City of Nakhchivan on 28 August 2011. An autopsy of Mr Z.’s body was carried out at the "Forensic Medicine and Pathological Anatomy Unification" of the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic of Azerbaijan on the same day (between 17.00 and 18.30). According to the autopsy’s conclusions dated 8 September: no signs of injury were found on the body or clothes of Mr Z.; the cause of his death was "thrombosis of lower parts veins resulting in thromboembolism of lung artery"; the time of death was 28 August. On 9 September, the prosecutor’s office closed the pre-investigative inquiry with the decision not to initiate a criminal case.
The autopsy report and those photographs provided have been examined by forensic doctors within the Committee. Video footage of the body of Mr Z., apparently taken by his relatives after the body had been returned to them, has also been examined. This material gives rise to the following observations:
- in the photographs provided to the delegation, only the upper part of the body is undressed; in order for a proper assessment to be made, the photographs of the undressed lower part of the body should also have been provided;
- in the video footage, visible lesions can be observed on both gluteal regions and in the right coccygeal region, in the form of bluish violet discoloration of the skin, clearly distinct from post-mortem lividity and indicative of bruises and haematomas; no description of such lesions is provided in the autopsy report;
- pathological findings described in the autopsy report and notably:
 (external examination) thromboses in the lower extremities (“Thrombus are detected at the both lower areas”);
 (internal examination) thrombotic embolus in the pulmonary artery (“At the cut of the lung artery there was freely disposed thrombus mass at reddish-grey colour was detected”) and sub-epicardial haemorrhages (“Few dot alike haemorrhages are detected at the epicardium”) are not documented in the photographs made available to the delegation;
- in the autopsy report, no reference is made to incisions having been made through the soft tissue of the lower extremities to enable examination of superficial and deep veins; and such incisions are not apparent on the video footage;
- the results of the toxicological analyses and of the histological examination of sampled organs have not been included in the autopsy report and have not been otherwise provided to the delegation.
The CPT considers that on the basis of the forensic examination carried out it is not possible to conclude that the cause of Mr Z.’s death was that referred to in the autopsy report (“thrombosis of lower parts veins resulting in thromboembolism of lung artery”). To reach such a conclusion would require a detailed examination of veins on both lower extremities including histological assessment of any thrombus found for evaluation of eventual vein pathology and maturity of the thrombus.
Further, taking into account the circumstances of Mr Z.’s death, i.e. rapid deterioration of the health of a young man while in detention, other possible causes of death should have been fully explored, in particular through examination of sub-cutaneous tissues by full exposure of the soft tissues and musculature on the back of the body including the extremities (so-called “peel-off” procedure). Finally, the CPT notes that none of the principal findings in the autopsy report, notably the absence of injuries to the body (and more specifically the lower part), the finding of a thrombus in the lower extremities and of thrombotic embolus in the pulmonary artery, are supported by photographic evidence.”
On 18 July 2018 the CPT published the report on the visit to Azerbaijan carried out by the CPT from 29 March to 8 April 2016. The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
“6. ... The delegation also noted with regret that some of the information provided in the responses to previous CPT reports turned out to be untrue –for example as regards ... the failure to re-open the inquiry into the death of T. Z. The CPT must again stress that the principle of co-operation encompasses the obligation to provide accurate information to the Committee and refrain from deceptive action of the kind referred to above.”