The case originated in an application (no. 56120/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Gasan Baysultanov (“the applicant”), on 24 July 2013.
The applicant was initially represented by a retired judge, Mr G. Kostrov, and then by the Stichting Russian Justice Initiative, in partnership with another NGO, Astreya (SRJI/Astreya). The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 19 June 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Article 2 of the Convention concerning the killing of the applicant’s wife and wounding of the applicant, and of the authorities’ failure to investigate the matter effectively. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
The applicant was born in 1981 and lives in Khasavyurt, the Republic of Dagestan, Russia. He is the widower of Ms Saniyat Magomedova, who was born in 1983, and allegedly a former colleague of Mr A.B., a military leader (aмир (emir)) of an illegal armed group who was wanted by the police.
On 2 November 2006 Dagestan law-enforcement authorities obtained information about Mr A.B.’s whereabouts. According to it, he had been sheltered at the applicant’s house in Khasavyurt and both the applicant and Mr A.B. were armed with machine guns.
At about 8 p.m. on 2 November 2006 Dagestan law-enforcement authorities including the heads of the Khasavyurt district police station (Officer G.G), the Khasavyurt police unit for fighting against organised crime (Officer G.G.), the Kazbek district operative unit (Officer A.S.) and the deputy minister of the Dagestan Ministry of the Interior (Officer A.K.) conducted a meeting to plan Mr A.B.’s arrest.
They decided that on the next morning – 3 November 2006 – at around 6.30 a.m. a special police unit would enter the applicant’s house to ensure the arrest of Mr A.B., if he refused to surrender. The Kazbek district operative unit headed by Officer A.S. and several other groups of officers would secure the premises from the back courtyard of the house and back up the special police unit.
At around 2 a.m. on 3 November 2006 Officer A.S. instructed his subordinates about the forthcoming operation, saying that they would participate in a special operation aimed at the arrest or killing of a particularly dangerous criminal, Mr A.B. The unit’s task was to secure the area and back up their colleagues from the special police unit.
At about 3 or 4 a.m. on 3 November 2006 police officers from the Kazbek district operative unit, the Novolakskiy district police station, the Khasavyurt town police station and the consolidated police unit of the Russian Ministry of the Interior in Dagestan arrived at the area in the vicinity of the applicant’s house in numerous vehicles, including armoured personnel carriers. They left the vehicles and silently walked to their positions. The special unit which was supposed to enter the applicant’s house set itself up around 50 metres from the house awaiting surrender negotiations to begin in the morning. Other officers cordoned off the area around the applicant’s house. Officer A.S. with his subordinates waited in ambush under a shed in a neighbouring courtyard. They were separated from the applicant’s house by a wire-mesh fence.
At about 5 or 6 a.m. on 3 November 2006 the applicant and his wife stepped out from the house and walked to the outhouse. Ms Magomedova was in a light-coloured sweatshirt put over a grey dress. According to the applicant, Ms Magomedova was carrying a water jug and he was unarmed. According to the officers involved in the special operation either the applicant or his wife allegedly had a Kalashnikov model machine gun no. ХГ 7195 from 1960 (hereinafter “the Kalashnikov”) and suddenly opened fire at the officers.
Without any warnings or orders from their superior Officers A.A., M.U., M.A., and A.Sh. opened fire on the applicant and his wife. An explosion of a grenade thrown by an unknown person followed. As a result, the applicant’s wife, Ms Magomedova, was shot dead next to the outhouse. Her body had multiple gunshot and shrapnel wounds. The applicant, who had been walking next to her, received a perforating gunshot to the chest and fell bleeding to the ground. Then he was arrested and taken to the hospital.
From the documents submitted to the Court it appears that the special operation was filmed (see paragraph 40 below).
On 3 November 2006 the senior investigator of the Khasavyurt prosecutor’s office received a report about an attack by the applicant on the police officers during a special operation at 6.50 a.m. earlier that day and ordered that a criminal case (no. 610531) be opened against the applicant on suspicion of involvement in an illegal armed group and attacking police officers.
On 3 November 2006, shortly after the reported event, the investigators from the Khasavyurt investigations department of the Dagestan prosecutor’s office (“the investigators”) examined the crime scene. In the courtyard they found Ms Magomedova’s body, the Kalashnikov with a magazine containing nine bullets and more than sixty spent cartridge cases and bullets shot from the service personnel’s firearms. No cartridge cases from the Kalashnikov were found in the radius of 6 or 7 metres around the firearm. According to a subsequent statement by the officer who had collected the cartridge cases the courtyard was littered with scrap metal and fallen tree leaves, which complicated the search and prevented him from using a metal detector. That, in turn, could have hindered the finding of all of the cartridge cases. The experts, who were present at the crime scene, examined the Kalashnikov and found no fingerprints on it. Its subsequent examination showed that its chamber was empty, which suggested that it had not been fired.
Several hours later the investigators questioned the applicant at the hospital. He submitted that in the morning Ms Magomedova had gone outside for morning prayers. Having returned she had told him that there had been strangers in their yard. He had taken a machine gun to scare the strangers away and together with his wife had gone outside to check what the situation had been. The service personnel had immediately opened fire on them and he had fallen to the ground. Later, the applicant retracted his statement saying that he had neither been armed nor had he known Mr A.B.
The next day the investigators questioned Officer A.S and his subordinate Officer M.U. They submitted that the unit had been instructed to secure the area during the special operation aimed at arresting or eliminating a particularly dangerous criminal, Mr A.B. However, the special operation had not gone as planned as at about 5 a.m. (before the planned entry into the house) two people had run out of it shouting Allāhu akbar! (“God is the greatest!”) and shooting at the officers. The latter had had to shoot back without warning. As soon as the fire had ceased, the police unit left the place. On unspecified dates later similar statements were made by Officers M.A. and A.Sh.
On various dates between 3 and 7 November 2006 the experts took gunshot-residue swabs from the body of Ms Magomedova and the applicant. No residue was found.
On 18 November 2006 the ballistic experts examined cartridge cases from the crime scene and established that thirty-six of them had been fired from Officer A.S.’s machine gun. The origin of five cartridge cases shot from a similar weapon and the origin of twenty-eight other cartridge cases remained unknown.
The applicant did not give his consent for his wife’s autopsy and she was buried without the exact cause of her death being established.
On 29 December 2006 the investigators formally indicted the applicant with membership of an illegal armed group, attacking police officers, and unlawful possession of firearms.
In February and March 2007 the Dagestan Supreme Court examined the criminal case against the applicant. During the trial the applicant stated that he had known Mr A.B. as a former colleague and that on the night between 2 and 3 November 2006 Mr A.B. had not stayed in his house. He also stated that early in the morning on 3 November 2006 he had been walking with his wife, Ms Magomedova, to the outhouse, when they had been shot. The police, who had opened fire, had killed his wife and wounded him in the chest. He had lost consciousness and had regained it only when the police officers were putting him into their vehicle.
On 13 March 2007 the applicant was acquitted of membership of an illegal armed group and attacking police officers, but was sentenced to a one-and-a-half-year term in a correctional colony for unlawful possession of firearms. Following examination of the applicant’s case, having regard to the absence of Kalashnikov cartridges at the crime scene, the absence of a bullet in the Kalashnikov chamber or gunshot residue on the applicant, the court stated that Officers A.S., M.U., M.A., and A.Sh. had given the investigators false statements about the gunfire the applicant and his wife had allegedly directed at them, as the officers had wanted to justify their “quite inadequate actions which were not justified by the circumstances” of opening fire unprovoked, as a result of which they had wounded the applicant and killed his wife. Furthermore, the court stated the following:
“ ... [T]hus, the evidence presented by the prosecution shows neither that Mr Baysultanov committed the attack on the police officers, nor that he opened fire with a machine gun. In connection with this, the court has serious doubts as to the truthfulness of the statements given by the ‘victims’ – [Officers A.S., and M.U.] – and witnesses – [Officers A.Sh. and M.A.] – as well as statements of other witnesses that state that Mr Baysultanov had run out into the courtyard whilst firing at them with a machine gun ... The statements of [Officers A.S., Mr M.U., Mr A.S. and M.A.] are not actually confirmed by the prosecution evidence; they are essentially refuted by it ...
In such circumstances, based only on the statements of the ‘victims’, [Officers A.S. and M.U.], and witnesses [Officers A.S. and M.A.], who are interested parties in the proceedings and who, without their commanders’ orders, opened fire with their service firearms and wounded Mr Baysultanov and killed his spouse ... the court cannot conclude that it has been proven that Mr Baysultanov opened fire with the machine gun and even more so, that he can be found guilty of attacking the police officers [... who ...] with the aim of justifying their actions, stated that Mr Baysultanov had been the first to open fire ...”
On 19 July 2007 the applicant’s sentence was upheld on appeal by the Russian Supreme Court.
As submitted by the applicant and not disputed by the Government, shortly after the special operation, the applicant complained to the authorities of his wounding and his wife’s killing in a situation when the use of lethal force had not been necessary.
On 9 December 2006 the Khasavyurt prosecutor’s office, referring to the statements by Officers A.S. and M.U. and to those given by the applicant on 3 November 2006 (see paragraphs 15 and 16 above), refused to open a criminal case into the incident for lack of corpus delicti.
On 5 February 2009 the Khasavyurt Investigative Committee annulled the above decision on the grounds of the applicant’s acquittal on charges of membership of an illegal armed group and attacking police officers (see paragraph 22 above). The investigators were ordered to question the officers involved in the special operation with a view to establishing the circumstances of Ms Magomedova’s death.
Having questioned Officers A.S., A.Sh., and M.A, who repeated their statements that the applicant or his wife had started the exchange of gunfire, the investigators refused opening a criminal case on 8 February 2009 for the second time.
On 8 June 2009 the investigators opened criminal case no. 910273 under Article 109 § 2 of the Russian Criminal Code (involuntary manslaughter resulting from undue execution of professional duties) into the circumstances surrounding Ms Magomedova’s killing. The investigation was repeatedly suspended for failure to identify the culprits on 8 August and 1 October 2009, 13 January and 15 February 2010. Each time the investigators referred to the lack of opportunity to examine Ms Magomedova’s body. The post-mortem examination would give the investigators an opportunity to identify the officers who had fired the fatal shots. On 31 August and 13 November 2009, and 14 January and 20 March 2010, respectively, the decisions to suspend the investigations were annulled by the senior authority, which each time noted the need to question the officers involved in the special operation and order expert examinations which would assist the investigators in the identifying the culprits.
From the documents submitted it appears that in the meantime the applicant complained of the use of lethal force against him and his wife, asking that the incident be investigated effectively. In particular, on 28 August 2009 he submitted a request to that end to the head of the Russian Investigative Committee.
On 7 April 2010 the investigators exhumed the body of Ms Magomedova for a post-mortem examination. Having examined the body on 12 May 2010, the experts concluded that they could not be absolutely sure about the exact cause of Ms Magomedova’s death as she had sustained many serious injuries. In particular, bullet holes were found in her frontal bone, sacrum, and a rib. Any of those injuries might have resulted in her death. The experts established that the injuries had been caused by shells and bullets of small and medium calibres.
On 20 May 2010 the investigation was suspended once again.
On 14 March 2011 it was resumed. The supervising investigating authority ordered the investigators to establish the origin of five unidentified cartridge cases found at the crime scene (see paragraph 18 above) and to identify the officer who had used a grenade against the applicant and his wife.
On 16 March 2011 a new forensic examination was ordered. On 1 April 2011 the experts concluded that owing to the lack of an autopsy, which should have been carried out shortly after Ms Magomedova’s death, it was impossible to establish the cause of her death and the order in which she had sustained the injuries.
On an unspecified date the investigators requested that the Ministry of the Interior in Dagestan provide them with information about the firearms which had been used in the course of the special operation. The authority replied that they did not have that information.
On 14 April 2011 the investigation was suspended and then, on 12 September 2011 it was resumed again.
On 13 October 2011 the investigators carried out a crime scene reconstruction. Having fired several shots from a Kalashnikov they established that the cartridges had been ejected out to around 6 to 9.5 metres from the Kalashnikov.
On 29 October 2011 the investigators questioned Officer A.S. He submitted that as soon as the special operation of 3 November 2006 had ended, an unidentified officer had removed a bullet from the chamber of the Kalashnikov found after the special operation in the applicant’s courtyard and put it in its magazine, which was a usual safety measure.
On 9 November 2011 Officer A.S. underwent a lie-detector test (polygraph), which confirmed that he believed in the veracity of his previous statements.
On 12 November 2011, referring to the results of the lie-detector test and Officer A.S.’s statements, the investigation in the case was terminated for lack of corpus delicti in the actions of the police officers.
On 7 December 2011 the aforementioned decision was annulled for the investigators’ failure to explain the origin of all cartridge cases found in the applicant’s courtyard and to identify the individual who had thrown the grenade during the special operation. It was noted that the investigators had failed to assess the lawfulness of the special operation as a whole and the use of firearms by the police. Moreover, the decision further stated that the investigators had failed to obtain video footage of the special operation from a Dagestan television company.
On 28 December 2011 the investigation was resumed, it was subsequently suspended on 28 January 2012 until a new resumption on 27 February 2012.
In the meantime, on 9 February 2012 Officers M.U. and M.A. underwent a lie-detector test, which confirmed that they genuinely believed that the applicant or his wife had fired at the police from the Kalashikov on 3 November 2006.
On 20 February 2012 the ballistic experts concluded that the injuries on the applicant and his late wife could have resulted from gunshots by Officers A.S., M.A., and A.Sh., from the Kazbek district operative unit.
On 27 March, 4 May, 16 July, 22 August and 20 October 2012 the investigators discontinued the proceedings for the lack of corpus delicti in the actions of the law-enforcement officers. The aforementioned decisions were annulled on 4 April, 15 June, 17 July and 20 December 2012, and 30 April 2013 respectively. The supervising authority criticised the investigators for failure to take basic steps and ordered that those steps be taken, including the collection and examination of the firearms belonging to Officers A.S., M.A., M.U., A.Sh., and S.M. and the bullets from the Kalashnikov, one of which might have had traces of having been transferred from its magazine to the chamber and back.
In the meantime, the Dagestan Ministry of the Interior’s internal security service carried out an internal investigation into the incident and prepared a report dated 4 May 2012. It stated that owing to the conflicting evidence it had been impossible to establish whether the service personnel had complied with “the requirements of the law” during the special operation.
On 29 June 2012 the ballistic experts examined gunshot traces on the roof of the shed under which Officer A.S.’s unit had set the ambush during the special operation. The experts concluded that the traces might have been caused by gunshots fired by the applicant at the officers.
On an unspecified date the Kazbek district police informed the investigators that no grenades had been provided to its operative unit in 2006.
On 30 July 2012 the applicant’s father complained to the head of the Investigative Committee in the Republic of Dagestan of the investigators’ failure to identify and prosecute the officers responsible for wounding the applicant and killing Ms Magomedova. No reply was given to this complaint.
On 2 August 2012 the investigators obtained the results of the expert examination on the explosives. According to them, the grenade which had exploded in the applicant’s courtyard during the operation could have been thrown either by the applicant, his wife or a third person located outside the courtyard.
On 13 May 2013 the investigation was resumed with a view to submitting the applicant to a lie-detector test and identifying the person who had allegedly removed the bullet from the Kalashnikov’s chamber after the operation had ended (see also paragraph 37 above).
On 13 June 2013 the investigation was again discontinued on the same grounds as before.
On 12 August 2013 the deputy prosecutor of Dagestan annulled the above decision as premature and unlawful, noting the investigators’ failure to identify the person who had emptied the Kalashnikov’s chamber. The investigation was resumed on 19 August 2013.
On unspecified dates before September 2013 the investigators questioned about twenty officers who had been involved in the special operation of 3 November 2006 and the applicant’s neighbour, Mr N.G.
All of the officers gave general statements, in which they submitted that they had either not opened fire themselves or that they had not known who had opened it, or that they had returned fire on the applicant and his wife.
The applicant’s neighbour, Mr N.G., submitted that the leader of an illegal armed group, Mr A.B., had been the applicant’s friend and had stayed in the applicant’s house on several occasions. According to the documents submitted, Mr N.G. had a history of mental illness, had been hospitalised for psychiatric care on several occasions and prior to his questioning in September 2013, on 16 April 2008, Mr N.G. had been deprived of his legal capacity by the Khasavyurt Town Court.
On 19 September 2013 the investigators discontinued the criminal proceedings for lack of corpus delicti in the actions of the police officers which had caused the applicant’s injuries and his wife’s death. They concluded that the applicant or his wife had attacked the service personnel, opening fire with the Kalashnikov and shouting Allāhu akbar! In response the service personnel had had to return fire to protect themselves. The fact that no cartridge cases from the Kalashnikov had been found might be explained by the narrow area of the crime scene that had been examined, which had not exceeded 6 or 7 metres in diametre, whereas the cartridges cases may be ejected out to up to 9.5 metres away from the Kalashnikov (see paragraph 36 above). The absence of gunshot residue on the applicant and his late wife might have been a result of the swabs having been taken belatedly (see paragraph 17 above). Lastly, the bullet from the Kalashnikov chamber might have been removed by an unidentified officer shortly after the operation as a safety measure (see paragraph 37 above). It is unclear when the applicant was informed of that decision.
On 2 April 2014 the applicant and his relatives appealed against the decision of 19 September 2013 to the Sovetskiy District Court in Makhachkala, stating, in particular, that they had not been provided with information on the progress of the criminal case and that the circumstances of the incident, such as the absence of gunshot residue on the applicant and Ms Saniyat Magomedova and the empty chamber of the Kalashnikov showed that the police officers had opened fire unprovoked, killing Ms Magomedova and seriously wounding the applicant. Therefore, it was necessary to reopen the criminal case and take a number of steps, such as a ballistic expert examination of the locations of the police officers during the special operation. The Sovetskiy District Court dismissed the appeal on 23 June 2014. The court concluded that the impugned decision was lawful and well-founded.
On 2 July 2014 the applicant’s relatives challenged the above decision before the Dagestan Supreme Court. The outcome of the proceedings is unknown.
For a summary of relevant law and practice see Tagayeva and Others v. Russia (nos. 26562/07 and 6 others, § 465-66, 13 April 2017) and Dalakov v. Russia (no. 35152/09, §§ 51-53, 16 February 2016).