The case originated in an application (no. 66641/10) against Montenegro lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by thirteen Serbian nationals, one of whom is also a national of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, on 23 March 2011. Further personal details of the applicants are set out in the appendix.
All the applicants were initially represented by Mr Vladan Stanojević, Director of the Roma Centre for Strategy, Development and Democracy (hereinafter “the Roma Centre”). The eleventh applicant subsequently authorised Ms S. Bulatović, a lawyer practising in Podgorica, to represent her. The Montenegrin Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by their Agent at the time, Mr Z. Pažin, and subsequently by their newly appointed Agent, Ms V. Pavličić. The Serbian Government, who had made use of their right to intervene under Article 36 of the Convention, were represented by their Agent, Ms N. Plavšić.
Notified under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (a) of the Rules of Court of their right to intervene in the present case, the Government of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia expressed no wish to do so.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that there had not been a prompt and effective investigation into the deaths and/or disappearances of their family members and that those responsible had not been brought to justice.
On 5 February 2014 the complaint concerning the failure of the relevant Montenegrin bodies to promptly and effectively investigate the deaths and/or disappearances of the applicants’ family members and prosecute those responsible was communicated to the Montenegrin Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The parties were duly informed. The remainder of the application included a general complaint of mass murders and human trafficking of, inter alia, Roma and their deportations, detention and arrests, which was declared inadmissible as unsubstantiated.
The applicants are the next-of-kin of several Roma who died or disappeared in the circumstances described below.
On the night of 15 August 1999 around seventy Roma boarded the boat “Miss Pat” on the Montenegrin coast with the intention of reaching Italy. A few hours later the boat sank owing to the large number of passengers.
By 30 August 1999 one of the passengers had been found alive on the Montenegrin shore, and thirty-five bodies had been found in the sea, thirteen of which were identified by their relatives. The forensic specialists who had performed autopsies on the bodies by 30 August 1999 stated that the cause of death could not be established with certainty on the basis of autopsies alone. In their opinion, however, the cause of death was drowning.
On 1 September 1999 the Court of First Instance (Osnovni sud) in Bar initiated a formal judicial investigation (rješenje o sprovođenju istrage) against seven individuals on suspicion of illegally crossing the State border in connection with reckless endangerment.
By 21 October 1999 the investigating judge had (a) questioned two suspects who were available to the authorities at the time, as well as thirty other individuals in relation to the incident, including the eleventh applicant; (b) requested that some other witnesses be questioned by the relevant authorities in Serbia; and (c) asked for the autopsy reports, an expert opinion on the capacity of the boat and a report on the weather conditions on the night of the incident. The eleventh applicant was questioned on 10 September 1999. She stated that she had been living with her brother and sister-in-law and their children in Kosovo, but that her brother and sister-in-law had decided to go to Montenegro. They had not called her from Podgorica or mentioned that they had intended to go to Italy. She also stated that she had not recognised them amongst the bodies found, but had recognised her brother’s arm in one of the photographs shown to her during questioning. Being illiterate, she had “signed” the minutes of the hearing by giving a fingerprint.
On 21 October 1999 the State prosecutor in Bar lodged an indictment with the Court of First Instance in Bar against the seven suspects.
On 29 October 1999 the court decided that it lacked territorial competence to deal with the case and transferred it to the Court of First Instance in Kotor. On 6 December 1999 the High Court (Viši sud) in Podgorica declared that the court in Bar was territorially competent to process the case and the case was returned.
By the end of 2002 the court in Bar had decided that two defendants still at large would be tried in their absence and appointed representatives for them. The remaining five defendants appeared before the court.
Between 25 December 2002 and 24 September 2003 ten trial hearings (glavni pretres) were scheduled, five of which took place. Four were adjourned because some of the defence lawyers, defendants, witnesses and an interpreter did not attend court; there is no information in the case file about one of the hearings. During the hearings that did take place, the court questioned four defendants and eleven witnesses.
On 24 September 2003 the court decided to recommence the trial hearing due to the passage of time. By 14 April 2004 ten hearings had been scheduled, six of which took place. Four were adjourned because one of the defence lawyers and some of the witnesses did not attend court. During the hearings that did take place, the court read out the indictment again, questioned four defendants and sixteen witnesses, including the eleventh applicant, and read out the earlier statements made by the witnesses; the fifth defendant chose to remain silent. The eleventh applicant was heard on 8 October 2003. She stated that she had come to Podgorica with her brother and his family and had had no idea that her brother and his wife had intended to go to Italy. When asked to explain the differences between that and her previous statement of 10 September 1999, she stated that she was certain that they had all been together since they had all been living together in one tent. She also confirmed that she was illiterate.
On 14 April 2004 the Supreme State Prosecutor (Vrhovni državni tužilac) in Podgorica instructed the State prosecutor in Bar to specify the indictment in terms of the facts and legal classification of the criminal offences, after which the court in Bar would declare that it lacked competence to deal with the case and would transfer it to the High Court in Podgorica (hereinafter “the High Court”), as the competent court to deal with it. Accordingly, the indictment was amended and the case file transferred to the High State Prosecutor (Viši državni tužilac) and the High Court.
On 26 May 2004 the High State Prosecutor requested that an investigation be opened (zahtjev za sprovođenje istrage) against the same seven people and another individual, Z, on suspicion of committing reckless endangerment.
By 20 October 2004 the High Court had questioned four of the defendants, while the fifth had chosen to remain silent. It also ordered that the remaining three defendants be brought before the court.
On 11 November 2004 an investigating judge of the High Court decided to initiate a formal judicial investigation against the eight individuals, a decision which was upheld by the High Court on 25 November 2004.
On 25 February 2006 the High State Prosecutor urged the investigating judge to finish the investigation.
On 28 March 2006 an expert witness issued an opinion on the capacity of the boat.
On 31 October 2006 the High State Prosecutor charged eight defendants with reckless endangerment under Article 338 § 2 in connection with Article 327 §§ 1 and 3 of the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 43-44 below).
Between 24 and 28 November 2006 the indictment was served on four of the defendants.
On 15 January 2007 the president of the chamber informed the president of the High Court that a trial hearing could not be scheduled yet as the indictment had not yet been served on all the defendants.
By 15 February 2008 the High Court had issued a national arrest warrant (potjernica) against one of the defendants, and had attempted to serve one on the other three, one of whom was in detention in Podgorica at the time. The other two were based in Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina respectively.
On 3 April 2008 the High Court rejected the indictment against Z (the defendant based in Serbia), a decision which was upheld by the Court of Appeal on 26 May 2008.
By 28 September 2009 the High Court had decided that the two defendants at large, one of whom was based in Bosnia and Herzegovina, would be tried in their absence.
At the first trial hearing on 28 September 2009 one of the defendants, X, stated that he was illiterate and did not understand the indictment. At the request of his lawyer the hearing was adjourned until further notice, so that the indictment could be translated into Romani. By 31 October 2009 the translation of the indictment into Romani had become available.
In the course of 2010 seven hearings were scheduled. One was held on 8 October 2010, during which the indictment was read out and four defendants were heard, the fifth having chosen to remain silent. Six hearings scheduled for 5 February, 29 April, 4 June, 2 July, 17 November and 17 December 2010 were adjourned because some of the defendants, defence lawyers, the interpreter for Romani and a witness did not attend court.
On 25 January 2011 another judge of the High Court took over the case. In the course of 2011 eight hearings were scheduled, seven of which were adjourned: (a) three because there was no permanent court interpreter for Romani; (b) two because the defence lawyers and witnesses did not attend court; (c) one because one defendant and several defence lawyers did not attend court and an interpreter had not yet been appointed; and (d) one because of changes to the Criminal Procedure Code, which made the relevant court panel incomplete. One hearing was held on 21 November 2011, during which four defendants were heard and their earlier defence statements made in 1999, 2003, 2004 and 2010 read out. The fifth defendant chose to remain silent.
In the course of 2012 seven hearings were scheduled, two of which were adjourned because one defendant, a defence lawyer, some of the witnesses, including the seventh applicant, and/or the interpreter did not attend court. Five hearings were held, two of which by 24 September 2012, when several witnesses were heard. On 24 September 2012 the trial hearing was recommenced due to “the passage of more than three months”. During that hearing and the subsequent two hearings four defendants and several witnesses were heard again, and a number of written documents were read out, including the indictment, the defendants’ earlier statements and witness statements from 1999, 2003 and 2012, reports by the Kotor and Budva police directorates (odjeljenja bezbjednosti), as well as information provided by the Radio and Television of Montenegro and the Bar Public Information Centre. The fifth defendant remained silent.
In the course of 2013 nine hearings were scheduled, five of which were adjourned because one of the defendants, two lawyers, an expert witness, a judge, and/or the interpreter did not attend. The lawyers were fined 500 euros (EUR) for their unjustified absence. By 18 December 2013 three hearings had been held, during which one expert witness was heard, and a number of other pieces of documentary evidence were read out, such as an earlier statement of another expert witness, earlier statements of other witnesses from 1999, 2003 and 2004, including the statements of the eleventh applicant, autopsy reports and reports from the Port of Bar of 1995 and 1998 relating to the boat. On 18 December 2013 the trial hearing was recommenced due to the passage of time. Four defendants and one of the expert witnesses were heard and their earlier statements read out.
In the course of 2014 five hearings were scheduled, two of which were adjourned because the interpreter and one of the expert witnesses did not attend court and because one defendant was justifiably absent. By 4 June 2014 one hearing had been held, at which earlier statements of witnesses, including the eleventh applicant’s statements, official reports, autopsy reports and experts witness statements were read out. On 4 June 2014 the trial hearing was recommenced due to the passage of time. At that and the subsequent hearing held in 2014 the court read out the indictment, the defendants’ earlier statements and some witness statements, including the eleventh applicant’s, as well as other written evidence. One of the witnesses was also heard.
On 24 July 2014 the High Court acquitted all the accused for lack of evidence. On 10 November 2014 the High State Prosecutor appealed against that judgment. There is no information in the case file as to the outcome of the appeal.
On an unspecified date prior to 7 December 2009 the Roma Centre complained to the Ombudsman, asking for the criminal proceedings to be expedited and the responsible persons punished, as well as for a DNA analysis of the bodies which had been buried.
On 7 December 2009 the Ombudsman issued a report in this regard noting, in substance, that the investigation had lasted for more than seven years and that ten years after the impugned event the criminal proceedings had not yet been terminated, which was unjustified. He recommended that the High Court undertake all necessary steps to terminate the proceedings as soon as possible.
On 21 December 2010 the Ombudsman enquired what had been done in the meantime. The judge in charge informed him of the hearings scheduled between October and December 2010.
On 19 August 1999 the only surviving passenger was found guilty of boarding the boat on 16 August 1999 with the intention of illegally crossing the border to Italy and was fined by the Misdemeanour Court (Sud za prekršaje) in Kotor.
In the course of 2002 a number of family members of those who had disappeared, two of them applicants in the present case, urged that the proceedings at issue be expedited. Some of them claimed that their next-of-kins were alive but had been trafficked. It appears that some others also hoped that their family members might still be alive.
On 15 June 2011 the president of the High Court requested the Ministry of Justice to appoint a permanent court interpreter for Romani as soon as possible, stressing that one of the reasons for the criminal proceedings in question having “lasted too long” had been the absence of an adequate interpreter for Romani.
It would appear that on several occasions the Roma Centre requested the High Court to expedite the proceedings, and that on 16 August 2010 it issued a statement that the investigation had not been effective.
The eleventh applicant’s initial representative submitted an authority form signed by her. He also specified that her two sons, two daughters-in-law and five grandchildren had died or disappeared in the impugned event.
Article 327 § 1 provides, inter alia, that endangerment of a human life or a human body by a dangerous activity or by dangerous means is punishable by imprisonment of between six months and five years. Article 327 § 3 provides that if the offence is committed in a place where there is a large number of people (veći broj ljudi), it is punishable by imprisonment of between one and six years.
Article 338 § 2 provides that if the offence defined in Article 327 §§ 1 to 3 results in the death of one or more persons, it is punishable by imprisonment of between two and twelve years.
Article 8 provides, inter alia, that parties to criminal proceedings who do not speak the official language of the court may use their own language instead, in which case both a translation of all the documents as well as interpretation will be provided.
Article 16 § 2 provides that the court has a duty to conduct proceedings without delay and to prevent any abuse of the rights of the parties.
Articles 19, 20 and 44 provide, inter alia, that formal criminal proceedings can be instituted at the request of an authorised prosecutor. In respect of publicly prosecutable offences the authorised prosecutor is the State prosecutor. His or her authority to decide whether or not to press charges is bound by the principle of legality, which requires that he or she must act whenever there is a reasonable suspicion that a publicly prosecutable offence has been committed.
Articles 19 and 59 provide, inter alia, that should the State prosecutor decide that there is no basis on which to prosecute, he or she must inform the victim of that decision, and the latter then has the right to take over the prosecution of the case – as a “subsidiary prosecutor” – within eight days of being notified of that decision. When notifying the victim of the decision not to prosecute, the State prosecutor must inform him or her what actions he or she may undertake as subsidiary prosecutor.
Article 62 provides that a subsidiary prosecutor has the same rights as the State prosecutor, except for those which the State prosecutor has as a State body.
Article 266 provides that if the investigation is not terminated within six months, an investigating judge must inform the president of the court of the reasons for the delay. If needed, the president will undertake measures to terminate the investigation.
Article 267 provides, inter alia, that a victim may file a request with an investigating judge to conduct an investigation.
Article 272 provides that parties to proceedings and victims are entitled to complain about delays in the proceedings and other irregularities to the president of the court, who will look into the complaint and, if requested, inform him or her of what has been done in that regard.
Article 273 provides that once an investigation is over, court proceedings may only be initiated on the basis of the indictment of the State prosecutor or the victim in his or her capacity as subsidiary prosecutor.
Article 291 § 2 provides that the president of the chamber must schedule a trial hearing within two months of receiving the indictment. If the trial hearing is not scheduled within the time-limit the president of the chamber must inform the president of the court why, and the latter will then, if needed, undertake measures to schedule it.
Articles 310 to 319 set out details as to the holding and adjournment of trial hearings, including in cases where various parties to the proceedings do not attend court. Article 317 § 3 provides, in particular, that if the trial hearing has been adjourned for more than three months or is to be held before another president of the bench, it must be started afresh and all witnesses reheard and documentary evidence reassessed (i svi dokazi se moraju ponovo izvesti).
Section 84 provides, inter alia, that the president of the court is responsible for organising the work of the court and undertakes measures to ensure prompt and timely performance of duties in the court.
The Obligations Act, which entered into force in 2008, was partially amended in April 2017. The relevant provisions, as in force at the time, provided as follows.
Sections 148 to 216 set out details as regards compensation claims.
Sections 148 and 149 set out the different grounds for claiming compensation for both pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage. In particular, section 148(1) provided that whoever caused damage to somebody else was liable to compensation, unless he or she could prove that the damage was not his or her fault.
Section 166(1) provided that any legal entity, including the State, was liable for any damage caused by one of “its bodies”.
Sections 206 and 207 provided, inter alia, that anyone who suffered fear, physical pain or mental anguish as a consequence of the violation of his or her personal rights or owing to the death of someone close to them, was entitled, depending on the duration and intensity, to sue for damages in the civil courts and, in addition, request other forms of redress “which might be capable” of affording adequate non-pecuniary satisfaction.
Section 208(1) and (2) provided that in the event of a person’s death the courts could award just satisfaction for mental anguish to their closest family, including their brothers and sisters, provided that they had been living together.