The case originated in an application (no. 49076/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Ms Satsita Matayeva and Ms Batu Dadayeva (“the applicants”), on 8 December 2006.
The applicants were represented by lawyers of the NGO EHRAC/Memorial Human Rights Centre. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 9 March 2009 the Court decided to apply Rule 41 of the Rules of Court, to grant priority treatment to the application and to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of the former Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application and to the application of Rule 41 of the Rules of Court. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it.
The first applicant is the wife and the second applicant is the mother of Mr Khamzat Tushayev, born in 1959. They live in the village of DubaYurt, the Shalinskiy District, in the .
According to the applicants, since 1996 Khamzat Tushayev had been suffering from a mental disorder.
In autumn 1999, before the launching of the military operation in the Chechen Republic, the applicants and Khamzat Tushayev had been residing in the . At the time when Russian federal troops approached the village and most of its residents left, Mr Tushayev’s brother stayed in the village and joined rebel fighters to resist the federal troops. Although Khamzat Tushayev also stayed behind, he did not join the rebels.
In 2000 Khamzat Tushayev left Duba-Yurt together with his brother’s insurgent group and some other residents and joined his family which had meanwhile moved to an adjacent village. By March 2000 federal troops had regained control over Duba-Yurt and Khamzat Tushayev returned there together with his brother and the first applicant.
On an unspecified date in 2001 armed men broke into the first applicant’s house. They came in several armoured personnel carriers (APCs) and were looking for Khamzat Tushayev and his brother. After the incident the brothers went into hiding. On several occasions armed men broke into the first applicant’s house, searching for them. During yet another similar incident on 17 February 2002 Mr Tushayev’s brother was allegedly killed while trying to escape.
Khamzat Tushayev stayed in hiding until June 2003, fearing reprisals for the fact of his leaving Duba-Yurt together with insurgents. In June 2003 the first applicant learnt from the head of the local administration that Khamzat Tushayev would be amnestied if he surrendered his arms. According to the applicants, he had never had any arms but bought a submachine gun and was provided with a walkie-talkie by an acquaintance who had found it somewhere.
On 12 June 2003 Khamzat Tushayev surrendered the gun and the walkie-talkie to the Department of the Federal Security Service in the  (“the Chechen Department of the FSB”). According to a certificate issued by that State authority on 12 June 2003, Khamzat Tushayev declared that he no longer participated in illegal armed groups and had surrendered his arms of his own free will. It was further stated that an inquiry into his case was under way, that he had given an undertaking to appear before the Chechen Department of the FSB for questioning, that his right to freedom of movement had not been restricted, and that, should any law-enforcement authorities arrest him, they were to inform the Chechen Department of the FSB immediately.
At the turn of the year 2003 the first applicant and Khamzat Tushayev moved to .
On an unspecified date in March 2006 several persons who did not identify themselves broke into the flat occupied by the first applicant and Khamzat Tushayev and took him away. Eight days later his relatives found out that he was being held at the Shali district police station and that a criminal case (no. 56006) had been opened against him on suspicion of participation in illegal armed groups. On an unspecified date Khamzat Tushayev was released on an undertaking not to leave his place of residence.
On 7 June 2006 the first applicant received a call on her mobile phone from a hidden number. A man who introduced himself as “Sergey Aleksandrovich”, an official of the prosecutor’s office of the Leninskiy District in Grozny (hereafter “the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office”), asked the first applicant to tell her husband that he was to report to the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office at 10 a.m. on 8 June 2006 in connection with criminal case no. 56006 (also referred to as 56049). When she asked if he could come a week later the man refused, saying that Khamzat Tushayev was already under a very lenient preventive measure – an undertaking not to leave his place of residence.
The first applicant was not surprised by the call because she had previously given her phone number to investigator R.Ya. of the prosecutor’s office of the Shalinskiy District (“the Shalinskiy district prosecutor’s office”), who was in charge of the investigation in case no. 56006. According to the first applicant, on several occasions R.Ya. had already summoned Khamzat Tushavev for interviews via her mobile phone. Moreover, an official of the Department of the Interior of the Shalinskiy District had also summoned Khamzat Tushayev for an interview by contacting the first applicant on her mobile and asking her to convey that message to her husband. On all those occasions, after having been interviewed, Khamzat Tushayev had always returned back home.
On 8 June 2006 Khamzat Tushayev and the first applicant went to the complex of government buildings in , the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office being situated within its secure grounds. According to the applicants, the perimeter of the complex was guarded and it was only possible to enter the premises through a number of check points. At one of the check points an on-duty officer called the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office and enquired whether Khamzat Tushayev had an appointment and should be issued with an entry permit. Several minutes later the officer called Khamzat Tushayev inside the check point, recorded his passport data and authorised him to pass through. He then showed Khamzat Tushayev the building in which the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office was situated and at about 10 a.m. the latter passed the check point. The first applicant stayed outside to wait for her husband.
On the same day, two hours later, worried about her husband’s absence, the first applicant asked the on-duty officer to call the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office. After a telephone conversation the officer told her that Khamzat Tushayev had not entered the premises of the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office and had not been registered at that authority’s own checkpoint. The first applicant waited at the check point until the end of the working day. At about 5 p.m. the on-duty officer told her to leave, which she did.
The Government did not dispute the applicants’ description of the events but stated that before the conclusion of the domestic investigation (see below) the circumstances of the disappearance of the applicants’ relative could not be established with sufficient certainty.
On 9 June 2006 the first applicant called investigator R.Ya. of the Shalinskiy district prosecutor’s office and told him about the disappearance of her husband. Ya. allegedly told her that she and her husband had visited a “dangerous place” and that she should have called Ya. before going to the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office. He also said that several departments of the FSB had inquired about Khamzat Tushayev and advised her to complain about his disappearance to the authorities.
On the same day the first applicant complained about the disappearance of her husband to the Prosecutor of the  and the acting prosecutor of the Leninskiy District of Grozny.
On 9 June 2006 the first applicant applied to the representation of the Memorial Human Rights Centre in  for assistance in the search for her husband. Its members contacted Mrs S. Gannushkina, member of the Human Rights Commission with the President of Russia. She immediately called the acting prosecutor of the Leninskiy District of Grozny, Mr T.M, who told her over the phone that Khamzat Tushayev had not been summoned to the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office and that he had come there to submit an unspecified complaint. About half an hour after Khamzat Tushayev had been let through the first check point, an on-duty officer from another check point had called T.M. and informed him that Khamzat Tushauev had not passed the second check point. When Mrs Gannushkina’s asked whether it was possible to disappear without leaving any trace from the grounds of the government complex, T.M. stated that it was impossible.
On 14 June 2006 the head of the Department for supervision of the investigation of crimes by the prosecutor’s office forwarded the first applicant’s complaint about the disappearance of Khamzat Tushayev to the acting prosecutor of the Leninskiy District of Grozny.
On 26 June 2006 the prosecutor’s office of the Staropromyslovskiy District of Grozny (“the district prosecutor’s office”) initiated a criminal investigation into the abduction of Khamzat Tushayev from the grounds of the government complex in Grozny under Article 126 § 1 of the Criminal Code (abduction). The case was given the number 53092. By a letter of 27 June 2006, investigator D. informed the first applicant about the opening of the investigation.
On 30 June 2006 the first applicant was granted victim status in connection with the proceedings in case no. 53902. She was notified of that decision on the same day.
On 11 July 2006 the deputy prosecutor of the  informed the first applicant that the investigation into the disappearance of Khamzat Tushayev had been entrusted to investigator D. of the district prosecutor’s office and that unspecified investigative and operational measures aimed at establishing the whereabouts of her husband were being carried out.
On 11 August 2006 Mrs Gannushkina wrote on behalf of the first applicant to the Prosecutor of the Chechen Republic and investigator D., requesting them to take a number of basic investigative steps, such as interviewing the personnel on duty at the check points on 8 June 2006, verifying the phone number of the person who had called the first applicant on 7 June 2006, identifying the owner of the phone and interviewing that person. It is unclear whether the request prompted any reaction on the part of the authorities.
On 25 October 2006 the acting head of the Department for supervision of the investigation of crimes by the prosecutor’s office informed the first applicant that her repeated complaint about the disappearance of her husband had been forwarded to the district prosecutor’s office.
According to the first applicant, she often came to the district prosecutor’s office to enquire about the progress of the investigation but never received any meaningful information. During a visit in August 2006 investigator D. had allegedly reassured her that the investigation was “following hard on the heels” of the abductors of her husband and that the suspects were members of the FSB. However, in a conversation which took place on an unspecified date later, D. allegedly told the first applicant that the investigation was very dangerous and that D. himself ran a risk of being killed. According to the first applicant, on an unspecified date D. must have been replaced by another investigator.
The Government’s account
The Government refused to submit a copy of the entire criminal file no. 53092 opened into the abduction of Khamzat Tushayev, providing only copies of several decisions to open and suspend the investigation, witness’ interview records, the investigators’ requests to various State authorities to provide information on Khamzat Tushayev’s whereabouts and replies to them and some other documents. Some of the documents furnished by the Government are illegible; some are legible only in part. Insofar as the documents submitted by the Government are legible, the information contained in them can be summarised as follows.
On 26 June 2006 the district prosecutor’s office instituted an investigation into the abduction of Khamzat Tushayev under Article 126 § 1 of the Criminal Code (kidnapping). The decision stated, among other things, that the district prosecutor’s office had received the first applicant’s complaint about the abduction of her husband on 9 June 2006.
On 30 June 2006 the first applicant was granted victim status in the proceedings in case no. 53092 and interviewed. She stated that on 7 June 2006 she had received a call from a hidden number on her mobile phone. A man, who had introduced himself as “Sergey Aleksandrovich”, an official of the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office, had told her that her husband was to come to the district prosecutor’s office to be interviewed. The man had spoken unaccented Russian. When the first applicant had asked him if Khamzat Tushayev could come for interview the following week, the man had insisted on him coming on 8 June 2006, saying that the authorities had already been very lenient on him by applying an undertaking not to leave his place of residence instead of detention as a preventive measure in connection with the proceedings in case no. 56049 concerning his membership of illegal armed groups.
On the following day the first applicant and her husband had gone to the complex of governmental buildings. At checkpoint no. 1 they had informed an on-duty officer that Khamzat Tushayev had been summoned to the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office. The officer had called T.M., the prosecutor of the Leninskiy district, and some five minutes later told them that Khamzat Tushayev would be let through. The first applicant had stayed outside, whilst Khamzat Tushayev had passed the checkpoint where servicemen explained him that the entry to the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office was near an APC. Some two to three hours later the first applicant had asked the officer on duty to call the prosecutor’s office to ask for her husband. Having called them, the officer had told her that Khamzat Tushayev had not entered the premises of the prosecutor’s office. The first applicant had waited at the checkpoint until 5.30 p.m., but her husband had not returned.
On the next day the first applicant had called investigator Ya. of the Shalinskiy district prosecutor’s office and he had assured her that he had not arrested Khamzat Tushayev and had not instructed any authority to do so. Lastly, the first applicant also stated that her husband’s brother had been an active member of illegal armed groups and had been killed in a special operation in 2002. She also submitted that after her husband had been arrested by officers of Operational and Search Bureau no. 2 (ORB-2) in March 2006, he had told her that they had asked him about their daughter, A.T., who had been killed in 2002 in Moscow along with other rebel fighters during the rescue operation of Nord-Ost.
When interviewed on 12 February and 25 June 2007, the first applicant confirmed her previous statement concerning the circumstances of the disappearance of her husband.
On 5 July 2006 the investigators interviewed D.D. as a witness. He stated that on 8 June 2006 he had been on duty at checkpoint no. 1 at the government complex and that he did not remember having seen Khamzat Tushayev there. According to D.D., checkpoint no. 1 was located at the entry to the grounds of the governmental complex from the side of the Staropromyslovskoye highway. If a person wished to get access to the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office, an on-duty officer from checkpoint no. 1 had to call officers at the checkpoint of the district prosecutor’s office. The latter would then call the reception of the district prosecutor’s office and inform them that they had a visitor, following which an official of the prosecutor’s office would call checkpoint no. 1 back and inform them whether they authorised the visitor to enter the premises of the prosecutor’s office. After that an on-duty officer at checkpoint no. 1 had to enter the visitor’s name, as well as the date and time of his entry, in a special logbook and let him through.
Serviceman S.S., interviewed as a witness on 6 July 2006, made a statement similar to that of D.D.
On 13 July 2006 the investigators interviewed officer V.S. as a witness. She stated that from 9 a.m. on 8 June 2006 she had been on duty at the checkpoint of the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office. At about 10.10 a.m. servicemen from checkpoint no. 1 had called her and informed her that Khamzat Tushayev had come for an appointment with T.M., the prosecutor of the Leninskiy district. She had called T.M. and he had told her to let Khamzat Tushayev through, following which she had called officers from checkpoint no. 1 and conveyed that information to them. Some two hours later V.S. had received a call from checkpoint no. 1, its servicemen asking whether Khamzat Tushayev had entered the premises of the prosecutor’s office through her checkpoint. V.S. had checked the relevant logbook but found no entries indicating that he had passed through her checkpoint. She had then called T.M. and he had told her that Khamzat Tushayev had not visited him either, of which V.S. had immediately informed her interlocutors at checkpoint no. 1. V.S. also gave to the investigators the names of the colleagues who had been on duty with her on the day of Khamzat Tushayev’s disappearance.
On 6, 9, 15, 16 and 18 July 2006 investigators interviewed as witnesses servicemen S.G., A.P., N.K., I..L., A.N. and M.N., who were on duty at checkpoint no. 102 on 8 June 2006. They stated that their checkpoint was used for entry by officials of the State authorities located in the government complex, such as the Federal Security Service (FSB) or the prosecutor’s office, in possession of special permits, and that other persons wishing to enter the secure grounds were directed to checkpoint no. 1. Persons leaving the government complex would be let through the checkpoint no. 102 if they did not raise suspicions; their documents would not be checked. They also submitted that they did not recognise Khamzat Tushayev in the picture shown to them.
On 31 January 2007 the investigators interviewed L.Ts. as a witness. She submitted that she held the post of the senior inspector with the information department of the Ministry of the Interior of the Chechen Republic and that on an unspecified date in April 2006 she had gone, together with members of a film crew, to the Department for the Fight against Organised Crime (“UBOP”) of the . While the crew had been filming, an UBOP officer had been questioning a group of detained persons, one of whom had been Khamzat Tushayev. The latter had told the officer, among other things, about his daughter, who had participated in the Nord-Ost hostage taking in . Shortly after the recording L.Ts. had submitted the related recordings, as well as an article about the detained persons, to the Ministry of the Press of the . However, her article had been published in a newspaper “Stolitsa plyus” (Столица плюс) only on 2 December 2006 and she was not aware of the reasons for that delay.
On 2 February 2007 the investigators interviewed R.Ya. as a witness. He stated that on 4 April 2006 he had instituted criminal case no. 56049 against a number of persons, including Khamzat Tuhayev, on suspicion of participation in illegal armed groups. On the same date Khamzat Tushayev and other suspects had been arrested and remanded in custody. Some of the arrested persons had initially stated that Khamzat Tushayev had been an emir of the  but they had subsequently retracted those statements. On 6 April 2006 Khamzat Tushayev had been released on an undertaking not to leave his place of residence. The preventive measure applied to him had been changed because there had not been conclusive evidence of his implication in the imputed crime. On an unspecified date R.Ya. had interviewed Khamzat Tushayev for a second time and on 4 June 2006 he had closed the criminal case against him. R.Ya. specified that he had learnt about the abduction of Khamzat Tushayev from the first applicant and that he had not instructed any one in the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office to interview Khamzat Tushayev.
Police officer A.A., interviewed as a witness on 2 February 2007, submitted that on 3 April 2006 he had participated in the arrest of a number of presumed members of illegal armed groups, including Khamzat Tushayev. A film crew from the Ministry of the Interior had been present and filmed the arrestees. On 4 April 2006 the arrested persons had been transferred to a remand centre. According to A.A., he had no information on the outcome of the proceedings against Khamzat Tushayev and had learnt about his abduction from his wife.
Police officer M.-A.D., interviewed as a witness on 6 February 2007, stated that he did not know why information on Khamzat Tushayev’s arrest in April 2006 had been published in December of the same year but that similar situations occurred from time to time owing to a lack of cooperation between the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of the Press of the Chechen Republic.
On 16 June 2006 the investigators interviewed S.M. and I.V. as witnesses. According to their interview records, they resided in the same block of flats as Khamzat Tushayev and his family in  and knew about his arrest in March 2006 by the law-enforcement authorities but had no information concerning his ensuing disappearance.
On 6 and 9 July 2006 investigators interviewed S.-Kh.E., V.Sh. and S.E. as witnesses. They stated that they were distant relatives of Khamzat Tushayev and resided in Duba-Yurt. According to them, Khamzat Tushayev had had some psychological problems, but they characterised him as a positive person overall.
Witness D.T., interviewed on 18 July 2006, stated that she worked as a nurse in a psychiatric hospital in the . From 11 to 25 April 2006 Khamzat Tushayev had undergone inpatient treatment in the hospital. She specified that his condition had not been serious and that he had been largely in control of his actions.
On 27 January 2007 the investigators interviewed T.M., the prosecutor of the Leninskiy district, as a witness. He submitted that on 8 June 2006, when servicemen from the reception of the prosecutor’s office had informed him that servicemen from checkpoint no. 1 were looking for Khamzat Tushayev and it had been revealed that he had not entered the premises of the prosecutor’s office, he had instructed the servicemen in charge of the prosecutor’s office to examine the logbooks of checkpoint no. 1. Having done so, they had reported that the logbook, indeed, contained the data concerning Khamzat Tushayev, including his passport number and confirmed the fact that he had been let through with a view to appearing for an appointment at the prosecutor’s office. However, he had never entered the premises of that authority. The servicemen at the prosecutor’s office had been interviewed and the incident had been reported to the district and the republican prosecutor’s offices. There were no pending criminal cases against Khamzat Tushayev in the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office, none of its investigators had summoned him for an interview there and there was no investigator named “Sergey Alexandrovich”.
On 9 June 2006 investigator D. of the district prosecutor’s office inspected the crime scene. According to D.’s report of the same date, entry to the grounds of the government complex was possible through a checkpoint (apparently, checkpoint no. 1), equipped with a barrier to control the entry of vehicles. The checkpoint had a special room for the registration of visitors. At about 200 metres distance from the checkpoint, on the grounds of the government complex, was located the building of the military commander’s office of the Leninskiy district of Grozny and near it was located the building of the Leninstiy district prosecutor’s office, the premises of which could only be entered through its own checkpoint. The building of the Chechen Department of the FSB was located near the building of the prosecutor’s office.
On 21 June 2006 the Staropromyslovskiy department of the interior (“the ROVD”) informed the district prosecutor’s office that they had established the hidden number from which on 7 June 2006 the first applicant had received a call with an instruction for her husband to come to the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office for an interview on 8 June 2006. The call had been made at 4.40 p.m. on 7 June 2006 and the number of the caller was 8 928 29 06 28. However, the mobile network provider had refused to furnish information on the owner of the number.
On 27 June 2006 investigators of the district prosecutor’s office instructed the Staropromyslovskiy Department of the Interior (the ROVD) to identify possible witnesses to the abduction of Khamzat Tushayev and the personnel who had been on duty at the checkpoint on 8 June 2006 and to summon them to the district prosecutor’s office for interviews.
Between 27 June and 15 July 2006 investigators of the district prosecutor’s office requested a number of State authorities, including prosecutor’s offices and departments of the interior of various districts of the , to provide information on Khamzat Tushayev’s whereabouts, his eventual arrest or detention or on whether they had instituted criminal proceedings against him. It appears that those requests yielded no results.
On 14 July 2006 the investigators formally seized the visitors’ logbook from checkpoint no. 1. The decision stated that the preliminary investigation had established that at 10 a.m. on 8 June 2006 Khamzat Tushayev had passed through checkpoint no. 1 and that the checkpoint logbook contained a record to that effect.
According to a record of inspection of documents (протокол осмотра документов) of 15 July 2006, page 67 of the visitors’ logbook of checkpoint no. 1, in the section concerning persons who had passed through the checkpoint, contained an entry relating to Khamzat Tushayev in which it was noted that he had passed through the checkpoint at 10.03 a.m. on 8 June 2006. The entry also contained his passport number and indicated that he was going to the prosecutor’s office. The logbook was appended to criminal file no. 53092 on 15 July 2006.
On an unspecified date in July 2006 the Ministry of the Interior informed the district prosecutor’s office that the following authorities’ buildings were located in the secure grounds of the government complex in Grozny: the military commander’s office of the Chechen Republic, the military commander’s office of Grozny, the military commander’s office of the Leninskiy district of Grozny, the Chechen Department of the FSB and the 349th special purpose battalion of the 46th special purpose brigade.
By a letter of 21 August 2006 the Chechen Department of the FSB replied to the request of the district prosecutor’s office and informed them that its officers had not arrested Khamzat Tushayev on the grounds of the governmental complex. The letter further stated that the Chechen Department of the FSB had arrested Khamzat Tushayev on 5 February 2003 during a special operation and that its officers had seized a submachine gun and several full cartridges for it from his house. On an unspecified date in August 2003 Khamzat Tushayev had been amnestied in relation to unspecified charges. On 3 April 2006 officers of the UBOP had arrested Khamzat Tushayev on suspicion of participation in illegal armed groups along with other persons. At 10 a.m. on 8 June 2006 Khamzat Tushayev had entered the grounds of the government complex in  and had never left those grounds; his whereabouts remained unknown.
On 5 September 2006 the investigation in case no. 53092 was entrusted to investigator Kh. of the district prosecutor’s office owing to the departure of investigator D. to the prosecutor’s office of the .
On 6 February 2007 the investigators seized a video recording of the arrest of Khamzat Tushayev and other persons in April 2006 from the archives of the Ministry of the Interior of the .
Between 2 and 12 February 2007 the investigators requested a number of State authorities to inform them whether they had arrested Khamzat Tushayev or had information on his whereabouts. It appears that no relevant information was obtained.
On 17 May 2007 the deputy head of the Chechen Department of the FSB informed the military commander of military unit no. 20102 that the unspecified mobile number mentioned in the latter’s request for information was not being used by the personnel of the department.
On 15 January 2007 the deputy prosecutor of the Staropromyslovskiy District of Grozny set aside the decision of 26 November 2006 to suspend the investigation in case no. 53092 as unfounded and premature. The investigators were instructed to carry out the following investigative measures: compile an up-to-date plan of investigative steps; interview the first applicant on the circumstances of the disappearance of her husband more thoroughly; identify the individuals who had been at checkpoint no. 1 on 8 June 2006 when Khamzat Tushayev had passed through it and interview them as witnesses; establish the manner in which visitors were admitted to the secure grounds of the government complex; interview the prosecutor of the Leninskiy district of Grozny as to the reasons for Khamzat Tushayev’s visit to the prosecutor’s office and the circumstances of his disappearance; establish whether the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office had investigated any criminal cases against Khamzat Tushayev or had been in possession of any materials which might have prompted it to summon him to it; instruct the military prosecutor to identify the owner of mobile number 8 928 290 06 28, because the materials of case file no. 53092 contained information to the effect that that number had been in use by the personnel of the Chechen Department of the FSB; interview staff of the newspaper “Stolitsa plyus” in connection with their article published on 2 December 2006 and mentioning Khamzat Tushayev and his arrest; identify and interview the UBOP officers who had arrested presumed members of illegal armed groups, including Khamzat Tushayev, in April 2006; and comply in full with the written instructions given by the district prosecutor’s office on 26 June 2006.
On 18 February 2007 the investigation in case no. 53092 was suspended owing to the failure to identify the perpetrators.
On 21 March 2007 the deputy prosecutor of the Staropromyslovskiy district prosecutor’s office quashed the decision of 18 February 2007 as unfounded and premature and instructed the investigators to take, among other things, the following investigative steps: compile an updated plan of investigative measures; identify the owner of mobile phone, from which the first applicant had received the call instructing her husband to appear at the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office for an interview on 8 June 2006 and interview that person; and obtain replies to the requests for information from all the relevant State authorities.
On 26 April 2007 the investigation in case no. 53902 was suspended because of the failure to identify the perpetrators.
On 20 June 2007 the deputy prosecutor of the Staropromyslovskiy district set aside the decision of 26 April 2007 as premature and unfounded.
On 20 July 2007 the investigation in case no. 53092 was adjourned because of the failure to identify those responsible.
It appears that on an unspecified date case no. 53092 was transferred for investigation to the investigation department of the Investigating committee with the prosecutor’s office of the Russian Federation in the  (“the investigation department”).
On 26 May 2009 the deputy head of the investigation department instructed his subordinates in charge of the investigation to take, the following investigative steps: resume the investigation; compile an uptodate plan of investigative measures; locate and interview a certain S.M. and I.V., who had stated on an unspecified date that Khamzat Tushayev had not been abducted; identify and interview the persons who had been at checkpoint no. 1 on 8 June 2006 when Khamzat Tushayev had passed through it; obtain the case file containing a printout of the conversation between the first applicant and the owner of mobile number 8 928 290 06 28, identify and interview all persons to whom that phone number had been registered or who had used or owned it at the material time; establish how visitors entered the grounds of the secure government complex; send a formal request to verify whether an official named “Sergey Alexandrovich” had indeed worked in the Leninskiy district prosecutor’s office and if so, interview him; identify possible eyewitnesses to the abduction of Khamzat Tushayev on the grounds of the government complex.
On 3 June 2009 the investigation in case no. 53092 was resumed.
According to the Government, the investigation into the abduction of Khamzat Tushayev is pending.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law see Akhmadova and Sadulayeva v. Russia (no. 40464/02, §§ 67-69, 10 May 2007).