The case originated in an application (no. 78117/13) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Gyula Fábián (“the applicant”), on 5 December 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Grád, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that the suspension of disbursement of his State old-age pension while he was employed within the public sector amounted to unjustified and discriminatory interference with his property rights contrary to Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 taken alone and in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). The Government were given notice of the application on 25 August 2014. The Government’s observations on the admissibility and merits of the application were submitted on 17 December 2014. The applicant’s observations in reply were submitted on 9 February 2015.
On 15 December 2015 a Chamber composed of Vincent A. De Gaetano, President, András Sajó, Boštjan Zupančić, Nona Tsotsoria, Paulo Pinto de Albuquerque, Krzysztof Wojtyczek, Iulia Antoanella Motoc, judges, and Françoise ElensPassos, Section Registrar, delivered its judgment. It unanimously declared the application admissible and held that there had been a violation of Article 14 of the Convention read in conjunction with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention in respect of the difference in treatment between pensioners employed in the public sector and pensioners employed in the private sector as well as between pensioners employed in different categories of the public sector. The Chamber considered that it was not necessary to examine the alleged violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 taken alone.
On 11 March 2016 the Government requested the referral of the case to the Grand Chamber in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention. On 2 May 2016 the panel of the Grand Chamber granted that request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicant and the Government each filed a memorial on the merits (Rule 59 § 1) and also, at the request of the judge appointed as Rapporteur, on the question whether the applicant had complied with the six-month time-limit laid down in Article 35 § 1 of the Convention in so far as he complained under Article 14 taken in conjunction with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 that there was an unjustified difference in treatment between different categories of State employees. In addition, third-party comments were received from the European Trade Union Confederation, which had been granted leave by the President of the Grand Chamber to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 9 November 2016 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Grád and Mr Tallódi, and replies by them to questions put by the judges.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Budapest.
He had been employed as a police officer when, having reached an age when he was entitled to do so, he took early retirement and started receiving a “service pension” (szolgálati nyugdíj) from 1 January 2000, when he was nearly 47 years old. The applicant, however, continued to work: he was employed in the private sector between 2000 and 2012 and from 1 July 2012 until 31 March 2015 he worked, as a civil servant, as the head of the Road Maintenance Department of the Budapest XIII District Municipality. The applicant paid the statutory contributions to the State old-age pension scheme from the first day of his employment (1 August 1973) until 31 March 2015.
On 28 November 2011 Parliament enacted Act no. CLXVII, which entered into force on 1 January 2012. According to section 5(1) of that law, service pensions like that of the applicant were converted into a “service allowance” (szolgálati járandóság), provided that the person concerned was born in or after 1955. Pursuant to section 3(2)(b) of the same Act, for recipients of a service pension who, like the applicant, were born in or before 1954, the service pension was to be converted into an old-age pension.
On 1 January 2013 an amendment to Act no. LXXXI of 1997 on Social-Security Pensions (hereafter “the 1997 Pensions Act”) entered into force, according to which the disbursement of those old-age pensions whose beneficiaries were simultaneously employed in certain categories within the civil service would be suspended from 1 July 2013 onwards for the duration of their employment (see also paragraphs 23-28 below). No such restriction was put in place in respect of those who were in receipt of an old-age pension while being employed within the private sector.
On 18 February 2013 the National Pensions Administration (Országos Nyugdíjbiztosítási Főigazgatóság) sent a letter to the applicant in his capacity as the recipient of an old-age pension, informing him of the amended legislation and instructing him to make a declaration as to whether he was employed in the civil service, in one of the categories concerned by the amendment of 1 January 2013. By a letter of 29 April 2013 the applicant notified the National Pensions Administration of his employment situation. Subsequently, on 2 July 2013, the National Pensions Administration informed the applicant that the disbursement of his pension had been suspended as of 1 July 2013. At that time his pension amounted to 162,260 Hungarian forints (HUF; at that time approximately 550 euros (EUR)) per month.
On 15 July 2013 the applicant lodged an administrative appeal with the National Pensions Administration (see paragraph 21 below) against the suspension of his pension payments in which he argued that his pension constituted an acquired right and that he was being discriminated against since pensioners working in the private sector continued to receive their pensions.
The National Pensions Administration sought further information from the applicant on 23 July 2013. The applicant elaborated on his appeal on 1 August 2013, referring, inter alia, to an application filed by the Ombudsman with the Constitutional Court in May 2013 (AJB-726/2013). In that application the Ombudsman set out the complaints which had been made to his Office about the amendment of the 1997 Pensions Act and raised the issue of a difference in treatment between pensioners employed in the civil service and those employed in the private sector. As far as the Court is aware, this case is currently still pending before the Constitutional Court.
On 27 September 2013 the National Pensions Administration discontinued the proceedings concerning the applicant’s appeal, holding that the applicant had failed to provide the information sought from him on 23 July 2013.
The applicant’s employment with the Budapest XIII District Municipality came to an end on 31 March 2015. On 24 April 2015 the competent authority decided that the disbursement of his pension would be resumed. His pension was increased to HUF 177,705 (at that time approximately EUR 585).
The Fundamental Law of Hungary provides as follows:
“(1)  Everyone shall have the right to freely choose his or her work or occupation and to engage in entrepreneurial activities. Everyone shall be obliged to contribute to the enrichment of the community through his or her work, in accordance with his or her abilities and opportunities.
(2)  Hungary shall strive to create the conditions to ensure that everyone who is able and willing to work has the opportunity to do so.”
At the relevant time, the employment of civil servants (közalkalmazott) was regulated by Act no. XXXIII of 1992 on the Legal Status of Civil Servants; the employment relationship of public officials (köztisztviselő), Government officials (kormánytisztviselő), officials in charge of public service administration (közszolgálati ügykezelő) and, in relation to some aspects, senior State officials (állami vezető) was governed by Act no. CXCIX of 2011 on Public Servants. Employment relationships in the private sector were governed by Act no. I of 2012 on the Labour Code.
The Hungarian compulsory social-security pension scheme is a contributory one. Persons in employment (be it in the public or private sector) pay a certain percentage – ten percent in 2013 – of their monthly income from work towards the scheme. Moreover, employers, private entrepreneurs and primary producers pay a social contribution tax of 27% of the amount of salaries paid, which goes, in whole or in part – the decision being made periodically on the basis of financial circumstances – towards the maintenance of the social-security pension system.
The Pension Fund (Nyugdíjbiztosítási Alap) thus obtained represents an item in the State budget. Pensions are paid from the Fund by the National Pensions Administration, which is a Government agency. If the Fund’s expenditures exceed its revenues, the State shall secure the necessary resources from the central budget.
The periods during which a person contributes to the scheme qualify as service time. The amount of pension paid out under the scheme, which is not subject to tax, is dependent on the service time and on that part of a person’s income which was subject to compulsory contributions.
In recent years, a number of measures were taken to terminate or reduce the concurrent receipt of State-paid pensions and State-paid salaries. Firstly, on 29 December 2012 Government Decree no. 1700/2012 on the principles of pension policy applicable to the civil service was issued. It prohibited the employment by central Government of persons entitled to an old-age pension, and stipulated that it was only in exceptional cases that vacancies could be filled by persons entitled to such a pension. Secondly, the 1997 Pensions Act was amended on 1 January 2013 to prohibit the simultaneous disbursement of remunerations financed by the central budget and old-age pensions or early-retirement pensions. This amendment applied, inter alia, to pensioners employed by local government bodies. A number of categories of persons in State employment were, however, exempted from the suspension of pension payments, such as members of Parliament, mayors, and judges and prosecutors on administrative leave, as well as persons employed in the public sector under the rules of the Labour Code who carried out tasks not related to the exercise of public powers.
Sections 83/C and 102/I of the 1997 Pensions Act as amended on 1 January 2013 provided as follows:
“(1)  The disbursement of an old-age pension shall be suspended ... if the pensioner concerned is employed as a civil servant, a government official, a senior State official, a public official, an official in charge of public service administration, a judge, an officer of the court, an officer of the prosecutor’s office, a professional member of an armed service, or a professional member or contractor of the Hungarian Defence Force.
...
(3)  For the period of suspension of the old-age pension the person concerned shall qualify as a pensioner.
(4)  Disbursement of the old-age pension may be continued at the pensioner’s request, if the beneficiary proves that the employment in subsection (1) above has been terminated.
....”
“(1)  Beneficiaries of an old-age pension working in any of the employments listed in section 83/C(1) on 1 January 2013 shall notify the pensions disbursement agency thereof by 30 April 2013.
(2)  The old-age pension of persons working in any of the employments listed in section 83/C(1) on 1 January 2013 shall be suspended from 1 July 2013, provided that such employment is maintained on that date.”
The lawmaker’s explanation of section 83/C contains the following passage:
“The amendment introduced the prohibition of double compensation in respect of the employment relationships of civil servants, government officials, senior State officials, public officials, officials in charge of public service administration, judges, officers of the court or the prosecutor’s office, professional members of an armed service, as well as professional members and contractors of the Hungarian Defence Force. Accordingly, persons working in such employments may not receive an old-age pension ... in addition to their remuneration, with the result that such payments must be suspended by the pension disbursement agency for the term of the employment.”
In the decision to suspend pension payments under section 83/C(1) no account is taken of the amount of salary being earned by the person concerned.
Beneficiaries of pension payments under the compulsory socialsecurity pension scheme who are at the same time in employment contribute to the scheme in the same way as other employed persons (see paragraph 21 above). They may request a yearly increase of their monthly pension payment in an amount of 0.5% of one-twelfth of their income from work carried out during a calendar year. If disbursement of the pension has been suspended under section 83/C(1) of the 1997 Pensions Act, the payment of any such yearly increases is suspended as well. Once disbursement resumes, the yearly increases will be added to the amount of pension that was received prior to the suspension.
According to data supplied by the Government, the number of persons in receipt of an old-age pension on 1 July 2013 was 2,007,426. The pension payments of a maximum number of 5,288 persons were suspended at any one time in the course of 2013 under section 83/C(1) of the 1997 Pensions Act. The maximum number of persons concerned at any one time in 2014 was 4,545; in 2015 4,212; and, in the period between January and August 2016, 3,945. Between March 2013 and August 2016 an amount of HUF 30,602,215,675 (at the last-mentioned date approximately EUR 98 million) was not disbursed as a result of the amendment of the 1997 Pensions Act. However, persons who worked in the public health-care sector and who had their pension payments suspended pursuant to section 83/C(1) of the 1997 Pensions Act (3,169 persons between July 2013 and August 2016) were provided by the National Health Fund with monthly compensation equal to the amount of their pension. Between July 2013 and August 2016 such compensation amounted to HUF 25,190,700,000 (at the last-mentioned date approximately EUR 81 million), which reduced the total amount of savings in State expenditure to HUF 5,411,515,675 (approximately EUR 17 million in August 2016).
Act no. CLXXVIII of 2012 on the amendment of certain tax-related legislation amended the 1997 Pensions Act and entered into force in January 2013. This amendment abolished the previously existing ceiling in respect of statutory contributions to the pension scheme, in order to increase the revenues of the Pension Fund.
In 2000 the general statutory retirement age for men in Hungary was 62; an old-age pension could be drawn by those who had reached that age and had completed at least twenty years’ service. That age was subsequently, and gradually, raised to 63 for both men and women born in 1953.
Various early-retirement schemes used to be statutorily available, both in the public sector (including the armed forces, to which, in Hungary, also the police belong) and the private sector, and over the years a great number of persons opted to make use of such schemes. From 1 January 2012 onwards those schemes – inasmuch as new entrants were concerned – were abolished by the entry into force of Act no. CLXVII (see also paragraph 12 above).
The Court conducted a comparative study of the legislation of 36 member States of the Council of Europe.
In almost all of the 36 States surveyed it is possible, in one way or another, to receive a State pension and a salary simultaneously. Only in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is the State pension suspended, without exception, if the person continues to work and receive a salary.
However, in the vast majority of States, some form of reduction or suspension of the pension is applied in various situations. These can broadly be divided into the following categories.
Many States’ legislation distinguishes between people who retire early and people who retire at the legal age of retirement (usually between 60 and 65). Thus, in Andorra, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Romania and Slovakia, payment of the State pension is suspended while the person continues to work, if he or she retired before reaching the statutory age of retirement. In Portugal, such suspension is applied for three years if the person continues to work for the same company or group of companies.
Meanwhile, in some States such as Austria, Denmark, Germany, Luxembourg, Poland and Sweden, an early-retirement pension is reduced or suspended only if the salary earned reaches a certain level. This reduction applies in Iceland not only to early-retirement pensions, but to all forms of pension. In Finland, a person’s early-retirement pension is not affected in any way by further employment.
In some of the States surveyed, the pension payment is suspended for people who continue to work in the public sector, whilst no obstacles apply in the private sector (see also paragraphs 38-43 below).
There are some differences between how the States surveyed regulate salary earned simultaneously with a disability or invalidity pension. In some States such as Austria, reductions are applied if the total amount of pension and salary exceeds a certain threshold. In Croatia and Italy, the accumulation of pension and salary is not possible. On the other hand, pension payments are not suspended for disabled people in Ukraine. Accumulation is also possible in Romania for pensioners with a third-degree invalidity and blind persons.
As stated above (paragraph 36), some States suspend State pension payments for people who continue to work in the public sector, whereas they may retain full payment if they continue to work in the private sector. For example, in Andorra, the retirement pension of a civil servant is suspended if that person continues to work as a civil servant or agent in the public administration. In Georgia, suspension of a pension would apply to all categories of jobs in the public sector. A person who continues to work in the private sector in Portugal may simultaneously receive a State pension, while the pension is suspended in the public sector. In Spain, Turkey and Ukraine, accumulation is possible for self-employed persons (up to a certain level), but not for most public-sector employees.
In Azerbaijan, while accumulation is possible without a suspension or reduction of the State pension, some categories of public-sector employees, including civil servants, are entitled to supplements to the pension. Supplements are calculated based on a certain percentage of the average salary during the employment period. These supplements will be reduced, or even suspended in some situations. However, they are not reduced or suspended if the person continues to work in the private sector.
The same goes for a special form of public-service pension in Denmark. Payment of the public-service pension is suspended if the person continues to work as a public servant, but not if he or she continues to work in the private sector.
In Italy, if the total amount of public-sector employees’ earnings (including old-age pension) exceeds a certain (quite high) threshold, their salary is reduced to the level of that threshold, while the amount of pension remains the same.
In Austria, conversely, public servants, but not private-sector employees, are exempted from the reduction applied to pension payments.
However, a majority of the States surveyed do not make a distinction between the public and private sectors regarding whether pension payments may be reduced or suspended.