The case concerns a legislative amendment that placed a moratorium on evictions during the crisis in Hungary arising from widespread defaulting on foreign-currency-denominated loans. Within the context of an official auction, this amendment resulted in the applicant not being able to take possession of the property that he had bought at that auction.
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Kistarcsa. He was represented by Mr O.V. Tamás, a lawyer practising in Budapest.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 18 March 2014, the applicant, as a bidder at an official auction held within the framework of judicial enforcement proceedings, submitted a bid for the debtor’s residential property (“the residential property”) – which was put up for official auction owing to the debtor defaulting on a loan agreement denominated in foreign currency (“foreign-currency loan agreement”) – and won the auction.
Before the applicant’s title to the residential property could be registered in the land register and before the debtor’s eviction from the residential property could take place, section 303 of Act no. LIII of 1994 (“the Enforcement Act”) was amended. The amendment placed a moratorium on evictions from residential properties affected by enforcement proceedings instituted for the recovery of debts arising from foreign-currency loan agreements until a date to be specified by further supplementary legislation (“the Moratorium”). The Moratorium was not applicable to local governments and economic operators wholly owned by the State or by local municipalities, provided that such legal persons that had bought real property at auction undertook to renovate such property within two years of their taking possession and to lease such property – by way of a public tender and in accordance with local government decrees on leasing – to workers, with the goal of promoting the creation of new jobs through the offering of subsidised housing. The Moratorium entered into force on 16 May 2014.
The Moratorium was the first enforcement-related legislative measure taken by the Government to mitigate the detrimental effects of the 2008 financial crisis on debtors who held loans denominated in foreign currency (“foreign-currency loans”) (see also Merkantil Car Zrt. v. Hungary. no. 22853/15, 27 November 2018, §§ 7, 8, 90 and 108). The aim of the Moratorium was to ensure that – prior to the settling of invalidity disputes concerning foreign-currency loan agreements – large parts of society did not lose their homes.
Owing to the entry into force of the Moratorium, the bailiffs service was barred from taking measures aimed at the eviction of the debtor from the residential property.
On 3 July 2014, shortly after the entry into force of the Moratorium, the Kúria adopted uniformity resolution (jogegységi határozat) no. 2/2014.PJE, which provided guidance on addressing the unfairness of certain contractual clauses in foreign-currency loan agreements. Following that resolution, on 4 July 2014 Parliament adopted Act no. XXXVIII of 2014 (“the Uniformity Act”), which enforced at a statutory level the principles laid down in the Kúria’s uniformity resolution and allowed for the resolution of disputes concerning foreign-currency loan agreements.
On 5 October 2014 Parliament also passed Act no. XL of 2014 (“the Settlement Act”), which laid down the conditions for settling foreign-currency loan agreements. Section 17 of the Uniformity Act and section 42(4) of the Settlement Act stipulated that the restrictions imposed by the Moratorium on enforcement proceedings conducted against defaulting debtors were to be lifted once the financial institutions met the settlement obligations, and section 42(4) of the Settlement Act determined that the Moratorium would end on 31 December 2016 at the latest.
According to the copy of the title deed attached to the case documents, on 14 November 2014 the debtor (and not the applicant) was still the registered owner of the residential property.
The applicant submitted that he had gained possession of and title to the residential property approximately two years after he had purchased it at the public auction.
Decision no. 3021/2017 (II.17.) AB of the Constitutional Court contains the following passage:
“The practice of the Constitutional Court is consistent in that the right to property set out in Article XIII of the Fundamental Law protects property already acquired or, in exceptional cases, property expectations.”
Section 5:41 of Act no. V of 2013 on the Civil Code provides as follows:
Acquisition of ownership by an administrative decision or by official auction
“(1) Any person who has acquired a thing [dolog] in good faith by an official resolution or by official auction shall gain ownership, irrespective of who the previous owner was.
(2) Ownership by [acquired by] an administrative decision shall be considered to have been acquired when possession is transferred in the case of movable property, or when the acquisition of title is recorded in the Real Estate Register in the case of real property, unless the [relevant] administrative decision provides otherwise.
(3) In the event of an official auction the auction buyer [árverési vevő] shall acquire ownership when possession of the movable property [in question] is transferred by the auctioneer, or when [in the case of real estate property] the acquisition of title is registered in the Real Estate Register.
(4) Upon the acquisition of ownership of a thing by an official resolution or by official auction, the rights of the third party in respect of that thing shall cease, except when the party acquiring ownership by an official resolution or by official auction has not acted in good faith in respect of those rights.”
Section 303 of Act no. LIII of 1994 on Judicial Enforcement provides as follows:
“(1) In enforcement proceedings instituted against a debtor or obligor – as referred to in subsections (2) and (3) (or instituted with the direct involvement of the mortgage holder) – the bailiffs service shall, pursuant to the provisions set out in section 182/A, postpone the evacuation of the residential property in question from the day following the day of its receipt of an order to enforce eviction with police assistance or of a request from the auction buyer (that is to say the party taking over the property) made under section 154/A(10) for a period lasting from the date of the expiry of the eviction moratorium mentioned in this section until the date specified in the separate Act for the resolution of the situation of foreign-currency loan debtors.
...
(10) The provisions of this section shall not apply in the event that the auction buyer or the person taking over the residential property is a local-government [entity] or an economic operator owned, jointly or separately, wholly by the State or local government, and undertakes in writing:
a) to renovate the residential property or have it renovated within two years of its taking possession, and
b) to publish, within two years of its taking possession, a call for tenders for the awarding of a lease agreement, under terms specified in the respective local government decree on leasing in respect of residential property, to prospective workers, with a view to creating new jobs, maintaining existing jobs, and allowing local people [to remain in their respective areas] ...”
Section 42(4) of Act no. XL of 2014 on the settlement of certain issues related to Act no. XXXVIII of 2014 on the Kúria’s uniformity resolution on consumer credit agreements made by financial institutions and on statutory settlement rules and certain other provisions provides as follows:
“The execution of eviction from residential property specified in section 303 of the Enforcement Act – with respect to section 182/A of the Enforcement Act – may be resumed after 31 December 2016 at the latest.”