The present case concerns the applicant’s complaint that the sanction of confiscation applied in respect of all the money which she had been transporting through Georgia in violation of her duty to declare it to the customs authorities had constituted a disproportionate interference with her right of property, in violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in the Lori Region of Armenia. She was represented by Mr S. Grigoryan and Ms T. Barbakadze, lawyers practising in Yerevan.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr B. Dzamashvili, of the Ministry of Justice.
Having been informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44), the Armenian Government did not avail themselves of that right.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 20 May 2010 the applicant arrived, together with two travelling companions, at the Sarpi Border Checkpoint on the land border between Georgia and Turkey to cross into Georgia. As it appears from the case-file material, the applicant had travelled through that route twenty-six times in the period between 21 May 2009 and 20 May 2010. After going through the passport control at the checkpoint she passed the desk designated for customs declarations without making such a declaration. Subsequently the applicant was approached by customs officers and asked whether she had anything to declare. The applicant responded in the negative. She was nevertheless required to go through a search procedure which revealed that she had 40,000 United States dollars (USD) hidden on her person which she had failed to declare. The money was hidden underneath the applicant’s clothes, placed in a stocking tied around her waist. The customs officers drew up a report on the discovery of an undeclared sum of money on the applicant’s person and its seizure, which was signed by the customs officers, the applicant, and an interpreter. No objections were recorded on that document. The officers also drew up an official report concerning the violation of customs rules, which was also signed by the applicant, without objections having been recorded on that document.
As it appears from the case-file material, on 9 June 2010 the applicant applied to the Batumi Regional Office of the Revenue Service of the Ministry of Finance (“the Revenue Service”). She noted, among other arguments, that while she had carried the entire sum seized by the customs officers, only USD 9,000 (approximately 16,000 Georgian laris (GEL)) had belonged to her while the remaining sums of USD 13,000 and USD 18,000 had belonged to her travelling companions who had entrusted her with their money for security purposes, not to have it stolen from them during their travels. This amount had not, the applicant argued, exceeded the limit of GEL 30,000 set by Georgian law; and in accordance with the law, only sums exceeding that limit had to be declared at a customs inspection.
On 14 June 2010 the Revenue Service informed the applicant that “the undeclared goods should be forfeited, in accordance with Article 242 § 1 of the Customs Code” (see paragraph 17 below).
On 3 August 2010 the applicant appealed, reiterating her arguments (see paragraph 7 above).
On 12 August 2010 the applicant’s complaint was dismissed by the Revenue Service. It reasoned that Article 242 § 1 of the Customs Code had provided for a fine of 100% of the customs value of goods transported by avoiding the customs inspection, or the forfeiture of such goods. As the applicant had signed the report concerning the violation of customs rules, the factual circumstances underlying the forfeiture order had been proved, justifying its imposition.
On 23 August 2010 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Council of Tax Appeals reiterating her arguments (see paragraph 7 above) and noting that at least the sum of GEL 30,000 (the legally allowed amount not subject to the declaration requirement) should have been returned to her.
On 13 September 2010 the Council of Tax Appeals dismissed her application. It reasoned that the obligation to declare any sum exceeding GEL 30,000 during a customs inspection had been provided for by law, and the applicant had deliberately avoided complying with that obligation, which had warranted the application of measures under Article 242 § 1 of the Customs Code. For the purposes of that provision, it did not matter whether the entire sum or part of that sum had been the applicant’s property, as at the time of the discovery of the violation of the declaration obligation, it was the applicant who had held the whole sum in question, and the sanction had been applicable to the totality of the sum concerned.
On 30 September 2010 the applicant instituted judicial proceedings before the Batumi City Court requesting that the customs inspection and seizure orders were declared null and void. She reiterated her earlier arguments (see paragraphs 7 and 11 above), and complained of the manner in which the customs inspection procedure had been implemented in her respect, stating that she had signed a document the content of which she had not understood.
By a decision of 26 November 2010 the Batumi City Court dismissed the applicant’s submissions. It found that she had been duly assisted by an interpreter. As regards the confiscation measure, the court established that the applicant had deliberately avoided making the customs declaration by failing to stop at the desk designated for such declarations, and had concealed the money underneath her clothes, placed in a stocking tied around her waist. The court also noted that the applicant had failed to substantiate her submission concerning the shared ownership of the money confiscated from her given that she had deliberately avoided making the appropriate declaration and this argument had not been raised at the time the violation of the customs regulations had been discovered. The court considered that the applicant’s behaviour had indicated that the subsequently raised argument concerning the shared ownership of the confiscated sum had been aimed at avoiding the imposition of the relevant sanction. It further noted that given the “dubious circumstances” of the case, the verbal explanations given by the applicant and her travelling companions as to the shared ownership had been insufficient to substantiate her assertions. The court continued to note that, in any event, the relevant regulation had been concerned with the transportation of money, not its ownership, and it had been the applicant who was found to have transported the whole amount on her person. Therefore, the declaration obligation had rested with her. The undeclared money having been found through the personal search, it had been, in the court’s conclusion, rightfully forfeited, in accordance with Article 242 § 1 of the Customs Code. The applicant lodged an appeal on an unspecified date, reiterating her complaints (see paragraphs 7 and 11 above).
On 26 April 2011 the Kutaisi Court of Appeal upheld the lower court’s findings. The appellate court agreed with the Batumi City Court that the applicant had been duly assisted by an interpreter at the time the violation of the customs regulations had been discovered. It further endorsed the finding that the applicant’s argument regarding shared ownership of the confiscated money had been unsubstantiated, as she had failed to put that argument forward at the time the violation of the customs rule had been found, and had signed the relevant reports on the violation of the customs regulations. The appellate court continued to note that regardless of the question of ownership, as the person transporting the full amount, it had been the applicant’s obligation to have it declared in accordance with the relevant regulations. The appellate court also noted that the declaration obligation and the relevant sanction had applied to the totality of the sum exceeding GEL 30,000, and not the part in excess, as argued by the applicant. Therefore the applicant had been under the obligation to declare the transportation of USD 40,000 which she had instead chosen to conceal. The Kutaisi Court of Appeal stated that while no taxes had been applicable to any sum transported through Georgia, a failure to declare a sum of money exceeding GEL 30,000, as in the applicant’s case, had constituted a violation of customs rules, warranting the application of the sanction provided for in Article 242 § 1 of the Customs Code.
By a final decision of 16 November 2011 the Supreme Court rejected an appeal by the applicant on points of law. According to the case file material, the decision of 16 November 2011 was served on the applicant’s lawyer on 17 April 2012.
Article 242 § 1 of the Customs Code, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“Carrying goods across the customs border of Georgia by means of bypassing the customs inspection or hiding [the goods from the inspection] shall entail a fine for the person [carrying those goods] in the amount of 100% of the customs value of the goods, but not less than GEL 1000, or the confiscation of such goods and/or the transport vehicle.”
Section 5(3) of the 2003 Act on Facilitating the Prevention of Legalisation of Illicit Income (“the Money Laundering Act”), as in force at the material time, provided that the transfer into and out of Georgia of cash or cheques whose value exceeded GEL 30,000 (approximately USD 15,700 at the material time) or the equivalent of that amount in another currency was subject to monitoring by the Revenue Service. Additionally, under Section 3(3.1) of Appendix no. 6 of Decree no. 1232 of the Minister of Finance, dated 22 November 2007, as in force at the material time, any amount of currency could be freely imported into or exported from Georgia without any charges. However, a person carrying an amount of cash equal to or exceeding GEL 30,000, or the equivalent in another currency, was required to declare it.