The case originated in an application (no. 23646/09) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Geotech Kancev GmbH (“the applicant”), a limited company registered in Castrop-Rauxel, on 29 April 2009.
The applicant company was represented by Ms H. Böttcher, a lawyer practising in Hamburg. On 30 March 2010 insolvency proceedings were opened over the applicant company’s assets. The company has not been struck off the Commercial Register (Handelsregister). The Insolvency Administrator (Insolvenzverwalter) authorised the applicant’s counsel to continue the proceedings before this Court. The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr H.-J. Behrens, Ministerialrat, of the Federal Ministry of Justice.
Third-party comments were received from the Supplementary Pension Scheme for the Construction Industry Corporation (Zusatzversorgungskasse des Baugewerbes AG, “ZVK”), which had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of the Court). The parties were given an opportunity to reply to those comments (Rule 44 § 6 of the Rules of the Court).
The applicant company mainly alleged that its obligation to participate in the Social Welfare Fund, jointly set up by the employers’ associations and the trade union in the building industry, violated its right to freedom of association under Article 11 of the Convention as well as its right to peaceful enjoyment of its possessions under Article 1 of Protocol  No. 1.
On 19 June 2013 the complaints concerning Article 11 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant company specialises in taking soil samples by way of drilling for geological examination, inter alia, for the purpose of assessing suitability for building sites and for the construction of wells.
In the building industry in Germany, a number of collective agreements operated, which contained regulations related to the social welfare of employees working in that sector (see relevant domestic law and practice paragraphs 21-28). The employers’ associations in the building industry (Hauptverband der Deutschen Bauindustrie and Zentralverband des Deutschen Baugewerbes) and the trade union (IG Bauen-Agrar-Umwelt) concluded the Collective Agreement on Social Welfare Proceedings in the Building Trade (Tarifvertrag über das Sozialkassenverfahren im Baugewerbe, “VTV”). The VTV contained rules about contributions and entitlements in relation to both the ZVK and the Holiday and Wage Equalisation Fund of the Construction Industry (Urlaubs- und Lohnausgleichskasse der Bauwirtschaft, “ULAK”), which jointly comprised the Social Welfare Fund in the building industry which went by the common name “SOKA-BAU”.
As the Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs declared the VTV generally binding (allgemeinverbindlich) pursuant to Section 5 § 1 of the Law on Collective Agreements (Tarifvertragsgesetz), it was binding on all employers in the building industry, even if they did not belong to the employers’ association (Section 5 § 4 of the Law on Collective Agreements, see relevant domestic law and practice paragraph 20). As a consequence, all employers in the building industry were obliged to contribute to the Social Welfare Fund an additional sum amounting to 19.8% of the gross wages paid to their employees.
The applicant company was not a member of an employers’ association that was party to the relevant collective agreements. It was thus not directly bound by any collective agreements by virtue of such membership.
On 10 August 2004 the Social Welfare Fund sent a letter to the applicant company with key information about the supplementary welfare schemes, including with regard to contributions to be paid and possible benefits it might receive. The applicant company did not react to this letter.
On 12 April 2005, following enquiries made in order to establish whether the applicant was obliged to pay contributions, the Social Welfare Fund sent a letter to the applicant company, informing it about its duty to pay contributions and that an account had been opened into which benefits would be paid.
On 28 April 2005 the applicant company’s lawyer sent a letter to the Social Welfare Fund, objecting to being registered with the Fund.
On 11 October 2007 the Wiesbaden Labour Court ordered the applicant company to pay 63,625.58 euros (EUR) in welfare fund arrears for the period between September 2002 and March 2004 to the ZVK. The applicant company was further ordered to submit copies of the wage slips issued to its employees between January 2006 and June 2007. The Labour Court considered that the applicant company was bound by the VTV, which was binding on all employers in the building industry even if they did not belong to one of the employers’ associations. The activities of the applicant company fell within the scope of the VTV which, in its Article 1 § 2 (v) no. 6, listed drilling as an activity within its scope.
The applicant company lodged an appeal submitting, in particular, that the generally binding effect of the VTV violated the negative aspects of its right to freedom of association. It argued that it was obliged to contribute to a fund jointly set up by the employers’ association and the trade union, even though it did not belong to either of these associations. The applicant company further complained that it was prevented from founding its own association, due to a lack of funds.
On 27 June 2008 the Hesse Labour Court of Appeal rejected the applicant company’s appeal and did not grant leave for an appeal on points of law. As well as confirming the Labour Court’s reasoning, the Court of Appeal held that the generally binding effect of the VTV did not violate the applicant company’s right to freedom of association. It observed that the generally binding effect did not entail an obligation to adhere either to one of the employers’ associations or to the Social Welfare Fund. Referring to the case-law of the Federal Constitutional Court (decision of 15 July 1980, 1 BvR 24/74, see relevant domestic law and practice paragraph 27), the Labour Court of Appeal conceded that the applicant company, which was not a member of one of the employers’ associations, had the disadvantage of not being able to assert its interests by exercising control over the activities of the Social Welfare Fund via these associations. The right to participate in the decision-making process within these associations was reserved to members of the respective association. In so far as this fact exerted a certain pressure to become a member of one of the employers’ associations, this was, however, not sufficient to amount to a violation of the negative aspect of its right to freedom of association.
The Court of Appeal further considered that the obligation to contribute to the Social Welfare Fund did not prevent the applicant company from founding its own association. It observed that the major parts of the contributions due would be reimbursed to the applicant if properly declared.
The Court of Appeal finally considered that the obligatory contribution to the Social Welfare Fund took account of the high fluctuation of employees in the building industry and served the public interest of allowing for management of the employee’s claims by the Social Welfare Fund, thus preventing a distortion of competition.
On 10 December 2008 the Federal Labour Court rejected the applicant company’s complaint against the refusal to grant leave to appeal.
On 5 February 2009 the Federal Constitutional Court refused to accept the applicant company’s constitutional complaint for adjudication without providing reasons (1 BvR 243/09).
Section 5 of the Law on Collective Agreements, which constituted the legal basis for declaring collective agreements generally binding and set out the procedure for and effects of such a declaration, provided:
“(1)  The Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs may, on request, and with the consent of a committee consisting of three representatives each of the head organisations of the employers and of the employees, declare a collective agreement generally binding, if
the employees of the employers which are bound by the collective agreement constitute no less than 50% of the employees to which the collective agreement applies and
it appears to be in the public interest to grant the agreement binding effect.
The conditions referred to in numbers 1 and 2 may be waived if the declaration of general applicability appears necessary to rectify a social emergency.
(2)  Before taking a decision concerning an application, employers and employees who might possibly be affected by the declaration of general applicability, the trade unions and employers’ associations interested in the outcome of the procedure, and the highest labour authorities of the Länder included in the scope of the collective agreement shall be given the opportunity to submit written statements and to make statements in an oral and public hearing.
(3)  Where the highest labour authority of an involved Land raises an objection against the declaration of general applicability, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may only grant the application with the prior approval of the Federal Government.
(4)  In case a collective agreement has been declared generally binding, the provisions of that agreement also apply to those employers and employees who had previously not been bound by it.
(5)  The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may revoke the declaration of general applicability of a collective agreement with the consent of the committee referred to in subsection (1) if the revocation appears expedient in the public interest. Subsections (2) and (3) shall apply mutatis mutandis.
(6)  The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may, in individual cases, transfer the right to make the declaration of general applicability and to revoke the declaration of general applicability to the highest Land labour authority.
(7)   Public notification shall be made of the declaration of general applicability and of the revocation of the declaration of general applicability.”
In the building industry, a number of collective agreements operated, which contained regulations related to the social welfare of employees in that sector. These agreements took account of the specific working conditions in the building industry, notably that building work was largely weather-dependent; the building industry was subject to considerable fluctuations in orders, but production in advance was not possible, so that low demand inevitably led to a shortage of orders; employee fluctuation between construction companies was generally high; and the majority of persons employed in the building industry left the labour force before they reached the age of retirement. This resulted in employees in the building industry not being able to fulfil the prerequisites for obtaining social welfare benefits in respect of one single employer.
In order to protect the employees in the building industry against these disadvantages and to guarantee them certain minimum social welfare benefits, supplementary social welfare schemes were introduced through collective agreements. The relevant collective agreements were: the Federal Framework Collective Agreement for the Building Industry (Bundesrahmentarifvertrag für das Baugewerbe, “BRTV”), which regulated the entitlement to holiday pay for employees in the construction industry, among other things; the Collective Agreement on Pension Allowances in the Building Industry (Rentenbeihilfen im Baugewerbe, “TVR”); the Collective Agreement on Vocational Training in the Building Industry (Tarifvertrag über die Berufbildung im Baugewerbe, “BBTV”); and the VTV.
The holiday fund and the supplementary pension scheme had in common that they eliminated the link to a concrete employment relationship and instead focused on the fact that an employee was a member of a specific sector. If an employee moved from one employer in the building industry to another, he retained any previously accrued entitlements. The employee’s periods of employment in various companies in the building industry were added up.
All employers within the scope of application of the respective generally binding collective agreements were obliged to contribute financially to the said social welfare schemes. These contributions were used to reimburse the companies that provided the respective benefits to the employees. In other words, the employers in the building industry financed the social welfare benefits of the employees in that sector, based on the principle of solidarity.
These social welfare schemes have been implemented in accordance with the respective generally binding collective agreements for several decades: the holiday scheme was introduced in 1949, the supplementary pension scheme in 1957, and the vocational training scheme in 1975.
In 1965 the Federal Labour Court found that declaring the collective agreements on which the social welfare schemes were based generally binding was legal (judgments of 3 February 1965, 4 AZR 483/62 and 4 AZR 385/63).
In 1980 the Federal Constitutional Court held that declaring the collective agreements concerning the Social Welfare Fund generally binding did not violate the Basic Law (Grundgesetz) (judgment of 15 July 1980, 1 BvR 24/74 and 1 BvR 439/79). It found, in particular, that the pressure on a company to become a member of an association that was party to the respective collective agreements, so as to be able to assert its interests by exercising control over the activities of the social welfare schemes via this association, did not constitute a violation of the negative aspect of the right to freedom of association. The Federal Constitutional Court recently upheld the keynotes of that decision (judgment of 11 July 2006, 1 BvL 4/00), finding that a mere incentive to join an association was not sufficient to constitute an interference with the negative aspect of the right to freedom of association.
The declaration of generally applicability of each of these collective agreements was preceded by the procedure prescribed by Section 5 of the Law on Collective Agreements.
The VTV contained rules about contributions and entitlements in relation to both the ZVK and the ULAK, which jointly comprised the Social Welfare Fund in the building industry which went by the common name “SOKA-BAU”. The ZVK and the ULAK were responsible for administering and implementing the above-mentioned social welfare schemes as regulated in the respective generally binding collective agreements concluded in the building industry.
The Social Welfare Fund in the building industry did not establish – nor foresee – that any employer or employee falling within the scope of the Fund became, or could become, a member of the Fund. The only members of the ZVK were the parties to the respective collective agreements, namely the employers’ associations (Hauptverband der Deutschen Bauindustrie and Zentralverband des Deutschen Baugewerbes) and the trade union in the building industry (IG Bauen-Agrar-Umwelt). Members of the ULAK included, in addition, regional employers’ associations.
At the time relevant for the present case, the ZVK was responsible for collecting contributions for the holiday scheme, for financing pension allowances, and for financing sector-wide vocational training in the building industry. It was also responsible for administrating the pension allowance scheme. The holiday scheme and the vocational training scheme, however, were administered by the ULAK.
In addition, the ZVK and the ULAK also administered and paid optional benefits to the employers and employees. These benefits were not part of the applicable collective agreements and were not financed from the contributions paid in accordance with the VTV.
From 21 December 2007 the Social Welfare Fund operated in the legal form of a stock company. Before 21 December 2007, and at the time relevant to the instant case, the ZVK was organised as a mutual insurance association (Versicherungsverein auf Gegenseitigkeit), a specific legal form in private law available in the area of insurance only. The ULAK was organised as a commercial association within the meaning of Article 22 of the Civil Code.
The benefits provided by the ZVK constituted an insurance product under domestic law. The ZVK was thus subject to state insurance supervision by the German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (Bundesanstalt für Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht, “BaFin”). The ULAK was likewise subject to state supervision, by the State capital of the Federal State (Land) of Hesse.
According to their statutes, neither the ZVK nor the ULAK were allowed to realise or to distribute any profits. The contributions they received could exclusively be used to administer and to finance social welfare schemes and to pay out the respective benefits. Profits could only be used to build up reserves.
Whenever a firm registered with the Social Welfare Fund, or the Social Welfare Fund learned of the existence of a building company by other means, a letter was sent to the company briefly outlining the social welfare schemes, including associated reimbursements. In addition, a brochure containing information about the benefits paid to employees and the reimbursement of employers was enclosed. The brochure also provided an overview of the legal bases for the social welfare schemes. Reference was made to the website www.soka-bau.de and to further information available by telephone or in electronic form.
If the Social Welfare Fund’s enquiries revealed that a company was bound by the respective collective agreements, the company received written notification thereof. Additional information about, inter alia, the benefits paid by the ZVK and the ULAK, the respective social welfare schemes, the tasks of the ZVK and the ULAK, and the use of the financial contributions was enclosed. In addition, the company was offered a free personal on-site consultation.
In terms of reporting, the ZVK and the ULAK each provided individual annual reports of their activities and the concrete use to which the contributions they received were put. As from 2004, they also prepared a joint annual report in addition to the individual reports.
The ZVK’s annual report was published in the Federal Gazette. From 2002, the annual reports of the ZVK and the ULAK could also be downloaded from the Fund’s website. Companies registered with the Social Welfare Fund received a letter of information as soon as a new annual report had been published. These letters did not only indicate the possibility of downloading the annual reports but also contained a form which a firm could use to order printed copies by post.
The annual reports set out the tasks of the Social Welfare Fund and provided a description of its income and expenditure. The respective information was detailed (for example, for the ZVK report as it related to the pension allowance: number of pensioners, pension payment expenditure, average amount of pension allowance, year-on-year comparison). The reports also featured information on staffing costs of the ZVK and the ULAK. The annual accounts, including balance sheets, were compiled in accordance with the relevant national provisions and audited by accountants. The annual reports showed that the Social Welfare Fund did not make any profit. Any surpluses generated were primarily used to build up reserves. This information was provided to the companies that were obliged to pay contributions, regardless of whether or not a specific company was a member of one of the associations that were party to the collective agreement.