The case originated in an application (no. 25747/07) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Juljan Romankevič (“the applicant”), on 15 June 2007.
The applicant, born in 1934, passed away on 27 January 2008. His daughter and heir, Helena Česlauskienė, who lives in the Vilnius Region, stated that she wished to maintain the application. For practical reasons, Mr Romankevič will continue to be called “the applicant” in this judgment. The applicant’s heir was represented before the Court by Mr R. Mištautas, a lawyer practising in Kaunas.
The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by their former Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė, and subsequently by their Acting Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė.
The applicant alleged that he had been deprived of his property by a decision of a domestic court and had not received adequate compensation, in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 29 June 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
In 1998 the applicant’s property rights to a previously nationalised part of his late father’s land near Vilnius were restored. On 5 June 2002 the Vilnius Region Administration restored his rights – restitution in natura – to the remainder of the land measuring 0.53 hectares, situated in the village of Gineitiškės. This plot of land was then entered in the land registry in the applicant’s name.
In January 2005, having discovered that the decision of 5 June 2002 was based on erroneous data prepared by a State-hired land surveyor and had possibly breached the rights of other former landowners, the General Prosecutor’s Office instituted administrative proceedings to have the applicant’s title to the plot annulled. The applicant was a third party to those proceedings and argued that the restoration process had been lawful, without, however, raising the question of an adequate compensation in the event that his title to the plot was extinguished. Shortly before the initiation of the case, the Vilnius Region Administration had admitted that its decision had been unlawful and had informed the applicant that it needed to rectify the error; however, it appears that the latter had disagreed.
On 8 September 2005 the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court dismissed the prosecutor’s complaint. However, on 12 December 2005 the Supreme Administrative Court remitted the case for re-examination.
On 20 April 2006 the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court granted the claim and annulled the decision of 5 June 2002. Finally, on 15 January 2007 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the decision of the lower court. The courts established that the original plot of land to which the applicant had ownership rights was actually situated in another, albeit nearby, area of Gilužiai village. Thus, the return of the plot in 2002 was declared unlawful as it breached the Law on the Restoration of Citizens’ Ownership Rights to Existing Real Property.
Following the courts’ decisions, the plot of land was taken away from the applicant and returned to the State. No compensation was awarded to the applicant. However, he reserved the right to have his ownership rights restored.
By a decision of 2 February 2009 the Vilnius Region Administration restored the applicant’s ownership rights in natura by granting a new plot of land measuring 0.53 hectares in Gilužiai village.
For the relevant domestic law and practice see Pyrantienė v. Lithuania (no. 45092/07, §§ 16-22, 12 November 2013), and Albergas and Arlauskas v. Lithuania (no. 17978/05, §§ 21-33, 27 May 2014).
Under the Law on the Restoration of Citizens’ Ownership Rights to Existing Real Property (Piliečių nuosavybės teisių į išlikusį nekilnojamąjį turtą atkūrimo įstatymas) (hereinafter “the Law on Restitution”) as in force at the material time, land had to be returned to citizens in natura in its former location, with the exception of land which could not be returned in natura and had to be bought out by the State while the former owners had to be compensated by other means provided for by the Law on Restitution, and land that citizens were not willing to get back in its former location (Article 4 § 2).