The case originated in an application (no. 35399/05) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Konstantin Stefanov Stefanov (“the applicant”), on 20 September 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Neykov, a lawyer practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms N. Nikolova, from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his right to peaceful enjoyment of his possessions was breached as a result of not receiving a fee for legal work and of being fined unlawfully during court proceedings in which he had been selected to act as legal aid defence counsel.
On 24 May 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1974. He is a lawyer who lives and practises in Plovdiv.
The facts of the case may be summarised as follows.
At the beginning of 2005, in the course of criminal proceedings against N.R. and another individual on charges of aggravated theft, punishable by imprisonment of up to fifteen years, the Plovdiv District Court (“the District Court”) decided that in the interests of justice two lawyers should be appointed defence counsel for the two accused, who could not afford to pay for a lawyer but wished to be legally represented.
The District Court sent a request to the Plovdiv Bar asking them to nominate two lawyers as defence counsel to represent the accused. The letter stated, inter alia, that the counsel’s remuneration would be determined in accordance with the Ordinance of the National Bar Council on Lawyers’ Minimum Remuneration 2004 (“the Remuneration Ordinance”).
In a letter of 31 May 2005, sent to the applicant and the District Court, the Plovdiv Bar nominated the applicant to represent N.R. The letter contained the following text:
“In accordance with section 44 of the Bar Act, you must act as defence counsel ... and appear at the hearing in the court proceedings. Failure to comply may result in disciplinary action under the Bar Act and civil liability vis-à-vis the parties [to the criminal proceedings].
In its decision to appoint [you as] defence counsel, the [criminal] court ... must set [your] remuneration in an amount not lower than the minimum provided for in the Remuneration Ordinance. Otherwise you must refuse to provide legal representation because you are at risk of a disciplinary [sanction] for breach of section 132 (6) of the Bar Act and the instructions of the National Bar Council ...”
The Plovdiv District Court held a hearing in the criminal case against N.R. on 10 June 2005. At the beginning of the hearing, at around 3.30 p.m., the court appointed the applicant as N.R’s counsel and invited him to state his position in respect of whether there was an obstacle to proceeding with the hearing or not.
The applicant replied that he would represent N.R. if the court undertook to comply with section 44(2) of the Bar Act, which in turn referred to the Remuneration Ordinance, and thereby determined his remuneration at or above the minimum 550 Bulgarian levs (BGN; the equivalent of approximately 280 euros (EUR)) provided for in law.
The presiding judge refused to determine the minimum remuneration at that point in time. He warned the applicant that he would fine him if he refused to act as counsel for the defendant.
Following this exchange, the applicant refused to represent the defendant and left the courtroom.
The court fined the applicant BGN 500 (approximately EUR 260). The decision imposing the fine referred to Article 269 § 7 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1974 (see paragraph 33 below) and stated as follows:
“In the court’s view, the lawyers already appointed to serve as defence counsel should not have asked about their remuneration [at this stage of the proceedings]. The court would be in a position to estimate that amount only after the collection of all evidence and following the final oral pleadings. By raising the question of setting their remuneration at a minimum of BGN 550 before the examination of the case started, the [two lawyers] showed manifest disrespect for the court and were in breach of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Despite a warning, they did not comment, they refused to act as legal representatives nominated by the Plovdiv Bar upon this court’s request ... and left the courtroom. Seeing that in the present case the defendants must be legally represented ... the hearing will have to be adjourned owing to the unjustified absence of their defence counsel.
Therefore, [the applicant and the other lawyer] shall be fined BGN 500 each.”
Then the prosecutor requested a one-hour break so that new counsel could be found for the accused. He submitted that, in view of the principle of speediness of criminal proceedings and the fact that all witnesses and experts were there in the courtroom, the hearing should not be adjourned to a later date. The court granted the request and decided to proceed with the case at 4.40 p.m. on the same day.
The hearing was resumed as scheduled. The prosecutor asked the court to appoint another lawyer who was present in the courtroom as counsel for the accused and to give him time to get acquainted with the case file. The court granted the request.
At 4.55 p.m. the new lawyer stated that he had acquainted himself with the case and agreed to be appointed defence counsel. The court did so and proceeded with the case. The proceedings ended with a plea bargain agreement between the prosecutor and the defendants. The court set the replacement defence counsel’s remuneration at BGN 30 (about EUR 15).
On an unspecified date the applicant appealed against the fine imposed on him (see paragraph 14 above). He claimed that he had not been appointed by the District Court in accordance with the law. In particular, the court had been bound by law, specifically the Bar Act, to determine his remuneration in the actual decision to appoint him counsel (see paragraph 30 below); the court had also had to determine the amount according to the Remuneration Ordinance. By refusing to comply with those legal requirements, the court had breached the law. Therefore, the applicant’s refusal to act as counsel had been justified; he should not have been held responsible for the adjournment of the hearing and he had not acted disrespectfully. Consequently, he submitted, the fine had been unlawful.
On 11 July 2005 the Plovdiv Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the fine in a final decision. It acknowledged that pursuant to section 44(2) of the Bar Act the remuneration to be paid to a court-appointed defence counsel had to be indicated in the order for his or her appointment and that it ought not be lower than the minimum provided for in the Remuneration Ordinance. However, the court found that it was only possible to determine the exact amount of remuneration to be paid at the end of the proceedings. The reason for this was that the Remuneration Ordinance provided for a lower amount in case of termination of the criminal proceedings by way of a plea bargain (see paragraph 28 below). The court could not predict the outcome of the proceedings at their outset. Therefore, the applicant’s insistence on a prior determination of his fee was contrary to section 44 of the Bar Act. The applicant had thus caused an unjustified adjournment and had rightly been fined under Article 269 § 7 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The court finally held that the amount of the fine was proportionate to the gravity of the offence.
Article 70 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1974 (“the 1974 CCP”) contained a list of circumstances requiring the appointment of counsel by the court. These included, among others, a situation where the accused wished to be legally represented and there was another accused with conflicting interests who had already retained counsel (Article 70 § 1 (5) in relation to Article 70 § 2 of the 1974 CCP). The appointment of counsel was also compulsory when the accused could not afford to – but wished to – be legally represented and the interests of justice so required (Article 70 § 1 (7) of the 1974 CCP). Apart from the circumstances envisaged in Article 70 of the 1974 CCP, the court was under a duty to appoint counsel when the accused was unrepresented and the prosecutor had proposed a plea bargain agreement (Article 414к of the 1974 CCP). Similar provisions appear in the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) which came into force in 2006 (Articles 94 § 1 and 384 of the 2006 CCP).
Where a court examining a criminal case decides to appoint a defence counsel, the relevant Bar Council is informed and selects one of its members for the task, proposing him or her for appointment by the court hearing the case in question (section 44 § 2 of the Bar Act).
On 1 January 2006 the provisions concerning the appointment of counsel were amended and became part of the newly adopted Legal Aid Act (sections 21 to 26). Under the new regime, once legal aid is granted, the legal-aid board sends a copy of its decision to the local Bar Council, which nominates a lawyer to be appointed as counsel for the accused (section 25 § 4).
Section 44(1) of the Bar Act provides that defence counsel appointed by the court is under a duty to act for the accused.
Legal counsel, whether appointed by the accused person or by the court, are entitled to resign their duties solely in a situation where “objective reasons” render their discharge “impossible” (section 35 of the Bar Act and Article 71 of the 1974 CCP).
Lawyers are not allowed to charge fees lower than those determined by the National Bar Council. They may offer their services pro bono to, inter alia, persons of modest means (sections 36(2) and 38(1) of the Bar Act).
At the relevant time the minimum fees were set out in the Remuneration Ordinance.
The minimum fees differed according to the type of legal work and the relevant stage of the proceedings (sections 12-16 of the Remuneration Ordinance in respect of criminal proceedings).
At the relevant time, in accordance with section 44(2) of the Bar Act, the courts were under a duty to determine the fees for court-appointed defence counsel in amounts not lower than those set out in the Remuneration Ordinance. The Remuneration Ordinance stipulated that the fee for legal representation in cases where the offence was punishable with up to fifteen years was BGN 550. In a case where the proceedings were terminated by a plea bargain agreement, the amount was BGN 150.
With the adoption of the Legal Aid Act, in force as of 1 January 2006, the Remuneration Ordinance no longer applied to court-appointed legal representation. In line with this new legislation the Council of Ministers adopted an Ordinance for the Reimbursement of Legal Aid 2006 (“the Legal Aid Ordinance”) which set out specific rules governing the remuneration of court-appointed counsel and provided for both minimum and maximum amounts of payment. The Legal Aid Act introduced a new system for processing the actual payment of court-appointed defence counsel’s fees which, until it came into force, had been payable from the court’s budget.
At the relevant time section 44(2) of the Bar Act provided that a court’s decision to appoint a lawyer should indicate the amount of his or her remuneration.
As from 1 January 2006, the new relevant provisions of the Legal Aid Act no longer require that the counsel’s remuneration be indicated in the court’s decision for his or her appointment (section 25 §§ 1 and 4). Under the new system, at the conclusion of the criminal proceedings the court-appointed lawyer prepares a report for the work done, certified by the relevant Bar Council, and submits it to the National Legal Aid Bureau. The Bureau pays counsel’s fees in accordance with the type and quantity of the work done, within the limits envisaged in the Legal Aid Ordinance. It is not bound by the counsel’s report and may determine a higher or lower amount (sections 37-39 of the Legal Aid Act and sections 1-12 of the Legal Aid Ordinance). The Bureau may also refuse to pay if faced with a case of misconduct or lack of necessary diligence (section 4 of the Legal Aid Ordinance).
Section 103 of the Judicial System Act 1994, as in force at the relevant time, provided that during hearings the presiding judge was responsible for maintaining order; the judge could issue binding orders and sanction those acting in breach of the established rules, in accordance with the applicable procedural law. The same rules are reproduced in the Judicial System Act 2007.
In accordance with Article 269 § 7 of the 1974 CCP, as in force at the relevant time, when a hearing was postponed as a result of a failure of a party to appear, the presiding judge could impose a fine of up to BGN 500 on the party in question.
According to section 132 (6) of the Bar Act it is a disciplinary offence to act as counsel for an accused in contravention of the conditions provided for by the law. Section 133 of the Bar Act lists the different types of disciplinary punishments applicable to lawyers. These include a reprimand, a fine of up to eight times the minimum salary in the country, and suspension from the bar for periods ranging from three months to five years.