The case originated in an application (no. 9134/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Austrian and Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Efe (“the applicant”), on 28 February 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr H. Pochieser, a lawyer practising in . The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador H. Tichy, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that because of the refusal of the Austrian authorities to pay him tax credits in respect of maintenance payments and family allowance for his children, he was a victim of discrimination.
On 6 November 2009 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
Third-party comments were received from the Turkish Government, who had exercised their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b)).
The applicant was born in Turkey in 1955 and lives in . He moved to  in 1989 and has been living and working there ever since.
On 17 June 2002 he filed a claim for family allowance backdating to 1 June 1997 for his two children who had been resident in  on a permanent basis. His daughter was born in 1978 and at the time of his claim in 2002 she had already finished her studies and taken up a job as a teacher. His son was born in 1980 and had been a student since 2000. Pursuant to a bilateral agreement, the applicant had been receiving a reduced family allowance until 1996.
On 17 February 2003 the Vienna Tax Office dismissed the applicant’s claim because the children were not resident in , which was one of the main conditions for entitlement to such an allowance.
On 8 April 2003 the applicant lodged an appeal, referring to case-law of the European Court of Justice (ECJ). He argued that the decision taken against him contravened European Union (EU) legislation; however, he did not make a request for a referral to the ECJ for a preliminary ruling under Article 267 (ex 234) of the EU Treaty.
On 24 May 2004 the Independent Financial Panel (Unabhängiger Finanzsenat – “the IFP”) dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It held that since Austria had on 30 September 2006 terminated the Social Security Agreement of 12 March 1985 between itself and Turkey (Abkommen zwischen der Republik Österreich und der Türkischen Republik über Soziale Sicherheit) and his children were not resident in Austria, he was no longer entitled to any family allowance. It further found that the applicant did not claim to have ever taken any steps to move his family to .
On 23 September 2004 the applicant made a claim for legal aid and lodged a complaint with the Constitutional Court, alleging a violation of Article 6 of the Convention on the basis that his case had not been referred to the ECJ for a preliminary ruling, although it appears that no such request had ever been made by him. He also alleged breaches of Article 8, 13 and 14 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
On 30 November 2004 the  dismissed the applicant’s claim for legal aid because he had already been denied eligibility on 13 July 2004. It further declined to deal with the applicant’s complaint finding that it had no prospects of success, and, upon the applicant’s request, remitted the case to the . In particular it held that the IFP was not a domestic authority obliged to refer cases to the ECJ for a preliminary ruling and that the provisions in question neither contravened the Austrian Constitution nor EU legislation since his children lived in Turkey, which was not a  of the European Union.
In another set of proceedings the IFP on 22 March 2004 dismissed the applicant’s appeal concerning the alleged failure to pay him tax credits for maintenance payments for the years 1999, 2000 and 2001. It held that generally such payments were not possible under Austrian law if the children were over the age of majority and were not in receipt of family allowance.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a second complaint with the  against this decision and made a further claim for legal aid.
On 4 October 2004 the  declined to deal with the applicant’s second complaint, finding that it had no prospect of success. It again refused to grant him legal aid.
The applicant requested that the case be remitted to the . The  agreed to do so and thereupon the  joined both sets of proceedings.
On 10 August 2005 the , referring to both its own and the Constitutional Court’s case-law, dismissed both complaints. It found that the legislation that had been in force since 1 January 2001, which prevented persons from receiving family allowances for children over the age of majority living abroad, was lawful. It referred to the constitutional provision that prevented the payment of tax credits for maintenance payments in respect of children for whom no family allowance could be received. It further held that since the provisions concerning family allowance were equally applicable to Austrian nationals and foreigners there was no discrimination. Lastly, it found that there was no legal basis on which to refer the case to the ECJ for a preliminary ruling without giving detailed reasons for such a request. Since there was no appearance of a violation of a right of the applicant, no oral hearing was necessary. That decision was served on the applicant’s counsel on 2 September 2005.
Section 2 of the Family Burden Equalisation Act 1967 (Familienlastenausgleichsgesetz), in so far as relevant reads as follows:
“(1)  Those persons who have their permanent or habitual residence on federal territory, are entitled to receive family allowance
a)  for children below the age of majority;
b)  for children over the age of majority who have not reached the age of twenty-six and who are receiving occupational training or further training connected to their occupation at a vocational school, if their attendance prevents them from practising their occupation.. In the case of children over the age of majority attending one of the institutions listed in section 3 of the 1992 Study Promotion Act (Federal Law Gazette no. 305) vocational training may only be accepted if the envisaged study period per study unit is exceeded by no more than one semester or the envisaged training period by no more than one year of training. If a study unit is completed during the envisaged study period, one semester may be added on to a subsequent study unit ...
...
d)  for children over the age of majority, who have not reached the age of twenty-six, for a period of three months after completion of their vocational training, provided that they are not carrying out their military service or training, or alternative civilian service;
...
(2)  The person to whose household the child belongs is entitled to receive family allowance for a child, as provided for in subsection (1) above. A person to whose household a child does not belong, but who pays the majority of the cost of maintaining the child, is entitled to family allowance if no other person is entitled to the allowance pursuant to the first sentence of the present subsection.
...
(5)  A child belongs to ta person’s household if he or she shares an address with that person and there is common housekeeping. Belonging to a household is not deemed to have been discontinued if
(a)  the child in question is away from the shared accommodation for only a temporary period;
(b)  for the purpose of vocational training the child is required to live in secondary accommodation at the place or near the place where he or she receives vocational training;
c)  the child is undergoing institutional care, either permanently or temporarily, owing to a disease or disability, if the person pays maintenance at least equivalent to the amount of family allowance payable for one child; in the event of a child with a major disability, this amount shall be increased by the additional amount payable for a child with a major disability (section 8(4)).
...
(8)  Persons are only entitled to family allowance if the centre of their main interests is on federal territory. A person has the centre of his or her main interests in the country in which he or she maintains his or her closest personal and economic relations.”
Section 5(4) of the Family Burden Equalisation Act 1967, in its version of 12 July 1974 (Federal Law Gazette no. 418/1974), read as follows:
“There is no entitlement to family allowance in respect of children who have their permanent residence abroad, unless there is reciprocity by way of State treaties.”
Section 5(4) of the Family Burden Equalisation Act was amended on 30 April 1996 (Federal Law Gazette no. 201/1996) and now reads as follows:
“There is no entitlement to family allowance in respect of children who have their permanent residence abroad.”
Section 34(5) of the Income Tax Act (Einkommensteuergesetz) (Federal Law Gazette Part I no. 201/1996), which entered into force in 1996 and which deals with tax rates and tax deductions, reads as follows:
“(Constitutional provision) Maintenance payments to children over the age of majority, in respect of whom family allowance is not payable shall not be taken into account for the purposes of tax credits in respect of childcare or maintenance payments, or as an extraordinary burden, other than in the cases and to the extent provided for in point (4) above.”
In 1985 the Social Security Agreement between Austria and  (Federal Law Gazette no. 91/1985) was concluded. Chapter 4, Article 26(1) provided as follows:
“Persons in paid employment in one Contracting State shall be entitled under that State’s legislation to receive family allowance, including for children who are permanently resident in the other .”
With effect from 30 September 1996 Austria terminated the Social Security Agreement with  (Federal Law Gazette no. 349/1996).
Article 12 of the European Social Charter (Revised), of 3 May 1996, CETS No. 173, reads as follows in so far as relevant:
“With a view to ensuring the effective exercise of the right to social security, the Parties undertake:
...
to take steps, by the conclusion of appropriate bilateral and multilateral agreements or by other means, and subject to the conditions laid down in such agreements, in order to ensure:
(a)  equal treatment with their own nationals of the nationals of other Parties in respect of social security rights, including the retention of benefits arising out of social security legislation, whatever movements the persons protected may undertake between the territories of the Parties ...”
The European Committee of Social Rights, in its Conclusions concerning Article 12 of the Charter in respect of Austria (18th report, reference period 2003-2004; Conclusions XVIII-1), stated as follows:
“As regards the payment of family benefits, the Committee considers that according to Article 12 § 4, any child resident in a State Party is entitled to the payment of family benefits on an equal footing with nationals of the State concerned. Therefore, whoever is the beneficiary under the social security system, i.e. whether it is the worker or the child, State Parties are under the obligation to secure through unilateral measures the actual payment of family benefits to all children residing on their territory. In other words, imposing an obligation of residence of the child concerned on the territory of the State is compatible with Article 12 § 4 and its Appendix. However since not all countries apply such a system, States applying the ‘child residence requirement’ are under the obligation, in order to secure equal treatment within the meaning of Article 12 § 4, to conclude within a reasonable period of time bilateral or multilateral agreements with those States which apply a different entitlement principle. The Committee therefore asks the next report to indicate whether such agreements exist with the following countries: Albania, Armenia, Georgia and , or, if not, whether it is envisaged to conclude them and in what time delay.
The Committee asks for whether a length of residence or employment requirement is imposed on non-EU/EEA nationals of States Parties to the 1961 Charter or the revised Charter for receipt of any of the non-employment related social security benefits. As regards family benefits, the Committee refers to its conclusion under Article 16 in this volume. The Committee recalls that in its previous conclusion (Conclusion XVII-1, p. 36) it found the situation in conformity as regards retention of accrued benefits also for nationals of other States Parties which are currently uncovered by any agreement. Such countries are currently Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and . The Committee asks confirmation of whether the principle of retention of benefits applies to nationals of all these countries.
The Committee concludes that the situation in  is in conformity with Article 12 § 4 of the Charter.”