The case originated in an application (no. 74681/11) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national, Mr Osman Sulejmani (“the applicant”), on 2 December 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr B. Pandovski, a lawyer practising in Skopje. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov.
The applicant complained under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention about the confiscation of his vehicle in criminal proceedings against a third person.
On 2 October 2014 the complaint under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Tetovo.
On 12 April 2006, the applicant concluded a sales contract (купопродажен договор) with a Sh.A., for the purchase of a concrete mixing and transport lorry (“the vehicle”) for the equivalent of 5,000 euros (EUR) in Macedonian denars (MKD). On 15 May 2007 the applicant lent the vehicle to his company.
On 6 October 2008 the Ministry of the Interior temporarily seized the vehicle and its registration certificate (сообраќајна дозвола) from the applicant in order to examine the vehicle’s chassis (проверка на шасија). A record of temporarily seized objects (потврда за привремено одземени предмети) was issued.
On 1 February 2010 the Struga Court of First Instance (“the first-instance court”) acquitted Sh.A. of charges of forgery of a document (“фалсификување исправа“) concerning the vehicle’s chassis number and rejected an indictment brought by a public prosecutor against a certain I.S. The court found that during the trial it had not been established that Sh.A. had altered the vehicle’s chassis. In accordance with section 102(3) of the Criminal Proceedings Act (see paragraph 18 below), the court further advised the applicant, who had claimed compensation in the criminal proceedings, to pursue the claim by means of a separate civil action before the civil courts. On 21 July 2010 the judgment became final.
On 16 November 2010 the applicant requested that the first-instance court return the vehicle in his possession.
On 3 December 2010 the first-instance court heard evidence from the applicant, who stated that he had bought the vehicle from Sh.A. for EUR 25,000. He further stated that he could not have been aware at the time that the chassis number of the vehicle had been forged.
On 6 December 2010 the first-instance court, relying on Article 100a (3) of the Criminal Code (“the Code”, see paragraph 17 below), found that there were no grounds for confiscation of the applicant’s vehicle. The applicant had not known nor could he have known that the vehicle had been used to commit a crime. The court also ordered that the registration certificate be returned to the applicant.
Upon the public prosecutor’s appeal, on 24 January 2011 the Bitola Court of Appeal (“the appellate court”) quashed that decision. Relying on Article 100-a (2) of the Code, the appellate court found that the vehicle’s chassis had been forged and that the vehicle, in the interest of public safety, could not be declared roadworthy. It further referred to section 100-a (3) of the Code and instructed the first-instance court to assess whether the continued use of the vehicle would constitute a “use of a forged document” offence under the Code (употреба на фалсификувана јавна исправа, see paragraph 17 below).
On 22 February 2011 the first-instance court dismissed the applicant’s application and ordered the confiscation (се одземаат) of the vehicle and its registration certificate. It referred to Article 100-a (2) and (3) of the Code and found that the vehicle’s chassis number had been forged and that the vehicle could be used for committing an offence. For that reason and for the reasons of road safety, it was necessary to confiscate the vehicle and the registration certificate. It also referred to section 532(1) of the Criminal Proceedings Act (see paragraph 18 below) and found that, irrespective of the fact that there had been no proceedings against the applicant and that he was not an offender, it was necessary to confiscate the vehicle for general safety reasons.
On 11 March 2011 the applicant appealed arguing that the first-instance court had wrongly applied Article 100-a (2) and (3) of the Code and that he had not known that the vehicle had been used to commit a crime.
On 19 May 2011 the appellate court dismissed the appeal and upheld the first-instance court’s decision. The relevant part of the decision states as follows:
“[The arguments] raised in the appeals, [namely] that the first-instance court had not established the decisive facts concerning [the certitude] that the [applicant] had not known that the vehicle’s chassis had been forged, which was decisive, are groundless. Specifically, it is true that [the applicant] did not know that the vehicle’s chassis had been forged, as a result of which [he] registered the vehicle as its last buyer, [he was] issued a driving licence and [he] paid a large amount. However, [what is] primary under Article 100-a (2) of the [Criminal Code] is that the objects which were intended to [commit] an offence or were used to commit an offence shall be confiscated notwithstanding that they are not in the ownership of the offender or that they are in the ownership of a third person, if general safety, public health or ethics require so ...
The fact that [the applicant] did not know that the vehicle’s chassis had been forged does not signify that the conditions of Article 100-a(3) are met, but the first-instance court correctly found that the use of the vehicle with thus forged identification numbers would affect the safety of the road users in the State [безбедноста на јавниот сообраќај], and therefore also the general safety [интересите на општата безбедност].”
It appears that the latter decision was served on the applicant on 2 June 2011.
.  The relevant provisions state as follows:
“(1) Nobody can keep or withhold the proceeds of crime.
(2) Objects which were intended to be used or which were used to commit a crime shall be confiscated from the offender, regardless of whether he or she or a third person is their owner, if the interests of general security, the health of the people or ethics so require.
(3) Objects which were used or were intended to be used to commit the crime can be confiscated if there is a danger that they will be used again to commit a crime. Objects owned by a third person shall not be confiscated, unless he or she knew or could and ought to have known that they had been used or were intended to be used to commit the offence.
(4) The court shall also issue a confiscation order in proceedings regulated by law when, for factual or legal obstacles, it is not possible for criminal proceedings to be conducted against the offender.
(5) The application of this measure does not affect the right of third parties to compensation for damage from the offender.
...”
“(1) A person who uses as evidence, in legal transactions [во правниот сообраќај], a document, book or a file, knowing that it is false, shall be fined or sentenced to up to three years’ imprisonment.”
The relevant provisions state as follows:
“...
(3) When the court delivers a judgment by which the accused is acquitted of the charges or by which the indictment is dismissed or when, by decision, it stays the criminal proceedings or rejects the indictment, it shall instruct the damaged party to pursue his or her compensation claim in civil proceedings. ...
...”
“(1) Objects which must be confiscated under the Criminal Code, shall also be confiscated when the criminal proceedings do not end with a judgment by which the accused is convicted.”
The relevant provisions read as follows:
(1) The seller shall be liable if there is a right over the sold item of a third party which excludes, reduces or restricts the right of the buyer, and the buyer was not informed of its existence, nor agreed to take the item burdened by that right.
(2) The seller of another right guarantees that the right exists and that there are no legal obstacles to its exercise.
When it is shown that a third party has a right over the item, the buyer is obliged to inform the seller thereof, unless that was already known to the seller, and to invite him to release within a reasonable time the item of that right or of the claim of a third party or, when the subject of the contract are items defined by type, to deliver another item without a legal defect.
(1) If the seller does not act upon the buyer’s request, when the seller is deprived of the item, the contract is terminated by law, and when the buyer’s right is restricted or limited, the buyer may choose between terminating the contract or requesting a proportionate reduction in the price paid.
(2) If the seller does not meet within a reasonable time the buyer’s request to release the item of the right or claim of a third party, the buyer can terminate the contract if his or her aim cannot be fulfilled for these reasons.
(3) In any event, the buyer shall be entitled to compensation of the damage suffered ...”
.  The Government referred to the position of the Supreme Court adopted in decision Гзз.бр. 51/06 of 31 January 2007, where the Supreme Court had found that the seller of a vehicle was responsible for a legal defect, irrespective of whether he had been aware or not of that legal defect. If due to that legal defect the vehicle was taken away from the buyer, the sale contract was terminated by law and the buyer was entitled to compensation for the damage suffered. In that particular case, the Supreme Court quashed the lower court’s judgments concerning a vehicle seized in Bulgaria given the inconsistent data entered in the relevant documents regarding the vehicle and those indicated on its chassis, on the basis of which it had been determined that the vehicle had been stolen.
.  The Government further submitted copies of four final decisions delivered by the Bitola Court of Appeal (КСЖ.бр.-105/10 of 18 October 2010, КСЖ.бр.-8/12 of 24 January 2012, КСЖ.бр.-130/12 of 20 September 2012 and КСЖ.бр.-16/13 of 5 February 2013). In all those cases, the vehicles with altered chassis had been confiscated, despite the fact that nobody had been held accountable and convicted (the accused had either been acquitted or the proceedings against them had been stayed). In a fifth case КСЖ-26/14, on 6 February 2014 the vehicle with an altered chassis had been confiscated, without any information as to the outcome of the criminal proceedings related to that confiscation.