The case originated in an application (no. 45498/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Viktorovich Sklyar, on 13 June 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms. E. Efremova, a lawyer practising in Moscow. On 4 June 2013 the applicant was granted legal aid.
The Russian Government ("the Government") were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant complained that he had not been provided with a legalaid lawyer during the appeal proceedings in his criminal case and that the conditions of his detention in the correctional colony where he was serving his sentence were inhuman and degrading.
On 20 November 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lived in Novosibirsk before his arrest.
On 12 November 2010 the Kalininskiy District Court of Novosibirsk convicted the applicant of aggravated theft and armed robbery and sentenced him to nine years’ imprisonment. The applicant was represented by a lawyer in these proceedings.
On 24 January 2011 an appeal brought by the applicant himself was examined by the Novosibirsk Regional Court in the absence of counsel. The appeal court upheld the applicant’s conviction.
The applicant has been serving his sentence in IK-8 in Novosibirsk since 10 February 2011.
As regards the conditions of the applicant’s detention in the IK-8 facility, the Government submitted information which can be summarised as follows:
The Government also submitted that all the units where the applicant had been detained had had a sufficient number of sleeping places for all the detainees, they had been ventilated through openings in the windows and had had access to cold water in accordance with up to date sanitary standards. The units were equipped with ten to fifteen kettles to boil water and tanks containing potable water. All the lavatories had individual cabins with doors that were one and a half metres high, opening to the outside. They submitted photographs of the washbasins and lavatories.
The applicant acknowledged that he had an individual sleeping place. However, he underlined that the conditions he had to live in were cramped. He further submitted that the units had no access to natural light or had poor artificial lighting, that the ventilation did not work and that the air was damp. The food he was provided was not in accordance with the special diet prescribed for him. Furthermore, inmates with tuberculosis lived in the same dormitory. There were only three lavatories (in units 17 and 7), they had no doors and the applicant had no privacy when using them. They were clogged up most of the time owing to the number of people using them. Prisoners were only allowed one shower a week. The applicant had no access to potable water and only one washbasin out of four had worked. There were only two kettles for boiling water and the electricity was switched off during the day and therefore it was not possible to have boiled water. The applicant further submitted that the buildings where his units were located were in a hazardous condition and that the roof and walls were liable to fall in at any time owing to a lack of repairs. Lastly, the applicant adduced written statements from his four co-detainees who confirmed his account of the conditions of detention in IK-8 in Novosibirsk.
The Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (in force from 1 July 2002) provides:
“1.  The participation of legal counsel in criminal proceedings is mandatory if:
...
In the circumstances as set forth in paragraph 1 above, unless counsel is retained by the suspect or the accused, or his lawful representative, or other persons on the request of, or with the consent of, the suspect or the accused, it is incumbent on the investigator, prosecutor or the court to ensure the participation of legal counsel in the proceedings.”
“1.  The suspect or the accused may refuse legal assistance at any stage of criminal proceedings. Such a waiver may only be accepted if made on the suspect or accused’s own initiative. The waiver must be filed in writing and must be recorded in the official record of the relevant procedural act ...”
The relevant domestic law and case-law governing the presence of lawyers in appeal proceedings in respect of criminal cases is also summed up in the Court’s judgments in the cases of Sakhnovskiy v. Russia [GC], no. 21272/03, §§ 31-39, 2 November 2010; Shugayev v. Russia, no. 11020/03, §§ 38-43, 14 January 2010; Shumikhin v. Russia, no. 7848/06, § 17, 16 July 2015; Volkov and Adamskiy v. Russia, nos. 7614/09 and 30863/10, §§ 21-26, 26 March 2015; Eduard Rozhkov v. Russia, no. 11469/05, §§ 11-13, 31 October 2013; and Nefedov v. Russia, no. 40962/04, § 17, 13 March 2012.
The relevant domestic law concerning conditions of detention in correctional facilities is summed up in the leading case of Butko v. Russia, no. 32036/10, § 17, 12 November 2015.
The relevant information concerning conditions of detention in correctional facilities in Russia is extracted from reports by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (CPT) in Butko, cited above, § 20.