The case originated in an application (no. 32349/16) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Dušan Vujnović (“the applicant”), on 2 June 2016.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Čanković, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged that the procedural obligation under Article 2 of the Convention had not been complied with; he further alleged that contrary to Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the practice of the Supreme Court as to the manner of calculating the statutory limitation period for lodging a civil claim for damages had been inconsistent, and that the manner in which it had been applied in his case had deprived him of his right of access to a court.
On 15 September 2016 notice of the complaints under Articles 2 and 6 § 1 of the Convention were given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. On 11 February 2020 the parties were invited to submit additional observations pursuant to Rule 54 § 2 (c) of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Zagreb.
In June 1991 Croatia declared its independence from the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Socijalistička Federativna Republika Jugoslavija – hereinafter “the SFRY”) and severed its ties with that entity in October 1991. In the same year war began in Croatia.
During 1991 and 1992 Serbian paramilitary forces gained control of about a third of the territory of Croatia and proclaimed the “Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina” (Srpska autonomna oblast Krajina) and, later on, the “Republic of Serbian Krajina” (Republika Srpska Krajina, hereinafter: Krajina). Territory south of the city of Gospić referred to as the “Medak Pocket” (Medački džep) became part of Krajina.
In September 1993 the Croatian Army conducted a military operation with the aim of regaining control over the Medak Pocket. The operation, codenamed “Pocket-93” (Džep-93), commenced in the early morning of 9 September 1993 and lasted for two days. As a result the Medak Pocket was fully brought under the control of the Croatian Army.
After the military operation, fifty-one bodies of persons killed during the operation were recovered and handed over to the forensic department of the Rijeka Faculty of Medicine (Zavod za sudsku medicinu Medicinskog fakulteta Rijeka). On 15 and 16 September 1993 three medics externally examined the bodies, photographed them and established the probable causes of death. The written record of examination referred to the bodies by numbers and did not contain any identification information.
On 15 September 1993 a ceasefire agreement was signed between the parties to the conflict, and the Medak Pocket became a demilitarised zone supervised by the United Nations forces (UNPROFOR).
The Croatian Army withdrew from the Medak Pocket at 6 p.m. on 17 September 1993. On the same date the Croatian authorities handed over the fifty-one dead bodies recovered from the Medak Pocket to the Serbian authorities, together with accompanying documentation.
On 11 October 2002 a working group consisted of police officers from different police departments was formed for the purpose of enquiring into the events which had occurred in the Medak Pocket during and after Operation Pocket-93. Thereafter, in late 2002 and beginning of 2003, numerous persons were interviewed, including former and current members of the Croatian Army and the police, former members of the Serb units, the medics who had examined the bodies recovered from the Medak Pocket, as well as civilians who had been present in the Medak Pocket during the operation. Military, medical and intelligence documentation regarding the operation was collected, including the report on the external examination of the bodies recovered from the Medak Pocket (see paragraph 9 above). An indictment by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (hereinafter “the ICTY Prosecutor”) of 23 August 2002 against a general of the Croatian Army, J.B., was obtained, together with a list of twenty-nine civilians killed during Operation Pocket-93. The list, marked as “Top Secret”, included A.V. (the applicant’s mother) under no. 17 and M.V. (the applicant’s father) under no. 21.
During the investigation of late 2002 and beginning of 2003 a case file of the Knin District Court (Okružni sud u Kninu) – a court of the Republic of Serbian Krajina (see paragraph 7 above) – was also obtained. The case file contained, inter alia, records on the external examination and identification of the bodies of those killed during Operation Pocket-93, as well as photographic studies. The record of 27 September 1993 stated that corpse no. 4 had been identified by family members as a woman named S.R. (later on it was established that corpse no. 4 was in fact the applicant’s mother, A.V., see paragraph 23 below). The record further stated that corpse no. 11 had been identified by family members as M.V. (the applicant’s father).
In addition, a document issued by the government of Krajina (Vlada Republike Srpska Krajina) on 29 December 1993, headed “List of identified soldiers and civilians killed in the area of Divoselo, Čitluk, Počitelj, Gračac, Donji Lapac, Otočac and Medak – September 1993”, was obtained. That list contained, under no. 26, the name of the applicant’s father (M.V.), with a note that he had been a soldier.
On 21 May 2001 the ICTY Prosecutor filed an indictment with that international court against a general of the Croatian Army, R.A., charging him with crimes against humanity and violations of the laws and customs of war perpetrated in the course of Operation Pocket-93. The indictment stated, inter alia, that R.A. had known or had had reason to know that his subordinates were engaged in the unlawful killing of Serb civilians living in the Medak Pocket and Serb soldiers who had been captured and/or wounded, and that he had failed to take measures to prevent such acts or punish the perpetrators. A table indicating the victims of Operation Pocket93 was enclosed with the indictment, listing A.V. (the applicant’s mother) under no. 17. On 26 November 2001 the indictment was amended and the table indicating the victims also listed M.V. (the applicant’s father), under no. 21.
On 20 May 2004 the ICTY Prosecutor filed an indictment before that international court against another general of the Croatian Army, M.N., also for crimes perpetrated in the course of Operation Pocket-93.
On 1 November 2005 the ICTY transferred the case against generals R.A. and M.N. to the Republic of Croatia for the purpose of conducting criminal proceedings against them, and forwarded the accompanying material and relevant evidence collected in the course of the investigation by the ICTY Prosecutor.
On the basis of those documents, as well as the results of the investigation performed by the Croatian authorities, on 22 November 2006 the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office (Županijsko državno odvjetništvo u Zagrebu) filed an indictment against generals R.A. and M.N. with the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) for the criminal offence of war crimes against a civilian population and prisoners of war committed in the Medak Pocket in September 1993.
R.A. was charged with, inter alia, failing to take appropriate action as a responsible commanding officer of the Croatian Army to prevent, curb and punish killing, cruel abuse and massacring of civilians of Serbian ethnicity. The factual description in the indictment specified that unknown members of the military units subordinated to R.A. on 9 September 1993 in the area of Rajčević killed A.V. (the applicant’s mother), and on the same day, in Divoselo, M.V. (the applicant’s father).
In the course of the proceedings the trial court heard a large number of witnesses and examined statements by the so-called “endangered witnesses” collected by the ICTY’s investigators. It also inspected documentation collected in the course of the investigation and obtained a forensic expert report to establish the cause of death of the persons specified in the indictment as war-crime victims.
On 29 May 2008 the Zagreb County Court adopted, and on 30 May 2008 proclaimed, a judgment whereby R.A. was entirely acquitted of the charges. M.N. was acquitted of the charges regarding the killing of civilians and non-civilians on 9 September 1993, but found guilty of war crimes concerning the period between 10 and 17 September 1993.
In the judgment the Zagreb County Court analysed the presented evidence and established the fate of each person whose death was included in the indictment. As regards the applicant’s father (M.V.), the court found as follows:
“As regards the killing of N.V., M.V. [the applicant’s father], Lj.J. and M.M., the court has established that they were killed while trying to escape by car on 9 September 1993. It arises from the statement of endangered witness no. 3 that only the person who stepped out of the car, specifically D.V., was armed, and that M.V., N.V. and M.M. were civilians who had been provided with rifles by the local community to protect their homes. On the basis of the statement of endangered witness no. 3 it arises that D.V. stepped out of the vehicle because he had forgotten something in his house. Then the Croatian soldiers arrived and N.V., Lj.J., M.V. and D.V. tried to escape but were killed by the Croatian soldiers who had arrived. ... the court has established, on the basis of the presented documentation and the findings and opinions of forensic experts, that the cause of M.V.’s death was explosives wounds to the left thigh and the right shin ...”
As regards the applicant’s mother (A.V.), the Zagreb County Court found as follows:
“For A.V., the court accepted the statements of endangered witnesses nos. 1, 11, 19 and 24, who know that A.V. was killed in the operation in question. From the statement of endangered witness no. 1 and witness Ž.M. it follows that A.V. was first wrongly identified as S.R., which mistake was corrected once the body of S.R. had been found. On the basis of the statements of witnesses N., B. and M. it is established that A.V. had been tied by a rope around her chest. ... it arises from the finding and opinion of the forensic experts and the inspected photograph ... that the injury to her left fist was inflicted by an explosive device and not by a mechanical device (by cutting). However, those circumstances are irrelevant since the circumstance that A.V. was a civilian and that she was killed on 9 September 1993 in the area of Rajčević was not contested. The evidence obtained raises no doubts regarding the place and time of A.V.’s killing.”
On 18 November 2009 the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) upheld the Zagreb County Court’s judgment, except in the part concerning M.N.’s prison sentence, which it amended.
After the judgment against R.A. and M.N. had been rendered, and on the basis of evidence obtained in the course of the trial against them, criminal proceedings were instituted against different persons for war crimes committed in the course of Operation Pocket-93. None of those criminal proceedings concerned the killing of the applicant’s parents (M.V. and A.V.).
On 29 September 2015 D.P., Đ.P. and V.M. lodged a criminal complaint with the State Attorney’s Office of the Republic of Croatia (Državno odvjetništvo Republike Hrvatske – hereinafter “the State Attorney’s Office”) against former and current officers of the Croatian Army, D.D.-L., M.M., Ž.S., Z.B. and G.B., in relation to their command responsibility for crimes which had occurred in September 1993 in the course of Operation Pocket-93.
The criminal complaint listed all the persons who were known to have been killed during that operation, according to the Zagreb County Court’s judgment rendered in the criminal case against R.A. and M.N., including the applicant’s parents (M.V. and A.V.).
The State Attorney’s Office is currently conducting an investigation in relation to that criminal complaint.
On 6 December 2007 the applicant contacted the State Attorney’s Office with a request for friendly settlement of the dispute. After receiving a negative reply, on 6 March 2008 he brought a civil action against the State before the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court (Općinski građanski sud u Zagrebu), alleging that during Operation Pocket-93, members of the Croatian Army had killed his parents. He stated that during that operation, Croatian soldiers had killed civilians, including his parents, as a result of which the ICTY had indicted generals of the Croatian Army, including R.A., and that the Zagreb County Court had been conducting criminal proceedings against those commanding officers. He claimed damages in the amount of 520,000 Croatian kunas (HRK).
On 7 April 2009 the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court suspended the civil proceedings until the criminal proceedings against R.A. and M.N. before the Zagreb County Court became final. The civil proceedings were resumed on 12 May 2010.
On 29 September 2011 the applicant was invited to submit his arguments regarding an objection lodged by the State that the death of his parents amounted to war damage and that his claim was statute-barred.
On 3 November 2011 the applicant submitted that the killing of his parents amounted to a war crime against a civilian population, and not war damage. He further submitted that he had learned about his parents’ killing when the criminal proceedings against general R.A. had been instituted before the Zagreb County Court in 2006. This had been the first time he had learned that his parents had been listed as war-crime victims in the indictment before the ICTY. During the war he had served in the Croatian Army and could not have contacted the surviving civilians from the Medak Pocket. He had not received any information concerning his parents’ killing from the soldiers participating in Operation Pocket-93 either. His parents’ death had not even been recorded in the civil register. After their fate had been clarified in the criminal proceedings against generals R.A. and M.N., in January 2011 he had instituted proceedings with a view to declaring them dead. He had lodged a request for friendly settlement of the dispute one year after learning that his parents had been unlawfully killed and that general R.A. had been charged with that crime.
At a hearing held on 6 February 2012 the applicant reiterated that he had learned about his parents’ killing and the way they had been killed in 2006, via the media, after the criminal proceedings for crimes perpetrated in the Medak Pocket had been instituted. Prior to that, he had made certain assumptions about their death, but had not felt free to ask any questions and had not had any concrete information. He had not instituted proceedings with a view to declaring his parents dead earlier because he had been waiting for official information in that regard. Prior to the institution of the criminal proceedings against general R.A., he had informed the Red Cross about his parents’ disappearance, but had not received any answer. After the war he had been unable to ask anyone about the fate of his parents, since those who might have known something had either been killed or had gone to Serbia, where he had not had any relatives.
On 21 February 2012 the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court rendered a judgment granting the applicant’s claim for damages regarding the killing of his mother, and dismissing it regarding the killing of his father. It found that the criminal judgment against generals R.A. and M.N. (see paragraphs 21-23 above) had established that the applicant’s mother had been an unarmed civilian killed by members of the Croatian Army. It concluded that her killing had amounted to a war crime and not to war damage. It accordingly found that since prosecuting a war crime could not become time-barred, lodging a related civil claim for damages could not become time-barred either. It dismissed the applicant’s claim for damages regarding the killing of his father, finding that the criminal judgment had established that he had died as an armed civilian. It could not therefore have been established beyond doubt that his killing had been unlawful.
The applicant appealed against the first-instance judgment in the part dismissing his claim, arguing that the criminal judgment had established that his father had been a civilian, had not participated in combat, and had been killed on his doorstep trying to escape from the Croatian soldiers.
The State appealed against the first-instance judgment in the part awarding the applicant damages, arguing that generals R.A. and M.N. had been acquitted of the criminal offence against the applicant’s parents and that therefore the statutory limitation period under section 376 of the Civil Obligations Act for lodging the civil claim had been applicable in the case. As the damaging event had occurred in 1993, the applicant’s claim had been statute-barred. Alternatively, the State argued that the applicant’s parents’ death had amounted to war damage.
The applicant replied to the appeal by the State, arguing that his parents’ killing had amounted to a war crime and that until the criminal proceedings against generals R.A. and M.N. had been instituted in 2006, he had not known how his parents had died.
On 3 July 2012 the Zagreb County Court reversed the first-instance judgment and dismissed the applicant’s claim in its entirety. It held that his civil claim had been lodged outside the statutory limitation period under section 376 of the Civil Obligations Act (Zakon o obveznim odnosima, see paragraph 46 below). In particular, it found that the damage had occurred in 1993 when the applicant’s parents had been killed. Thus, the objective five-year statutory limitation period for lodging a civil claim for damages – which started to run when the damage occurred – had expired in 1998, whereas the applicant had lodged his civil claim in 2008. The longer statutory limitation period set out under section 377 of the Civil Obligations Act could not apply, as the perpetrators of the criminal offence against the applicant’s parents had remained unknown.
In an appeal on points of law, the applicant argued that the statutory limitation period for lodging a civil claim for damages in his case should have been calculated from the time he had learned of the damage in 2006. He reiterated that there had been objective reasons why he could not have learned, before 2006, whether and how his parents had been killed.
On 24 March 2015 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law as unfounded. The relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“Considering the results of the conducted proceedings and the factual findings of the lower courts, from which it follows:
- that the plaintiff’s parents were killed on 9 September 1993 ... by unknown members of the Croatian Army during Operation ‘Pocket-93’ ...,
- that there were criminal proceedings against R.A. (as well against M.N.) before the Zagreb County Court for the criminal offence of war crime against a civilian population, in which R.A. was finally acquitted of the charges, including the charge that ‘even though he knew that parts of units subordinated to him were killing and cruelly abusing ethnic Serb civilians in the territory captured in the military action, he did nothing to prevent, curb and punish such prohibited conduct ... thus unknown members of the units subordinated to him killed, among others, on 9 September 1993, A.V. ... and M.V. ...’,
- that the plaintiff brought the civil action for damages regarding the death of his parents on 6 March 2008,
and having regard to the provisions of the Act on the liability of the Republic of Croatia for damage caused by members of the Croatian Army and police in the performance of their duties during the Homeland War (Zakon o odgovornosti Republike Hrvatske za štetu uzrokovanu od pripadnika hrvatskih oružanih i redarstvenih snaga tijekom Domovinskog rata, Official Gazette, no. 117/2003, hereinafter ‘the Liability Act’ [see paragraph 48 below], and in particular sections 1, 2 and 6 of that Act, as well as the provisions of section 376 of the Civil Obligations Act, the second-instance court correctly dismissed the civil claim on the grounds that it was statute-barred.
Namely, considering the circumstances in which the plaintiff’s parents were killed, the damage referred to in the civil action does not amount to war damage and therefore the State is liable for it under section 2 of the Liability Act. The general rules on liability for damage apply, that is the Civil Obligations Act, including the provisions of that Act regulating the running of the statutory limitation period for lodging a civil claim for damages.
In a situation such as this one, where the plaintiff’s parents were killed by a perpetrator who remained unknown until the present day and therefore no criminal proceedings were conducted against such unknown person, there is no possibility to apply the longer statutory limitation period referred to in section 377(1) of the Civil Obligations Act. Namely, when the perpetrator of a criminal offence is unknown, the civil court is not authorised to examine, as a preliminary question, whether damage was caused by a criminal offence.
Therefore, the issue of the statutory limitation period in the case in question must be examined under section 376 of the Civil Obligations Act, under which the subjective three-year period runs from the time the injured party learned of the damage and the person who caused it, and the objective five-year statutory limitation period runs from the time when the damage occurred.
The damaging event in relation to which the plaintiff claims damages occurred on 9 September 1993, and in relation to that event on 26 November 2001 an indictment was filed against R.A. before the ICTY. An integral part of that indictment was an enclosure which contained a list of persons who had been unlawfully killed, including the plaintiff’s parents. Therefore it is clear that already at that time the plaintiff had an objective possibility to learn about the fate of his parents, that is, the plaintiff had already incurred damage at that time, and the objective five-year statutory limitation period had started to run.
The plaintiff contacted the State Attorney’s Office with a request for friendly settlement of the dispute on 6 December 2007 and lodged his civil action against the State on 6 March 2008, that is, outside the five-year statutory limitation period.
In such circumstances, where the claim for damages was lodged outside the objective statutory limitation period, the subjective statutory limitation period whose commencement is related to the damage and the perpetrator (which, according to the plaintiff, would only be in 2006!) does not apply, since this statutory limitation period would extend beyond the objective five-year statutory limitation period.”
On 20 August 2015 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske). He alleged a violation of Article 2 of the Convention and the corresponding Article 21 of the Croatian Constitution (Ustav Republike Hrvatske), arguing that there had not been an effective investigation into his parents’ killing. He also alleged a violation of Article 6 of the Convention and the corresponding Article 29 of the Croatian Constitution as regards the manner in which the civil courts had applied the rules on calculating the statutory limitation period for lodging a civil claim for damages.
On 18 November 2015 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint. It held that the applicant in his constitutional complaint “[had] not demonstrate[d] that the Supreme Court had failed to respect the provisions of the Constitution and the Convention, namely that it had applied the relevant law in an arbitrary manner” and that therefore “the present case did not raise a constitutional issue.” The decision was served on the applicant’s representative on 7 December 2015.
In January 2011 the applicant applied to the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court with a view to declaring his parents dead, submitting that they had been killed in Operation Pocket-93 in September 1993.
After examining the documents submitted by the applicant, on 16 December 2011 the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court established that the applicant’s father had died on 10 September 1993. That decision became final on 17 July 2012.
On 18 December 2012 the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court established that the applicant’s mother had died on 9 September 1993. That decision became final on 5 March 2013.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Obligations Act (Zakon o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia nos. 29/1978, 39/1985, 46/1985 and 57/1989, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia nos. 53/1991, 73/1991, 3/1994, 107/1995, 7/1996, 91/1996, 112/1999 and 88/2001), read as follows:
“(1) A claim for damages shall become statute-barred three years after the injured party learned of the damage and the person who caused it.
(2) In any event that claim shall become statute-barred five years after the damage occurred.
...”
“(1) Where the damage was the result of a criminal offence and the statutory limitation period for criminal prosecution is longer, the claim for damages against the person responsible becomes statute-barred at the same time as the criminal prosecution.
(2) The interruption of the statutory limitation period in respect of criminal prosecution entails the interruption of the statutory limitation period in respect of a claim for damages.
...”
Section 184(a) of the Act introducing changes to the Civil Obligations Act (Zakon o dopunama Zakona o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette no. 112/1999 – hereinafter “the Civil Obligations (Amendment) Act”) provided that all proceedings instituted against the State in respect of damage caused by members of the Croatian Army and police in the performance of their duties during the Homeland War in Croatia from 17 August 1990 to 30 June 1996 were to be stayed. The Act also imposed an obligation on the Government to submit to parliament special legislation regulating liability for such damage within six months of the Act’s entry into force.
The Liability Act (see paragraph 40 above), in force as from 31 July 2003, regulates the circumstances in which the State is liable for damage caused by members of the Croatian Army and police during the Homeland War from 17 August 1990 to 30 June 1996.
The Supreme Court held that after the expiry of the objective fiveyear statutory limitation period for lodging a civil claim for damages, the injured party could no longer seek damages, even if the subjective threeyear period had not yet expired or had not even started to run.
The relevant part of the Supreme Court’s judgment no. Rev 84/07-2 of 12 March 2008 rendered in a case in which the plaintiffs had sought damages in connection with the murder of their husband and father in 1991 by a member of the Croatian Army, reads as follows:
“Under section 376(1) of the Civil Obligations Act, a claim for damages shall become statute-barred three years after the injured party learned of the damage and the person who caused it, and under section 376(2) that claim shall in any event become statute-barred five years after the damage occurred.
The start of the subjective statutory limitation period depends on when the injured party’s learned of the damage and its perpetrator; those facts are relevant for the injured party to be able to claim damages.
This period is combined with the objective period after the expiry of which the injured party can no longer seek fulfilment of the obligation, even if the subjective period has not yet expired or has not even started to run.”
The same approach was reiterated in the Supreme Court’s judgment no. Rev 1794/12-2 of 11 October 2016, the relevant part of which reads:
“... the objective statutory limitation period for lodging a civil claim for damages [which expires] five years after the damage occurred, applies in a situation where the subjective three-year period from [the date on which the injured party] learned of the damage and its perpetrator expires after the [objective] five-year period.”
Judgment no. Rev 287/08-2 of 6 May 2009 was rendered in a case in which the plaintiffs had sought damages from the State in connection with the death of their husband, father and son in 1992. The Supreme Court held that the plaintiffs had learned about the killing of their relative on 15 September 1993, when his body had been exchanged between the Serbian and Croatian authorities, and that on that day the objective five-year statutory limitation period under section 376(2) of the Civil Obligations Act for lodging the civil claim for damages had started to run.
 Judgment no. Rev 812/09-2 of 16 February 2011 was rendered in a case in which the plaintiff had sought damages from the State in connection with the death of her husband in 1991. The Supreme Court held that the damage under section 376(2) of the Civil Obligations Act had occurred to the plaintiff on the date on which she had learned about her husband’s death, which had undoubtedly been when an autopsy of his body had been performed.
Judgment no. Rev 1449/11-3 of 25 February 2014 was rendered in a case in which the plaintiffs had sought damages against the State in connection with the death of their mother and sister in 1995. The Supreme Court held that the damage under section 376(2) of the Civil Obligations Act had occurred to the plaintiffs on the date on which they had learned about the death of their mother and sister, which had been when the authorities had conducted an on-site inspection at the end of August 1995.
Judgment no. Rev 2617/11-3 of 11 March 2014 was rendered in a case in which the plaintiffs had sought damages in connection with the death of their husband and father in 1995. The relevant part of the judgment reads:
“The first and second-instance courts concluded that in the particular case the objective five-year statutory limitation period under section 376(2) of the Civil Obligations Act had started to run on 10 September 1995 (when D.P.’s body was found), but ... they did not provide any reasons for such a conclusion. ...
Owing to the nature of the matter, the obligation to compensate for damage cannot occur before the damage occurs. The non-pecuniary damage on account of the emotional pain related to the death of a close person cannot occur before the injured party actually learns about the death of the close person, because owing to the nature of the matter it is only after learning about that circumstance that the injured party can suffer emotional pain.
In the particular case the lower courts did not give reasons as to when the plaintiffs had learned about the death of D.P. ... Neither the results of the proceedings thus far nor the lower courts’ judgments indicate that it was the plaintiffs who had found D.P.’s body on 10 September 1995, that is, that on that day they had learned about his death.”
Judgment no. Rev-x 398/14-2 of 9 September 2014 was rendered in a case in which the plaintiffs had sought damages from the State in connection with the death of their husband and father in 1995. The Supreme Court held that the objective five-year statutory limitation period had started to run on the date on which the damage had been incurred, and not on the date of the damaging event. It reiterated its principle that where plaintiffs have learned about the death of their relatives only subsequently, then the damage is considered to have been incurred by them on the date on which they learned about their relatives’ death.
Judgment no. Rev 1917/13-3 of 12 January 2016 was rendered in a case in which the plaintiffs had sought damages from the State in connection with the death of their son and brother in 1991. The Supreme Court held that the objective five-year statutory limitation period had started to run on the date on which the damage had been incurred, which was when the plaintiffs had learned about the death of their relative.
Judgment no. Rev 471/06-2 of 27 September 2006 was rendered in a case in which the plaintiff had sought damages from the State in relation to the disappearance of her sons, who had been taken from their home by armed persons on 7 November 1991. They had never been seen again, nor had there ever been any information regarding their fate. The relevant part of the judgment reads:
“The plaintiff’s claim for damages is based on the fact of her sons’ disappearance (after they had been violently taken away on 7 November 1991), which resulted in their being declared dead. The date of their death was finally set at 8 November 1996. It thus follows that only once the plaintiff’s sons had been declared dead and the date of their death established were they considered to be dead, and at that point the plaintiff became entitled to seek damages related to their death. ... Therefore, before establishing the date of the plaintiff’s sons’ death, the statutory limitation period could not have started to run. Nor could it have started to run on the date on which they had been taken away, as incorrectly held by the lower courts.”
Judgment no. Rev 270/06-2 of 10 October 2007 was rendered in a case in which the plaintiffs had sought damages from the State in relation to the disappearance of their husband and father. Having been arrested by police officers on 3 November 1991, there had never been any trace of him. The relevant part of the judgment reads:
“Namely, the plaintiffs’ claim for damages is based on the disappearance of their husband and father (after he had been taken away on 3 November 1991 by police officers ...), which finally resulted in his being declared dead. It thus follows that the statutory limitation period could only have started to run on the date on which the decision ... of 26 March 1998 by which M.S. had been declared dead became final ... since at that point the plaintiffs became entitled to seek damages related to his disappearance, that is, his death.”
Judgment no. Rev-1518/10-2 of 7 December 2011 was rendered in a case in which the plaintiff had sought damages from the State in relation to the disappearance of her husband, who had been taken away from their home on 4 July 1992 by unidentified persons dressed in military police uniforms. He had been declared dead in 2000, and his body had eventually been identified by his family in 2003. The relevant part of the judgment reads:
“... the statutory limitation period for lodging a civil claim for damages related to the violent, unauthorised and unlawful taking away of a person from his or her home by armed persons and his or her disappearance cannot start running before the missing person has been declared dead ...
The plaintiff’s husband was declared dead by a decision ... of 22 May 2000, which became final on 22 June 2000, and only then did the plaintiff become entitled to seek damages ... and not from the date which was established as the date of her husband’s death ...”
Judgment no. Rev 1668/10-2 of 14 July 2015 was rendered in a case in which the plaintiff had sought damages from the State related to the disappearance of her father in 1991, after which there had been no information regarding his fate. The relevant part reads as follows:
“On the subject of calculating the statutory limitation period in the same circumstances (when the death of the injured party’s predecessor had been established by a final decision declaring him or her dead), the Supreme Court has expressed its point of view in several of its decisions, for example, Rev-471/06 of 27 September 2006, Rev-270/06-2 of 10 October 2007 and Rev-1518/10-2 of 7 December 2011[. According] to that (already established) point of view of the Supreme Court, when a missing person has been declared dead, the statutory limitation period for lodging a civil claim for damages related to the death of that person starts to run on the date on which the decision on declaring that person dead became final (because the injured party was able to seek damages on that ground only on that date), and not from the date established by the decision as the date on which that person had died.”
The Government submitted an excerpt from the 27th edition of Bilten – a bulletin issued in Serbia in September 2001 by the Centre for Documentation and Information “Veritas”. On pages 6-9 of the bulletin the indictment filed against general R.A. before the ICTY on 21 May 2001 was cited, as was the list of victims of Operation Pocket-93 attached to the indictment, mentioning the applicant’s mother, A.V., as one of the victims. In the excerpt it is stated that the indictment was taken from the ICTY website. There is no information as to whether that bulletin was accessible in Croatia.
The Government further submitted a statement published on the Internet on 25 September 2002, in which the former president of Croatia had spoken about the meaning of the ICTY indictment filed against general J.B. They also submitted two articles published on 13 November 2002 and 2 July 2003 respectively in Nacional – a political magazine published weekly in Croatia. The articles discussed the ICTY indictments for crimes committed in the Medak Pocket. Neither the statement nor the two articles mentioned the names of victims of Operation Pocket-93.