The case originated in an application (no. 63206/10) against the Republic of Estonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Estonian national, Ms Veronika Jüssi Osawe (“the applicant”), on 22 October 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Pirn, a lawyer practising in Tallinn. The Estonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kuurberg, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had no access to a court in respect of the proceedings which she had sought to initiate for the establishment of the paternity of her child.
On 22 January 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Tallinn.
On 29 June 2005 the applicant and O., a Nigerian national, married in Copenhagen, Denmark, where they were living at that time.
Since 1 November 2005 they have lived apart. According to the applicant, in 2006 she initiated proceedings for dissolution of the marriage in Denmark. By a decision of 2 November 2007 the Copenhagen City Court decided to grant the applicant separation from O. – which in Danish law is not identical to a divorce, since the spouses remained legally married. According to the decision O. was thought to be in Nigeria; he had been summoned to court by a public notice but had not appeared. It appears that the marriage between the applicant and O. has not been officially dissolved.
In September 2008 the applicant moved to Estonia. On 4 October 2008 she gave birth to a daughter, A., whose father, according to the applicant, was D. When registering the birth, the applicant was told by the officials of the municipality that since she was married, her husband O. would be registered as the child’s father. According to the applicant this was done despite her objections.
On 28 September 2009 the applicant lodged a claim with the Harju County Court seeking a declaration that the entry in the birth register concerning her daughter’s father was incorrect. She provided the court with a notice from the Copenhagen population register about O.’s registered address but added that in fact O. no longer lived there and she did not know his actual address. She asked the court to serve the summons on the defendant by a public notice.
By a decision of 15 December 2009 the County Court declined to proceed with the examination of the claim. It noted that the applicant had paid 1,000 kroons (EEK) (approximately 64 euros (EUR)) in State fees instead of the applicable fee of EEK 5,000 (EUR 320). The County Court gave the applicant a thirty-day time-limit to pay the remaining part of the fee. It also gave the applicant the same time-limit to find out where O. currently lived. The court noted that in accordance with the Code of Civil Procedure (Tsiviilkohtumenetluse seadustik), in filiation cases parties had to appear in court in person and they also had to be summoned personally. Accordingly, the court could not proceed with the claim without having information about the defendant’s address. The court noted that in view of the fact that the defendant was a Nigerian national probably living in Denmark, it was likely that the defendant had to be heard in a court in the place of his residence in line with the provisions of EU Council Regulation no. 1206/2001 on cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil or commercial matters. However, for that it was necessary to ascertain where O. was residing. The court noted that it was the plaintiff’s obligation to find out where O. actually lived; it considered that the applicant’s efforts in this respect had not been sufficient. It referred to the fact that O. was the applicant’s husband and that divorce proceedings were pending before a Danish court, and concluded that the applicant had better chances of ascertaining O.’s whereabouts, for example through his acquaintances, relatives and colleagues.
On 30 December 2009 the applicant requested the County Court to declare unconstitutional the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure related to the State fee and the requirement that the defendant be summoned and that he appear in court in person. She also informed the court of her intention to request information from the Danish police as to the defendant’s residence and asked for an extension of the time-limit to rectify the deficiencies in her claim indicated by the County Court in its decision of 15 December 2009.
By a decision of 12 February 2010 the County Court dismissed the applicant’s request concerning the alleged unconstitutionality of the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. It acceded to the applicant’s request for the extension of the time-limit.
It appears that the applicant did not inform the County Court of whether she had made any inquiries about O.’s whereabouts to the Danish authorities or of the results of any such inquiries.
On 16 April 2010 the County Court declined to entertain the case since the applicant had failed to eliminate the deficiencies indicated in its earlier decisions. The applicant did not lodge an appeal against that decision.
In the meantime, on 18 March 2010, the applicant lodged a new claim with the Harju County Court seeking the establishment of her daughter’s filiation from D., a British national living in the United Kingdom. She asked the court to order that a DNA test be carried out with the assistance of the British authorities. The applicant supplied the court with D.’s and his parents’ addresses.
On 20 April 2010 the County Court refused to examine the claim. Referring to the Supreme Court’s case-law (judgment of 12 September 1996, case no. 3-2-3-20-96), the County Court found that it was not legally possible to establish the child’s filiation from D. without the entry in the birth register, according to which her father was O., having been declared incorrect beforehand. The claims could not be examined simultaneously.
The applicant appealed. On 17 June 2010 the Tallinn Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal.
The applicant appealed to the Supreme Court, which decided not to examine the appeal on 8 September 2010.
Section 39 of the Family Law Act (Perekonnaseadus), as in force at the material time, provided that a child who was born or conceived during the marriage of the parents was to be deemed to be descended from the man who was married to the mother of the child (subsection 1). In the birth register, the person who was married to the mother of the child was to be entered as the father (subsection 2).
Section 42 (1) of the Family Law Act provided that if the parents of a child were not married to each other and the filiation of the child could not be ascertained, the filiation of the child from the father could be established by a court.
Section 44 of the Family Law Act provided that a court could declare an entry concerning a parent in the birth register incorrect if it established that the child did not descend from that parent (subsection 1). The limitation period of a claim to declare an entry incorrect was one year after the date the person became or should have become aware of the incorrectness of the entry (subsection 3).
Article 317 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Tsiviilkohtumenetluse seadustik) sets out rules concerning the public service of procedural documents. Public service is possible, inter alia, if the address of the participant in the proceedings is not entered in the register, if the person does not live at his or her registered address, or if the person’s address or location has not become known to the court by any other means, or if service of the document in a foreign State in conformity with the requirements of the law is presumed to be impossible (§ 1(1) and (2)). The court may refuse public service of a procedural document if the decision to be made is presumably going to be recognised or enforced in a foreign State and as a result of public service it is probable that the decision would not be recognised or enforced (§ 6).
Article 338 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that if a participant in the proceedings does not know the address or other information about another participant in the proceedings, the procedural document must set out the measures taken by him or her in order to obtain such information (§ 3).
Article 346 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that in marital and filiation matters the parties must appear in court in person unless they have a good reason not to appear. If a party is unable or cannot be expected to appear in court, he or she may be heard and his or her explanations may be obtained by another court on the basis of a letter of request (§ 2). A party must be personally informed by a summons of his or her obligation to appear in court in person (§ 3).
Article 414 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that if one or both parties are absent from a court session, the court may adjudicate on the merits of the matter if the facts on which the action is based have been, in the opinion of the court, ascertained to a sufficient extent. The court may also adjudicate a marital and filiation matter in this manner.
In a judgment of 12 September 1996 (case no. 3-2-3-20-96) the Civil Chamber of the Supreme Court held that it was not allowed to establish a child’s filiation from another man before the existing entry in the birth register had been declared incorrect and removed. Only after the pertinent judgment had become final could a claim for the establishment of filiation from another man be resolved. A simultaneous examination of the claims concerning the entry of the father in the birth register and the filiation of the child was not allowed.
The Government provided several examples of cases where a court of appeal had quashed the first-instance courts’ decisions whereby those courts had declined to hear an action because a plaintiff had been unable to ascertain the residence of a defendant, including in cases where the defendant was allegedly living abroad (decision of 14 April 2008 of the Tallinn Court of Appeal in case no. 2-07-27215; decision of 21 January 2009 of the Tartu Court of Appeal in case no. 2-07-17227; and decision of 3 February 2009 of the Tallinn Court of Appeal in case no. 2-08-11009).
Furthermore, by a judgment of 8 February 2011 the Pärnu County Court in case no. 2-09-34277 established filiation of a child from a defendant who had been summoned to the court by a summons published in the Official Gazette, as well as by an e-mail, but had failed to appear in court.