The present case raises issues under Article 6 of the Convention and concerns the alleged unfairness of the criminal proceedings opened against the applicant in so far as the appellate court overturned his acquittal without a direct assessment of the relevant testimonial evidence on which that court relied.
The applicant was born in 1992 and lives in Piatra Neamţ. The applicant’s father, Mr V. Lamatic, was granted leave to represent him before the Court, in accordance with Rule 36 §§ 2 and 4 of the Rules of Court.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms O. Ezer of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant was accused of having committed three acts of robbery with violence in Bacău, on the nights of 30 July, 2 September and 11 September 2014.
The applicant admitted having committed the crimes in respect of the incidents of September 2014; however, he denied any involvement in the crime committed on 30 July 2014.
In connection with the latter incident, in the early morning of 31 July 2014, the victim, A.M.D., told the investigating authorities that on 30 July at around midnight, while she was crossing the street, she had seen the applicant’s reflection in the windows of a building as he was following her. She hesitated as to whether to make a phone call for help, but was then hit from behind; as she fell, her handbag was taken from her hand. When she attempted to get the purse back, the perpetrator kicked her. She immediately called the police, but by the time they came it was too late, the perpetrator having escaped. She further described the perpetrator as a “young person, 23-24 years of age, white, about 1.75 m tall, with dark-brown hair, medium beard, dressed in a white jacket and dark blue jeans, with a black backpack”.
She also indicated that the value of the stolen goods was 100 Romanian lei (RON – approximately 25 euros (EUR)), and claimed compensation in that amount.
On 18 September 2014 she was called by the police and asked to identify the perpetrator by looking at a selection of six pictures of various persons, including the applicant. She identified the applicant as the perpetrator by pointing to his photograph.
On an unspecified date, the victims of the robberies committed on 2 and 11 September had also identified the applicant as the perpetrator, choosing his picture from a set of different photographs.
On 27 September 2014, in a statement to the prosecutor, the applicant said that on the night of 30 July 2014 he had been at work at the fast-food company Q.M., located in Piatra Neamţ. His shift had started at 8.30 a.m. and ended at around midnight, hence it was impossible for him to have been present in Bacău at that time. He also stated that in 2014, the first time he had gone to Bacău was in September.
On 17 October 2014 A.M.D. was summoned before the prosecutor in order to identify the perpetrator from a group of a few persons. She pointed to the applicant, identifying him as the perpetrator. She also mentioned that at the time of the incident the perpetrator had been dressed in a white jacket, a pair of dark blue jeans and white running shoes and had had a black backpack.
On that occasion the applicant, assisted by his lawyer, denied having possessed or worn clothes such as those indicated by the victim.
On 20 November 2014 the applicant was indicted on three counts of robbery committed in July and September 2014 (see paragraph 5 above) and was committed for trial before the District Court.
On 17 December 2014 A.M.D. submitted a written statement to the court informing the latter that she wished to waive her civil claims against the applicant and that she was withdrawing her complaint against him.
On 25 February 2015 the Bacǎu District Court convicted the applicant of the robberies committed on 2 and 11 September and sentenced him to two years and eight months’ imprisonment. It acquitted him of the robbery committed on 30 July 2014 against A.M.D.
The court heard evidence from the applicant, A.M.D. and one more witness, E.I.L. No reference is made in the court’s reasoning to E.I.L.’s statement.
During the hearing of 15 January 2015 before the first-instance court, the applicant stated that he could not have been the perpetrator of the act committed on the night of 30 July, because on 31 July 2014 he had been on duty at his workplace at company Q.M. and his shift had started at 8.30 a.m. For the work he did, he needed to be well presented and freshly shaven; hence, he did not have a beard, unlike the perpetrator as described by A.M.D.
Before the court, A.M.D. confirmed her previous statements (see paragraphs 7, 9 and 12 above), stating that she had noticed that the perpetrator had a beard, in the sense of not having shaved for two or three days. She also pointed to the applicant, who was present in the hearing room, as being the perpetrator.
The first-instance court had also watched a short sequence of footage taken by a camera which was located in the area where the incident had occurred. The court considered that the person who could be seen stealing the victim’s handbag did not have the same physiognomy as the applicant, in so far as the shape of that person’s face, nose and eyebrows was different from the applicant’s. Furthermore, the clothing of the person on the footage was different from the clothes found at the applicant’s home.
The court also considered that the victim’s statement was not corroborated by any other evidence. She had indeed pointed to the applicant’s photograph on 18 September 2014 (see paragraph 9 above), but that identification had been made almost a month and a half after the incident. Furthermore, the incident had occurred at around midnight, so that the light had been quite dim, and the victim had been attacked from behind. Therefore, it was unlikely that she could have actually seen the perpetrator in sufficient detail to be able to identify him.
The prosecutor as well as the applicant appealed against the firstinstance court’s judgment.
The prosecutor argued that there was no reason why the court should disregard the statement given by A.M.D., given that she had identified the applicant as the perpetrator several times, and that her description of him and of his clothes corresponded to what was shown by the camera footage.
 24.  Before the Bacǎu Court of Appeal, during the oral hearing of 5 May 2015, the applicant’s representative argued that the footage taken showed a person with different characteristics (different hairstyle and different clothes). Moreover, the sketch drawn on the basis of the details provided by A.M.D. regarding the facial features of the perpetrator (see paragraph 7 above) pointed to someone totally different from himself.
The applicant, present during the oral hearing and assisted by his chosen lawyer, stated that he waived his right to be heard again in the appeal proceedings and that he maintained his claims as set out in writing as well as all of his previous statements.
The appellate court did not re-examine any of the witnesses.
On 5 May 2015 the Bacǎu Court of Appeal reversed the findings of the lower court in respect of the crime committed on 30 July 2014 as being ill-founded, and upheld its findings in respect of the other two crimes. It sentenced the applicant to a total of four years and four months’ imprisonment.
The court considered that the evidence corroborating A.M.D.’s statements pointed to the applicant as the perpetrator of the robbery committed on the night of 30 July 2014.
The first item of evidence was the description given by the victim immediately after the incident (see paragraph 7 above), which corresponded to the applicant’s facial features, to what the footage had shown, and also to the description given by the other two victims of the robberies of 2 and 11 September respectively. A.M.D. had then identified the applicant both from a set of pictures laid out by the investigating authorities and from a group of persons, indicating that he was the perpetrator (see paragraphs 9 and 12 above). She had given the same details regarding the description of the perpetrator before the first-instance court, where she had again identified the applicant, who was present in the hearing room, as the perpetrator (see paragraph 19 above).
The appellate court also considered that even though the clothes of the person on the camera were not identical to those found at the applicant’s home, the style of dress of the perpetrator was similar for each of the three crimes, which had been committed at short intervals. Moreover, the backpack and the running shoes worn by the perpetrator in the incident of 30 July were the same as those used in the incident of 2 September.
Furthermore, the court noted that the applicant’s statements had varied throughout the proceedings.
In particular, the alibi relied on by the applicant, to the effect that on the night of 30 July 2014 he had been working at the company Q.M. (see paragraph 11 above), had not been confirmed by the company, which had submitted documents proving the contrary. The applicant then changed his version and stated that his working shift had started at 8.30 a.m. on 31 July (see paragraph 18 above). The applicant had also stated that he had not been in Bacău before September 2014; however, certain documents found in a pawn shop in Bacău proved that the applicant had pawned various objects – which most probably had not belonged to him – at various dates before September. The court also noted that the applicant lived in Piatra Neamţ; therefore, if those objects had belonged to him, there was no reason why he could not have pawned them in the city where he lived.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure relating mainly to the authority of the appellate courts, as in force at the relevant time, are set out below:
“Article 378 – Hearing of the defendant [before the first-instance court]
...
(5) When the defendant refuses to give any statements before it, the court shall read out his or her statements made in the previous stages of the proceedings.
Article 420 – Proceedings on appeal
....
(4) The appellate court shall hear evidence from the defendant, where possible, according to the rules applicable to the court of first instance.
(5) The appellate court may re-examine the evidence submitted to the court of first instance and may order new evidence, according to the requirements set out in Article 100 [rules on the taking of evidence].
...
(7) The prosecutor and the parties shall have the right to reply to any new points raised as a result of the hearing. The defendant shall have the last word.
(8) The court shall examine the contested decision based on the case file and on any other evidence adduced before it.
(9) In ruling on the appeal, the court may assess the evidence afresh, providing reasons.
(10) The court shall rule on all the grounds of appeal raised by the parties ...
Article 421 – Outcome of appeal proceedings
In giving judgment on appeal, the court may ..:
...
allow the appeal and:
 a) quash the contested decision and deliver a new decision according to the procedure governing the ruling on the criminal and the civil aspects of the case by the court of first instance; ....”