The case originated in an application (no. 2945/16) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Oleksandr Ivanovych Khlebik (“the applicant”), on 18 December 2015.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms I. Koval, Mr D. Mazurok, Ms A. Salyuk and Mr M. Tarakhkalo, lawyers practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that his detention in circumstances where the courts were unable to examine an appeal he had lodged against his conviction because the domestic case file was in an area that was not under the Ukrainian Government’s control, was contrary to the requirements of Article 5 of the Convention. He also alleged that he did not have an enforceable right to compensation in that respect. He further complained, under Article 6 of the Convention and Article 2 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention, that he had been waiting in vain for the appellate court to examine his appeal against his conviction because the domestic authorities had failed to enact legislation enabling the examination of appeals in circumstances such as his.
On 1 April 2016 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. It was also decided that the application should be given priority under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Nizhyn in the Chernihiv Region.
On 1 May 2010 the applicant was arrested and remanded in custody pending the outcome of the investigation and trial.
On 30 April 2013 the Alchevsk Court of the Luhansk Region convicted the applicant and his four co-defendants of armed robbery committed in an organised group, banditry and illegal possession of firearms in connection with a series of armed attacks committed in the Perevalsk District of the Luhansk Region. The court sentenced the applicant to eight years and nine months’ imprisonment, to be counted from 1 May 2010 (the date on which he had been arrested), and to confiscation of his property. It ordered that the applicant remain in detention pending appeal.
On 14 May 2013 the applicant’s sister, acting in the capacity of his lay defender, appealed against the judgment to the Luhansk Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”). Other parties lodged appeals as well.
From the beginning of April 2014, armed groups started to seize official buildings in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions and announced the creation of self-proclaimed entities known as the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and the “Luhansk People’s Republic” (“DPR” and “LPR”).
In response, on 14 April 2014 the Ukrainian Government, who consider those armed groups to be terrorist organisations, authorised the use of force against them in the legal form of an “anti-terrorist operation”.
As a result of extensive military action, between May and August 2015 the Ukrainian Government forces recaptured some territory in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, but certain parts of the regions have remained outside of the Government’s control since that time. The parts of the Luhansk Region not under the Government’s control include the Perevalsk District, where the offences for which the applicant was convicted were committed, Alchevsk, where the applicant was tried and convicted, and Luhansk, where the Court of Appeal was located.
A ceasefire was agreed upon within the framework of the Tripartite Contact Group composed of representatives of Ukraine, Russia and the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (hereinafter, “the OSCE”). An obligation to uphold the ceasefire and to withdraw heavy weaponry from the contact line was enshrined in the Minsk Agreements and the Package of Measures for their Implementation of September 2014 and February 2015 respectively. However, numerous violations of the ceasefire have continued to occur ever since.
.  At the time the events of spring and summer 2014 were unfolding, the applicant was detained in Starobilsk remand prison, located in the part of the Luhansk Region that has remained under the control of the Ukrainian Government. He remained in that prison until his release (see paragraph 30 below).
On 6 June 2014 the Court of Appeal, which was still sitting in Luhansk, failed to hear the applicant’s case because the applicant could not attend the hearing on account of the armed conflict. A hearing by video conference was scheduled for 8 August 2014, but it did not take place because as from 1 August 2014 the electricity and water supply and telephone communications were cut off at the Court of Appeal’s building in Luhansk. At some point around that time, the judges of the court moved to the Government-controlled territory. The case files, however, remained at the court’s building in Luhansk.
On 2 September 2014 the President of the High Civil and Criminal Court, acting under the Law of 12 August 2014 (see paragraph 44 below), reassigned jurisdiction over cases which would normally have fallen within the jurisdiction of the Alchevsk Court to the Lysychansk Court of the Luhansk Region (“the Lysychansk Court”), located in the Governmentcontrolled area.
On 12 November 2014 the President of Ukraine issued a decree defining Sieverodonetsk in the Luhansk Region, also located in the Government-controlled area, as the seat of the Court of Appeal instead of Luhansk.
On 25 February 2015 the applicant complained to the Court of Appeal about the delay in the examination of his appeal.
On 3 March 2015 the applicant lodged a similar complaint with the office of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights.
On 27 March 2015 the Court of Appeal informed the applicant that his criminal case file was in Luhansk, which was not under the Government’s control, and that this prevented the court from examining his case. In order to resolve the problem, amendments would have to be made to the relevant legislation.
On 30 March 2015 the Parliamentary Commissioner’s office responded that there was no way to obtain case files from the territory that was not under the Government’s control, but that the Commissioner was working with the courts, the prosecutor’s office and other authorities to find a way to resolve the problem.
In response to another complaint from the applicant, on 19 May 2015 the Court of Appeal informed him that it was unable to apprise him of the state of proceedings in his case because his criminal case file was in the court archives in Luhansk, to which there was no access.
On 21 May 2015 the Parliament of Ukraine (Verkhovna Rada) adopted a declaration which read, insofar as relevant, as follows:
“I. Derogation from Obligations
...
In view of the armed aggression of the Russian Federation against Ukraine involving both the regular Armed Forces of the Russian Federation and illegal armed groups guided, controlled and financed by the Russian Federation, since April 2014 an anti-terrorist operation has been conducted by the units of the Security Service of Ukraine, the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine and the Armed Forces of Ukraine in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions (oblasts) of Ukraine. The anti-terrorist operation is part of Ukraine’s inalienable right to individual self-defense against aggression under Article 51 of the UN Charter. The Russian Federation, which has occupied and is exercising control over certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, is fully responsible for respect for and protection of human rights in these territories under international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The Russian Federation’s ongoing armed aggression against Ukraine, together with war crimes and crimes against humanity committed both by the regular Armed Forces of the Russian Federation and by illegal armed groups guided, controlled and financed by the Russian Federation, constitutes ‘a public emergency threatening the life of the nation’ in the sense of ... Article 15 § 1 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
In order to safeguard the vital interests of society and the State in response to the armed aggression of the Russian Federation, the Parliament of Ukraine, the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and other authorities have to adopt decisions which constitute a derogation from certain obligations on the part of Ukraine under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
...
On 12 August 2014, the Parliament of Ukraine adopted the Law on Administration of Justice and Criminal Proceedings in connection with the Antiterrorist Operation. The Law changed, for the duration of the anti-terrorist operation, the territorial jurisdiction over cases amenable to the courts located in the anti-terrorist operation area and, concerning the situations where it is impossible to conduct a pre-trial investigation in that area, investigative jurisdiction over criminal offences perpetrated there. The application of this law makes it necessary for Ukraine to derogate from certain of its obligations under Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Article 6 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. However, the courts and pre-trial investigation bodies are not currently functioning in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions because of the armed aggression of the Russian Federation and the actions of terrorist groups backed by the Russian Federation. That is why Ukraine has had to change the territorial jurisdiction of the courts and investigative jurisdiction in respect of criminal offences in conditions where the life of the nation is threatened.
...”
On 5 June 2015 the Permanent Representation of Ukraine to the Council of Europe transmitted to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe a note verbale containing the text of the above declaration and its translation.
On 15 June 2015 the applicant applied to the Lysychansk Court for restoration of the lost case file (відновлення матеріалів втраченого провадження).
On 22 June 2015 the Lysychansk Court held a hearing in the presence of a prosecutor but in the applicant’s absence. The prosecutor stated that the case file in question was not in the area of the Luhansk Region controlled by the Ukrainian Government and that it was therefore not possible to furnish the court with any of the material therein. The court found that there was insufficient material available to restore the file. It discontinued the examination of the application, reminding the parties that if sufficient material was provided, the question of restoration could be reexamined.
On 22 October 2015 the Court of Appeal again informed the applicant that examination of his case required amendments to the legislation. In this context, it referred to draft law no. 2930 (see paragraph 47 below).
On five occasions between May 2015 and February 2016 the applicant applied for release, arguing that his detention was unlawful because his conviction was not final and “would never become final”.
The Starobilsk Court of the Luhansk Region rejected the applicant’s applications for release, finding that, contrary to his submissions, there were sufficient legal grounds for continuing to detain him, since he had been convicted and his case was pending before the Court of Appeal. The most recent of those decisions was taken on 25 February 2016. No appeal lay against them.
On 30 December 2016 the applicant applied to the Court of Appeal for release under the Law of 26 November 2015 (see paragraph 46 below).
On 18 March 2016 the Lysychansk Court released the applicant. It considered that, as he had been held in pretrial detention since 1 May 2010, under the Law of 26 November 2015 he could be deemed to have already served his sentence.
The regional prosecutor’s office appealed, arguing that the applicant’s conviction had not become final because his domestic case file had remained inaccessible in a non-Government-controlled area and appeals against his conviction were still pending before the Court of Appeal. According to the prosecutor’s office, only convicted persons whose convictions had become final could benefit from the application of the new legislation. By contrast, those whose convictions were not final could be released only once the period for which they had been detained had exceeded half of the maximum sentence for the offence of which they stood accused. Since the applicant was accused of offences, in particular banditry and aggravated robbery, the maximum punishment for which was fifteen years’ imprisonment (see paragraph 41 below), and he had served much less than half of that term, he could not be released.
On 24 May 2016 the Court of Appeal upheld the Lysychansk Court’s ruling of 18 March 2016 (see paragraph 30 above).
Following communication of the case to the respondent Government, on 11 August 2016 the regional prosecutor’s office informed the office of the Government Agent that, apart from the applicant, there were seven other individuals still held in the region’s remand prisons against whom criminal proceedings were still pending but whose case files were in the non-Government-controlled areas. The prosecutor’s office stated that it had requested the assistance of the police in gathering the documentation necessary to restore the relevant files. That work had allowed the prosecutor’s office to gather sufficient material to ask the courts to consider the case against one of those individuals. The work was ongoing concerning two other defendants. Assistance had also been requested from the International Committee of the Red Cross, which operated in both the Government-controlled and the non-Government-controlled areas, in facilitating the transfer of files from the Court of Appeal’s building in Luhansk.
At the date of last information made available to the Court (19 January 2017), the applicant’s appeal against his conviction remained pending before the Court of Appeal.
As the criminal proceedings against the applicant started before the entry into force of the 2012 Code, his detention and trial and the appeal proceedings were governed by the 1960 Code of Criminal Procedure.
Article 362 of the 1960 Code provided that appellate courts may examine and assess evidence in respect of the parts of judgments challenged on appeal, in accordance with the rules of criminal procedure applicable to the trial. Under those rules the court had the power to call witnesses, appoint experts, and examine physical evidence and documentation. Article 367 provided that a judgment could be quashed or amended by an appellate court in the event of: (i) a substantial breach of the rules of criminal procedure; (ii) incorrect application of the criminal law or an error in sentencing; or (iii) an error of fact, namely where a pre-trial investigation or examination of evidence by the trial court had been biased or was incomplete, or where the trial court had drawn erroneous conclusions from the facts of the case.
Article 149 of the 1960 Code listed pre-trial detention, along with bail and several other measures, among the preventive measures that could be applied to defendants in the course of criminal proceedings.
Article 324 required the convicting court to decide, in particular, on the preventive measure to be applied to a convicted person until the judgment became final.
Under Articles 338 and 401 a person sentenced to imprisonment was considered to be serving his or her sentence from the date on which the judgment became final, namely the date on which it was upheld on appeal. However, pursuant to Article 338, if the convicted person had been held in pre-trial detention, the duration of that detention counted towards his or her sentence.
The applicant’s application for restoration of the case file was examined under Articles 524-31 of the 2012 Code of Criminal Procedure, which set out the procedure for restoration of lost case files in which a judgment has been delivered. Parties to proceedings may apply to the court which delivered the judgment for restoration of a lost case file. Article 527 of the Code requires persons applying for restoration to provide detailed information as to the specific material in the file, the names and addresses of parties to the proceedings, the possible location of the lost material and the circumstances in which it was lost, and to furnish to the court all documentation available to him or her. Article 529 provides that the court, having received the application, must ask the prosecutor’s office for information and documentation which may help in restoring the case file. Under Article 530, the court can examine as witnesses officials and other persons who took part in procedural actions and, where necessary, judges who examined the case. On the basis of the information and documentation so collected, the court may either deem the file restored in its entirety or in part or, if it finds the information available insufficient, discontinue the proceedings and explain to the parties their right to reapply if necessary documentation becomes available (Article 531).
Article 187 § 1 and Article 257 of the Code make robbery committed in an organised group and banditry (namely creation and participation in an armed gang) punishable by up to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
The Law concerns the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol, which it defines as territory temporarily occupied by Russia (sections 2 and 3). Section 12 reassigns jurisdiction over cases which would normally fall within the jurisdiction of the courts of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol to courts in Kyiv determined in accordance with the rules set out in that section.
The Law came into force on 20 August 2014.
Section 1(1) authorises the President of the High Specialised Civil and Criminal Court to designate the courts with jurisdiction over criminal сases which would normally have been examined by courts located in the area where the anti-terrorist operation is being conducted, but which are prevented from operating.
Section 1(3) provides that cases pending before the courts that are prevented from operating will be transferred to the courts which have been designated in accordance with the Law. If the case file cannot be transferred, proceedings are to be conducted on the basis of the material submitted by the parties, “provided that such material is sufficient for the court to decide on the matter”.
The Law, which came into force on 24 December 2015, amended the Criminal Code. Prior to the amendment, the Code had provided that, when calculating the final time to be served, one day of pre-trial detention counted for one day of imprisonment. Article 72 § 5 of the Code as amended now provides that one day of pre-trial detention counts for two days’ imprisonment. Accordingly, a convicted person now has to be released if he or she has already spent at least half of the term of imprisonment to which he or she has been sentenced in pre-trial detention. If at any point before a verdict is delivered the person has remained in detention for more than half of the maximum term of imprisonment provided for in the Criminal Code for the offence of which he or she is suspected or accused, the defendant must be released. The court orders release on its own motion or following an application from the defence or the prosecutor. The Law applies to all persons whose convictions have become final (i.e. upheld on appeal) but whose sentences have not been served in full by the date on which the Law came into force.
On 18 May 2017 the Parliament adopted a law repealing the Law of 26 November 2015 and restoring the situation which had existed before that law came into force. According to the repealing law, it shall come into force the day after its official publication. The law was officially published on 20 June 2017.
On 21 May 2015 Mr G. Nemyrya, Member of Parliament and chairman of the Parliamentary Committee on Human Rights, and four other Members of Parliament introduced a draft law proposing amendments to certain legislation concerning the strengthening of human-rights protection in criminal procedure. The draft law, which was registered in Parliament under no. 2930, proposes, in particular, an amendment to section 1(3) of the Law of 12 August 2014 (see paragraph 45 above). It would remove the proviso that cases can be examined on the basis of the material submitted by the parties, “provided that such material is sufficient for the court to decide on the matter”. According to the most recent publicly available information, the draft law is pending before the relevant parliamentary committee.
On 19 October 2015 Mr R. Knyazevych, Member of Parliament and chairman of the Parliamentary Committee on Justice and Legal Policy, introduced a draft law proposing amendments to the Law of 15 April 2014 concerning Crimea and Sevastopol (see paragraph 42 above). The draft law, which was registered under no. 3343, proposes adding a new subsection to section 12 providing that, if it is impossible to obtain the case file from the occupied territory, the competent court to which jurisdiction of the case has been reassigned has to examine the case on the basis of material provided by the parties. The draft law also proposes that the courts before which appeals are pending should be empowered to examine the question of restoration of case-file material at the request of the parties or ex officio. A new section would also provide that if copies of the material from the file left in the occupied territory are insufficient for examination of the case, the prosecutor’s office or other investigating authorities can conduct a new investigation to gather evidence. If the newly gathered material is still insufficient to examine the case, the court may adjourn the proceedings and release the defendants being held in pre-trial detention.
According to the press reports to which the applicant referred, Ukraine’s Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights has organised the transfer of more than a hundred case files concerning criminal defendants detained in the area under the Government’s control from nonGovernmentcontrolled territory. Similarly, she has organised the transfer of a number of prisoners detained in connection with “ordinary” criminal offences (i.e. prisoners whose detention was apparently unrelated to the political and/or conflict-related matters) in nonGovernmentcontrolled territory to the areas under the Government’s control. However, those transfers concerned only the non-Government-controlled territory in the Donetsk Region. According to public statements made by the Parliamentary Commissioner and the Deputy Minister of Justice, who also took part in the prisoner exchanges, similar contacts have not been established with the forces controlling the parts of the Luhansk Region not under the Government’s control.
According to the information provided to the Government Agent’s office by the Luhansk Regional Court of Appeal, there have been no transfers of case files left in the non-Government-controlled areas of the Luhansk Region.
According to information published by the International Committee of the Red Cross, in 2016 the latter facilitated the exchange of thirty-seven detainees between non-Government-controlled and Government-controlled areas.
The relevant part of Resolution 2133 (2016) on “Legal remedies for human rights violations on the Ukrainian territories outside the control of the Ukrainian authorities”, adopted on 12 October 2016, reads:
“1. The Parliamentary Assembly is deeply worried about the human rights situation in Crimea and in the self-proclaimed ‘people’s republics’ of Donetsk and Luhansk (‘DPR’ and ‘LPR’, respectively).
...
Victims of human rights violations have no effective internal legal remedies at their disposal:
1. as far as the residents of the ‘DPR’ and ‘LPR’ are concerned, local ‘courts’ lack legitimacy, independence and professionalism; the Ukrainian courts in the neighbouring government-controlled areas, to which jurisdiction for the noncontrolled areas was transferred by Ukraine, are difficult to reach, cannot access files left behind in the ‘DPR’ or ‘LPR’ and cannot ensure the execution of their judgments in these territories;
...
Numerous inhabitants of the conflict zone in the Donbas, on both sides of the contact line, still suffer on a daily basis from numerous violations of the ceasefire that was agreed in Minsk. These violations are documented daily by the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, despite the restrictions on access imposed mainly by the de facto authorities of the ‘DPR’ and ‘LPR’. The inhabitants also suffer from the prevailing climate of impunity and general lawlessness due to the absence of legitimate, functioning State institutions, and in particular access to justice in line with Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ETS No. 5).
...
The Assembly therefore urges:
...
5. the international community to continue focusing on the human rights and humanitarian situation of the people living in the territories of Ukraine not under the control of the Ukrainian authorities and refrain from placing demands on Ukraine which would cement the unlawful status quo if fulfilled ...”
On 21 March 2014 the OSCE decided to deploy a Special Monitoring Mission (hereinafter, “the SMM”) to Ukraine. Its tasks include reporting on the security situation in the area of operation; establishing and reporting facts in response to specific incidents and reports of incidents; and monitoring and supporting respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
In December 2015 the SMM published a thematic report entitled “Access to Justice and the Conflict in Ukraine”. The report reads, insofar as relevant, as follows:
“5.4. Unlawful Detention or Deprivation of Liberty
The relocation of courts and prosecution offices, and the lack of a developed and legitimate legal system in ‘DPR’ - and ‘LPR’ - controlled areas, has resulted in potentially illegal and arbitrary detention of people in both government- and nongovernment-controlled areas.
4.1. Government-Controlled Areas
In government-controlled areas, due to the loss of case files and difficulties caused by the relocation of judicial services, some individuals are unlawfully detained. People remaining in detention include those who were detained but not convicted of a crime, those who were convicted at a first instance court and awaiting an appeal when the case file was lost and those who have been arrested since court relocation but the court is unable to examine the necessary evidence due to lack of access to nongovernment-controlled areas ... The relocated Luhansk Regional Prosecution Office, on 20 April 2015, also informed the SMM of four juveniles who were convicted of serious crimes prior to the conflict, but the case files were lost during relocation. At the time of the interview, these people remained imprisoned due to the seriousness of the crimes. The SMM was informed by the Starobilsk District Court (Luhansk region) of 60 persons convicted at a first instance court of serious crimes who are imprisoned in government-controlled areas awaiting an appeal but whose case files remain in non-government-controlled areas...”
The SMM’s status report as of 5 April 2017 reads, insofar as relevant:
“The SMM recorded an approximate 20 per cent decrease in violence between 27 March and 2 April compared with the previous week, and a calmer situation since the renewed commitment to adhere to the ceasefire beginning on 1 April. At the same time, the security situation remained volatile and unpredictable.
From 27 March to 2 April, the Mission observed an almost 90 per cent decrease in the use of heavy weapons. But in the preceding week, from 20 to 26 March, the SMM recorded the second highest use of proscribed weapons since the Addendum to Package of Measures came into force, including at least 3,930 explosions.”
The SMM status report as of 14 June 2017 reads, insofar as relevant:
“Following the re-commitment to ceasefire to mark “International Children’s Day” on 1 June, and an accompanying one-day lull in violence, both Donetsk and Luhansk regions witnessed upsurges in violence. For example, on 3-4 June, the SMM observed artillery and mortar fire exchanges between the Trudivske neighbourhood in Petrovskyi district of Donetsk city and neighbouring Krasnohorivka; and on 5-6 June use of artillery, including multiple-launch rocket systems in the Zholobok-Krymske area of Luhansk region.
Over the period 29 May-12 June, the SMM confirmed 21 civilian casualties, one of whom was killed. This brings the total number of civilian casualties confirmed by the SMM in 2017 to 261, including 45 fatalities.”