The case originated in seven applications (nos. 73590/14, 73593/14, 73820/14, 4635/15, 5200/15, 5206/15 and 7289/15) against Ukraine, lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by seven Ukrainian nationals, Ms Lyubov Nikolayevna Tsezar (“the first applicant”), Mr Nikolay Vladimirovich Tsezar (“the second applicant”), Ms Svetlana Pavlovna Karlyuk (“the third applicant”), Ms Kateryna Andrianivna Vanina (“the fourth applicant”), Ms Tetyana Kostyantynivna Chernovol (“the fifth applicant”), Ms Tetyana Anatoliyivna Vysla (“the sixth applicant”) and Mr Anatoliy Leonidovych Vyslyy (“the seventh applicant”). The first three applicants lodged their applications on 10 November 2014. The other applicants lodged their applications on 14 January 2015. The applicants were granted leave to present their own cases under Rule 36 § 2 in fine of the Rules of the Court.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that the Ukrainian authorities had unlawfully and disproportionately suspended pensions and other social benefits (“social benefits”) due to them in the city of Donetsk, territory the Government do not currently control. They also alleged that, as a result of the relocation of the courts from Eastern Ukraine, they could not bring any claims before the courts. Lastly, the first three applicants alleged that they had been discriminated against based on their place of residence.
On 15 July 2015 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1954, 1952, 1964, 1926, 1952, 1960 and 1956 respectively and live in Donetsk.
From the beginning of April 2014 armed groups started to seize official buildings in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions and announced the creation of self-proclaimed entities known as the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and “Luhansk People’s Republic” (the “DPR” and “LPR”).
In response, on 14 April 2014 the Government, who consider the armed groups to be terrorist organisations, authorised the use of force against them in the legal form of an “anti-terrorist operation”.
In June 2014 the armed groups started to seize offices of the National Bank of Ukraine and other regional financial institutions in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
On 24 July 2014 the Ukrainian postal service Ukrposhta suspended its operations on the territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions that were outside the control of the Government, because of frequent attacks on its vehicles and employees by armed groups.
On 6 August 2014 the National Bank of Ukraine suspended all financial transactions on the territories outside the control of the Government (see paragraph 20 below).
Government forces recaptured some territories in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, but certain parts of the regions have remained outside the Government’s control since that time. One part of the Donetsk region not under the Government’s control is the city of Donetsk.
On 2 September 2014, following changes in the law, jurisdiction of the courts in the non-controlled areas was transferred to the relevant courts in the neighbouring regions on the territory controlled by the Government (see paragraphs 34 to 36 below).
On 11 November 2014 all social benefit payments in the settlements of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions that were outside the control of the Government were suspended (see paragraph 26 below)
In December 2014 the Donetsk Regional Administrative Court and the Donetsk Regional Administrative Court of Appeal were relocated to the cities of Sloviansk and Kramatorsk, territory controlled by the Government (see paragraphs 37 and 38 below).
The applicants were registered as recipients of social benefits with different departments of the Pension Fund of Ukraine in Donetsk. Some applicants had been receiving their social benefits until 30 June 2014, others until 31 August 2014.
On 16 June 2015 the first and second applicants registered themselves with the Labour and Social Security Department of the Krasnoarmiysk District of the Donetsk region (currently the city of Pokrovsk), controlled by the Government. On the same day their social benefits was reinstated, including social benefits due to them for the period 1 July 2014 to 16 June 2015.
The sixth applicant was registered with the Labour and Social Security Department of the Obolonskiy District in Kyiv on 9 September 2015. However, she did not apply for reinstatement of her social benefits.
The other applicants did not apply to the relevant social authorities on the territory controlled by the Government for reinstatement of their social benefits.
According to the Government, the sixth and seventh applicants travelled from Donetsk to the territory controlled by the Government after their social benefits had been suspended. The Government provided a certificate from the State Customs Office stating that the sixth and seventh applicants had entered the territory controlled by the Government on 31 October 2015, through an authorised checkpoint near the frontline between Ukrainian forces and “DPR” armed groups in the town of Zaitseve.
All financial transactions on the territory outside the control of the Government were suspended, in order to secure the lives and health of employees of banking institutions and their clients, and ensure the stability of the banking system of Ukraine as a whole.
Section 1(1), before the amendments of 24 December 2015, read as follows:
“An internally displaced person is a citizen of Ukraine who permanently resides in Ukraine, [and] who was forced or who voluntarily left his or her place of residence as a result or in order to avoid the negative consequences of the armed conflict, temporary occupation, widespread manifestation of violence, large-scale violations of human rights and emergency situations of natural disaster or anthropogenic hazards.”
Section 7(2) reads as follows:
“Ukraine takes all possible measures aimed at resolving issues related to the social protection of persons, including reinstatement of social benefits to internally displaced persons.”
Section 7(3) reads as follows:
“Elderly citizens, disabled people, disabled children and any other persons in difficulty who are registered as internally displaced persons are entitled to receive social benefits in accordance with the law currently in force at the place of registration of their actual place of residence.”
The procedure for preparing and issuing certificates of registration as an internally displaced person was established by Resolution no. 509 of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine of 1 October 2014 “On the registration of persons displaced from the temporarily occupied territory of Ukraine and anti-terrorist operation area” (after relevant amendments “on the registration of internally displaced persons”).
Section 1 provided that the assignment and continuation of social benefit payments to an internally displaced person is conducted in accordance with his or her place of residence, which should be confirmed by a certificate of registration as an internally displaced person issued in compliance with Resolution no. 509 of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (see paragraph 24 above).
Section 3 reads as follows:
“The Ministries and other State authorities shall, by 1 December 2014, ensure that publicly funded institutions, enterprises and organisations under their control are relocated from territory outside the control of the State authorities to settlements where the State authorities exercise their powers in full.”
The resolution approved an Interim Order “on financing publicly funded institutions, paying social benefits and providing financial support to certain enterprises and organisations in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions”.
Section 2 reads as follows:
“In the settlements of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, where the State authorities do not exercise their powers in full, payments from the State Budget, the Pension Fund of Ukraine and other compulsory State social insurance funds will only be conducted after the State authorities regain control over those territories.
The resolution came into force on 11 November 2014.
The resolution defined the areas which are temporarily outside the control of the Government, and includes the city of Donetsk.
Article 17 § 2 of the Code of Administrative Justice of Ukraine provides that administrative courts have jurisdiction over claims by individuals or legal entities against public authorities regarding their decisions (regulations or individual legal acts), actions or omissions.
Article 18 § 1 (4) of the same Code provides that local courts of general jurisdiction have jurisdiction over claims by individuals against public authorities regarding the calculation, recalculation and payment of social benefits.
Article 18 § 2 (1) provides that regional administrative courts have jurisdiction over all claims by individuals or legal entities against public authorities except in the particular cases specified in the Code.
Under Article 1, the territorial jurisdiction of court cases within the competence of the courts located in the area of the anti-terrorist operation was changed. The relevant higher specialised courts of Ukraine were authorised to designate the courts that would have jurisdiction over cases which would normally have been examined by courts located in the area where the anti-terrorist operation was being conducted, but which were prevented from operating.
Section 1 provided that administrative cases within the competence of administrative courts located in the area outside the control of the Government, were to be considered by the following courts:
- Zaporizhzhia Regional Administrative Court – administrative cases within the competence of the Donetsk Regional Administrative Court;
- Kharkiv Administrative Court of Appeal – administrative cases subject to review by the Donetsk Regional Administrative Court.
The order provided that administrative cases within the competence of the courts of general jurisdiction located in the city of Donetsk were to be considered by certain courts located on the territory controlled by the Government.
Section 1 provided that the operations of the Donetsk Regional Administrative Court were to be relocated to the city of Sloviansk, territory controlled by the Government, as of 22 December 2014.
The order provided that the operations of the Donetsk Regional Administrative Court of Appeal were to be relocated to the city of Kramatorsk, territory controlled by the Government.