The case originated in two applications (nos. 77144/01 and 35493/05) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Turkish nationals,
The applicants were represented by Mr H.J. Poth, a lawyer practising in Bruchköbel. The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs A. Wittling-Vogel, Ministerialdirigentin, of the Federal Ministry of Justice. The Turkish Government, having been informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 and Rule 44), did not indicate that they wished to exercise that right.
The first applicant alleged in particular that she had been denied a fair trial before the civil courts and that the denial of compensation violated her right to life.
The Chamber decided to join the proceedings in the applications (Rule 42 § 1).
By a decision of 11 December 2007, the Court declared the first applicant’s complaints partly admissible and the second and third applicants’ complaints inadmissible.
The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the parties submitted further written observations (Rule 59 § 1).
The first applicant (“the applicant”) was born in 1968 and lives in .
In December 1992 the applicant’s companion found out that he was suffering from lymph gland cancer and Aids. He informed the applicant about the cancer but concealed his Aids infection.
On 21 January 1993 he informed their family physician about his diseases but forbade him to disclose to anybody that he had developed Aids. When the applicant consulted the physician on 29 January 1993 he did not mention to her that her companion was suffering from Aids.
In April 1995 a blood test established that the applicant was
Subsequently, the applicant sued her physician for damages before the  (Landgericht). She submitted that the physician had failed to inform her that her companion was suffering from Aids and had thus prevented her from protecting herself against infection.
On 28 April 1998 the court-appointed expert, having examined the case file and a number of laboratory results, submitted his expert opinion. The expert considered that it was probable that the applicant had contracted the virus before 29 January 1993. The laboratory results dating from
On 24 February 1999 the , which was in possession of the physician’s medical records on the first applicant and on her late partner, rejected the action. That court considered that the physician had not been obliged to disclose her companion’s infection to the applicant. Having regard to his duty of confidence towards the applicant’s companion, he would only have been under such an obligation if this could be regarded as the only possibility of preventing the applicant’s infection. This had not been the case, as the physician had consistently advised the applicant’s companion to take the necessary steps to prevent infection and could reasonably believe that the latter would follow his advice. Under these circumstances, the  did not find it necessary to determine whether there was a causal connection between the applicant’s contracting HIV and the physician’s alleged failure to inform her about her companion’s infection.
On 5 October 1999 the Frankfurt Court of Appeal (Oberlandesgericht) dismissed the applicant’s appeal. Contrary to the Regional Court’s opinion, the Court of Appeal considered that the physician had misconceived his duty of care owed towards the applicant in his position as family physician and overestimated his duty of confidence owed towards her companion. As laid down in section 34 of the Criminal Code (see Relevant domestic law below) a physician’s duty of confidence owed towards a patient had to be restricted or even given up if a superior value was at stake. By not informing the applicant about the fatal threat to her health, he had committed an error in treatment. The court considered, however, that the physician had not disregarded medical standards in a blindfold way, but had only overestimated his duty of confidence while balancing the different interests. It followed that his behaviour could not be qualified as a gross error in treatment which, according to the established case-law of the Federal Court of Justice, would have entailed a reversal of the burden of proof as to the causality of the error in treatment and the first applicant’s HIV-positive status. Referring to the written opinion submitted by the court-appointed expert in the first-instance proceedings, the Court of Appeal considered that the applicant had not been able to prove that she had contracted the virus after January 1993, when the physician himself had been informed that her companion was HIV-positive. According to the expert’s opinion, it was more likely that she had already become
The Court of Appeal further considered that medical treatment such as was available in 1993 would not have improved the first applicant’s physical condition, even if she had been informed of her HIV status by that time.
On 4 April 2000 the Federal Court of Justice (Bundesgerichtshof) dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law for lack of prospect of success.
On 14 November 2000 the  (Bundesverfassungsgericht), sitting as a panel of three judges, refused to admit the applicant’s constitutional complaint.
In August 2002, in the course of separate criminal investigations against the physician, another medical expert submitted his opinion on the applicant’s HIV-positive status to the Wiesbaden Public Prosecutor. While not concurring with the first expert’s opinion that it was very likely that she had contracted the virus before January 1993, the expert considered that a date prior to January 1993 could not be excluded. In April 2003 the Public Prosecutor discontinued criminal investigations on the ground that it could not be excluded beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant had contracted the virus before January 1993. Appeals by the applicant were to no avail.
On 14 September 2007 the applicant requested the physician to hand her the complete medical files. On 5 October 2007 the physician informed her that he had destroyed the medical files after expiry of the time-limit for storage.
Section 823 of the Civil Code provides inter alia:
“A person who, wilfully or negligently, unlawfully injures another person’s life, body, health (...) is bound to compensate him for any damage arising therefrom.”
Section 847 as in force at the material time provides inter alia:
“In the case of injury to the body or health (...) the injured party may also demand fair compensation in money for moral prejudice.”
A patient requesting damages from a physician under section 823 of the Civil Code generally carries the burden of proof for the requisite causal connection between the physician’s negligence and the damage to his health. According to the established German case-law, in case of gross error in treatment the burden of proof is reversed to the physician. A gross error in treatment is generally assumed if the physician clearly breaches
Section 229 of the Criminal Code provides:
“Whoever negligently causes bodily injury to another person shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years or a fine.”
Section 203 provides inter alia:
“Whoever, without authorisation, discloses the secret of another, in particular, a secret which belongs to the realm of personal privacy (...) which was confided to, or otherwise made known to him in his capacity as a physician (...) shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than a year or with a fine.”
Section 34 provides as follows:
“Whoever, faced with an imminent danger to life, limb, freedom, honour, property, or another legal interest which cannot otherwise be averted, commits an act to avert the danger from himself or another, does not act unlawfully, if, upon weighing the conflicting interests, in particular the affected legal interests and the degree of danger threatening them, the protected interest substantially outweighs the one interfered with. This shall apply, however, only to the extent that the act is a proportionate means to avert the danger.”
If the Public Prosecutor refuses to prefer criminal charges against an alleged offender, the aggrieved party may, pursuant to section 172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, lodge a request for a court decision.