The case originated in an application (no. 56935/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Krunoslava Zovko (“the applicant”), on 21 August 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Valičević, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the administrative proceedings concerning her entitlement to sick leave had been unfair.
On 8 September 2015 the complaint concerning the lack of fairness of the administrative proceedings was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in Samobor.
On 20 April 2009 she sustained an injury in a car accident while returning home from work. On 8 May 2009 her injury was recognised as a work-related injury by the Croatian Health Insurance Fund for Health Protection at Work (Hrvatski zavod za zdravstveno osiguranje zaštite zdravlja na radu). On the basis of her work-related injury the applicant was granted sick leave between 21 April 2009 and 3 July 2009.
On 26 October 2011 the applicant visited the Emergency Medicine Centre of the University Hospital Centre Zagreb (Centar za hitnu medicinu Kliničkog bolničkog centra Zagreb) owing to the pain in her neck and back. There it was established that she was suffering from a severely sore spine with a deformity.
The following day she visited her chosen general practitioner, who found that the applicant was unable to work and granted her sick leave starting from 27 October 2011 on the basis of an illness.
On 3 November 2011 the applicant lodged a complaint against her general practitioner’s assessment of the reason for her sick leave. She argued that she should be granted sick leave entitlement on the basis of the work-related injury that she had sustained on 20 April 2009. She submitted medical documentation in support of her argument.
Following the lodging of the complaint, the applicant’s general practitioner referred the applicant for an expert medical evaluation, enclosing her medical documentation with the request for expert evaluation.
On 6 December 2011 an authorised doctor of the Zagreb Office of the Croatian Health Insurance Fund (Hrvatski zavod za zdravstveno osiguranje, Područni ured Zagreb – hereinafter “the Zagreb Office”), specialised in physical medicine and rehabilitation, examined the applicant’s medical documentation and reported finding no direct causal link between the work-related injury sustained by the applicant in 2009 and the sick leave she had begun on 27 October 2011.
The Zagreb Office forwarded the report to the applicant and informed her of her right to seek the delivery of a written decision on the matter of her sick leave entitlement. The applicant availed herself of that right and asked for a written decision.
By a decision of 23 January 2012 the Zagreb Office, relying on the report of 6 December 2011, refused the applicant’s request that the sick leave from 27 October 2011 be granted on the basis of her work-related injury. It also dismissed her claim for compensation for lost salary during the period of sick leave.
The applicant challenged this decision before the Central Office of the Fund (Hrvatski zavod za zdravstveno osiguranje, Direkcija – hereinafter “the Central Office”), submitting further medical documentation and requesting that her sick leave be granted on the basis of her work-related injury.
Following the appeal by the applicant, the Central Office asked an in-house medical commission to conduct an expert examination regarding the matter. On 16 March 2012 the medical commission, consisting of three doctors of medicine, examined the applicant’s overall medical documentation and reported that her sick leave from 27 October 2011 could not be granted on the basis of the work-related injury that she had sustained in 2009.
On 5 April 2012 the Central Office, relying on the findings of the medical commission, dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the Zagreb Office.
The applicant then brought an administrative action in the Zagreb Administrative Court (Upravni sud u Zagrebu). She contested the findings of the Fund’s expert medical bodies, relied on her medical documentation and alleged that it indicated a causal link between the work-related injury she had sustained in 2009 and her sick leave. She requested that she be heard and that an expert medical report on the matter be obtained.
On 27 June 2012 the Central Office submitted a response to the applicant’s administrative action. This response was forwarded to the applicant.
On 27 August 2012 the Zagreb Administrative Court held a public hearing, to which the applicant was duly summoned. She did not attend the hearing, but was represented by a lawyer. Her lawyer reiterated the arguments adduced and evidence proposed in the administrative action. The representative of the Central Office contested this. The Zagreb Administrative Court then dismissed the proposal to hear the applicant and to obtain a further expert medical report on the matter and closed the hearing.
On 31 August 2012 the Zagreb Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s action as unfounded. It stressed, in particular, that two expert medical bodies of the Fund, as well as the applicant’s chosen general practitioner, had established without a doubt that the applicant’s sick leave beginning on 27 October 2011 was not linked to the work-related injury she had sustained in 2009. It also stressed that the applicant, by the submissions in her administrative action, did not manage to put into doubt the findings of the expert medical bodies and that thus there was no need to hear her or to obtain a further expert medical report on the matter.
The applicant lodged a constitutional complaint, alleging that the proceedings had been unfair in that she had been excluded from the procedure of commissioning and obtaining the administrative authorities’ expert reports, whereas the Zagreb Administrative Court had refused to hear her and to obtain an independent expert medical report on the matter.
On 6 February 2013 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint as manifestly ill-founded. This decision was served on the applicant’s representative on 22 February 2013.
The Administrative Procedure Act (Zakon o općem upravnom postupku, Official Gazette no. 47/2009), which entered into force on 1 January 2010, in its relevant parts provides:
“(1) In the proceedings a party has to be provided with an opportunity to express his or her opinion about all the facts, circumstances and legal issues important for the determination of the matter.
(2) Proceedings may be conducted without a party first expressing his or her opinion only if his or her claim is being adopted, or if the decision in the proceedings does not have a negative effect on the party’s legal interests, or if so provided by law.”
“(1) The official [of the relevant authority] establishes all the facts and circumstances relevant for the determination of the matter.”
“(1) An examination procedure (ispitni postupak) shall be conducted when this is necessary for the establishment of the facts and circumstances relevant for the clarification of the status of the matter [in question], when in the proceedings there are two or more parties with conflicting interests, and in order to give the parties the opportunity to enforce and protect their rights and legal interests.”
“(1) A party has the right to participate in the examination procedure up to the point of adopting a decision on the matter, to submit statements and explanations, to put forward facts and circumstances relevant for the determination of the matter and to challenge the accuracy of submissions that are contrary to his or her submissions.
(2) The official is obliged to give the party an opportunity to express his or her opinion on all the circumstances and facts raised in the examination procedure [and] on the proposed and submitted evidence, to participate in the examination of evidence and to question the other parties, witnesses and expert witnesses, either through the official or, with his or her permission, directly, and to take cognisance of and have the opportunity to express his or her opinion on the results of the evidence adduced.
(3) A party may submit his or her statements either orally for the record or in written form. ...”
“(1) The official in the proceedings establishes the factual status by all appropriate means and for that purpose may obtain documents, hear witnesses, obtain an expert report and perform an on-site investigation.”
“(1) When the establishment or assessment of a certain fact relevant for the determination of the matter requires special professional knowledge which the official does not possess, an expert report may be ordered.
(2) The official shall order an expert report as a matter of course or at the request of the party [concerned]. [The expert report shall be ordered from] an expert who is qualified in the matter and authorised to give opinions on issues of a specific matter, or from a person registered to provide expert reports. ... The parties shall always be consulted beforehand as regards [which] expert [to appoint].”
“(2) Before the expert report is ordered the expert shall be instructed that he or she must carefully examine the [subject matter of the expert report] and correctly state his or her findings in the report, and that he or she must give reasoned conclusions impartially and in compliance with the relevant scientific and professional rules.
...
(6) If the expert report is not clear or complete, or if the reports of two or more experts significantly diverge, or if the expert report is not sufficiently reasoned or there is a reasonable doubt as to the accuracy of the opinion, and these omissions cannot be remedied by questioning the expert witness, [a further] expert report shall be ordered from other experts, and the opinion of a scientific or professional institution may be requested.
(7) The opinion of a scientific or professional institution may also be requested if the complexity of the case, or the need to perform an analysis, reasonably indicates that in such a way a more accurate opinion would be obtained.”
“(4) The second-instance authority may dismiss the appeal, annul the [impugned] decision wholly or in part, or reverse it.”
The relevant provisions of the Administrative Disputes Act (Zakon o upravnim sporovima, Official Gazette no. 20/2010), as in force from 1 January 2012 to 28 December 2012, provided:
“(1) An administrative dispute is initiated by [bringing] an action.
(2) The following may be claimed [by means of such] an action:
The annulment or declaration of an individual decision as null and void,
...
(3)  In the cases stipulated in paragraph 2 (1) and (2) of this section, the court may be requested to adjudicate on a right, obligation or legal interest of a party.”
“(1) The court serves the action and all its attachments on the defendant and the interested persons [and invites them] to reply.”
“(1) The court freely assesses the evidence and establishes facts.
(2) The court takes into account the facts established during the proceedings [that led to the] adoption of the impugned decision, by which it is not bound, as well as facts that it established on its own.
(3) The parties may propose which facts are to be established and evidence by which they can be established, but the court is not bound by such proposals.
(4) Evidence includes documents, the hearing of the parties, witness testimonies, expert reports, on-site investigations and other means.
(5) The court adduces evidence in accordance with the rules governing the adducing of evidence in civil proceedings.”
“(1) [By means of bringing] an action and responding to that action the parties are obliged to present all the facts on which they base their claims, propose evidence necessary for establishing them, and express their opinion on the submissions of facts and proposals of evidence undertaken by the other parties.”
“(2) The president of the panel or a single judge establishes the presence of all the persons summoned [to the hearing], and in the event of their absence, establishes whether they were duly summoned and whether they justified their absence.
(3) When a party or another participant in the dispute fails to attend the hearing without a justified reason, the hearing may be held in his or her absence.”
“(1) The court adjudicates the claim ... by means of a judgment.
...
(3) The court renders a judgment in accordance with its own belief and on the basis of an examination of all the legal and factual issues.
(4) A judgment may be based solely on the facts and evidence on which the parties were able to express their opinion.”
“(1) The court shall dismiss a claim if it finds it unfounded.”
“(1) If the court finds an individual decision of the relevant body unlawful, it shall by means of a judgment uphold the claim, annul the impugned decision and adjudicate on the matter on its own, unless it is unable to do so due to the nature of the matter, or if the defendant has resolved the matter [at its own discretion].”
“(4) In its reasoning [in respect of a judgment], a court shall state the parties’ claims, the submitted facts and proposed evidence, the facts it has established, the reasons and time of their establishment, and in the event that they were established on the basis of evidence, which evidence the court adduced and how that evidence was assessed. The court shall state in particular which provisions it applied when adjudicating on the dispute and shall express its opinion regarding the parties’ proposals and objections regarding which it did not express its opinion during the dispute.”
The Compulsory Health Insurance Act (Zakon o obveznom zdravstvenom osiguranju, Official Gazette nos. 150/2008, 94/2009, 153/2009, 71/2010, 139/2010 and 49/2011), as in force at the material time, provided that in the event that insured persons sustained a work-related injury they were entitled to medical protection and financial compensation (section 14.a). The right to financial compensation implied, inter alia, compensation for lost salary during the period of temporary inability to work caused by a work-related injury (section 24.a). Insured persons were entitled to compensation for lost salary during the entire period of sick leave, up to the time-limit provided for by law (section 32).
An insured person’s entitlement to sick leave was established by that person’s chosen general practitioner (section 33). The insured person was entitled to freely choose his or her general practitioner (section 110). In the event that the insured person was not satisfied with the general practitioner’s assessment of his or her entitlement to sick leave, the insured person was entitled to lodge a complaint with the Fund, which would then issue a written explanation informing the insured person of the procedure for acquiring the right sought (section 34).
In proceedings concerning compulsory health insurance rights the Fund applied the provisions of the Administrative Proceedings Act (section 107). Such proceedings were conducted before two instances of the Fund. Against the second-instance decision of the Fund the insured person was entitled to initiate an administrative dispute (section 108).
The Ordinance on rights, conditions and the manner of acquiring the compulsory health insurance rights (Pravilnik o pravima, uvjetima i načinu ostvarivanja prava iz obveznog zdravstvenog osiguranja, Official Gazette no. 67/2009, with further amendments), as in force at the material time, provided that an insured person’s chosen general practitioner should establish the start and the end of that insured person’s sick leave (section 25.1). It further provided that in the event of the insured person [complaining] in that respect, the general practitioner should refer him or her to an authorised doctor of the Fund for an expert medical evaluation, enclosing his or her medical documentation with the referral (section 25.10).
The Ordinance on authorities and the manner of work of authorised doctors and medical commissions of the Croatian Health Insurance Fund (Pravilnik o ovlastima i načinu rada ovlaštenih doktora i liječničkih povjerenstava Hrvatskog zavoda za zdravstveno osiguranje, Official Gazette no. 113/2009, with further amendments), as in force at the material time, provided that the authorised doctors of the Fund and members of the medical commissions of the Central Office should be doctors of medicine with at least five years of relevant professional experience and a licence to work issued by the relevant authority (section 6.2).
At an insured person’s request an authorised doctor was to provide an expert report concerning the general practitioner’s assessment of his or her entitlement to sick leave (section 13.1.1). The authorised doctor delivered the expert report on the basis of the relevant medical documentation, and if necessary, on the basis of an examination of the insured person (section 13.3).
If the insured person was not satisfied with the authorised doctor’s expert report, he or she was entitled to seek a first-instance written decision by the local office of the Fund on the matter (section 28). In second-instance administrative proceedings an expert report from a medical commission of the Central Office was to be obtained (section 20.3). This report was to be compiled on the basis of the relevant medical documentation (section 20.4).