The case originated in an application (no. 65367/16) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Mr Ringolds Zelčs (“the applicant”), on 11 November 2016.
The applicant was represented by Mr Ā. Stoks, a lawyer practising in Riga. The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Līce.
The applicant alleged that his detention in a police car on 20 November 2015 had been unlawful and that he had not had sufficient opportunities to question police officers during administrative-offence proceedings against him, contrary to Articles 5 § 1 and 6 §§ 1 and 3 (d) of the Convention.
On 5 July 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Riga.
At 8.46 p.m. on 20 November 2015 the applicant was administratively detained by the police. He was placed in a police car.
The police drew up the following reports:
1) an administrative-detention report (administratīvās aizturēšanas protokols) stating that the applicant had been detained with a view to drawing up an administrative-offence report in relation to an administrative offence under Article 14915 of the Code of Administrative Offences (Latvijas Administratīvo pārkāpumu kodekss – hereinafter, “the Code”);
2) an administrative-offence report (administratīvā pārkāpuma protokols) stating that the applicant had violated Article 14915(3) of the Code by driving a vehicle in reverse gear under the influence of alcohol (report no. PC082928); and
3) another administrative-offence report stating that the applicant had violated Article 1494(14) of the Code by driving a vehicle in reverse gear and causing a traffic incident (report no. PC 082973).
The applicant disagreed with both administrative-offence reports and submitted a written statement, which was annexed to the first report. He alleged that his wife, I.Z., had been in the driver’s seat at the time when the traffic incident had taken place.
At 10.24 p.m., less than two hours later, the applicant was released.
The Government alleged that on 20 November 2015 N.S., E.P. and R.S., officers of the State police, had received information about a traffic incident in a car park of a residential building in Riga, in which one of drivers had possibly been under the influence of alcohol. On arrival at the scene, the police officers had observed that the Mazda car, owned by the applicant, had crashed into another car, a Mercedes Benz owned by J.Č. At that time, only the applicant, J.Č. and her spouse, S.H., had been present at the scene.
The police officers had obtained initial statements from those present. J.Č. had asserted that the applicant had been driving the Mazda, as she had seen him leaving the car from the driver’s side, but the applicant’s spouse, I.Z., and their child had been sitting in the passenger seat. After the incident, J.Č.’s spouse S.H. had come to the scene and talked to the applicant. It had been S.H. who had called the police because he had smelt alcohol on the applicant’s breath.
The police officers had asked the applicant to get into the police car for a breath test. The test had indicated a strong presence of alcohol (1.4720 ‰). Subsequently, the police officers had drawn up two administrative-offence reports: one for driving under the influence of alcohol and the other for causing a traffic incident (see paragraph 7 above). Both reports had been based on the statement of J.Č. The applicant had read those reports, then had signed the report for driving under the influence of alcohol, but not the report for causing the traffic incident.
The applicant averred that he had not been driving the car at issue that evening. Having bought some groceries at a nearby store, the applicant with his spouse and their two-year old daughter, had stopped by his car on the way home to get some tools. It had started to drizzle and they had decided to sit in the car. As he had consumed alcohol, he had sat in the passenger seat with their daughter on his lap. His spouse had sat in the driver’s seat. About ten minutes later, when it had started to get cold, I.Z. had asked the applicant for the car key with a view to switching on the heating. When I.Z. had switched on the engine, the car had suddenly moved backwards because the gearstick had been left in reverse. They had had a minor traffic incident with the car driven by J.Č. It had been around 8 p.m.
The applicant had rushed out of the car. His spouse – holding their daughter – had followed. An argument between J.Č. and I.Z. had ensued, the latter had decided to go home to put their daughter to bed with the intention of returning afterwards. The applicant had stayed at the scene, as had J.Č. The latter had called her spouse, S.H., who had arrived some minutes later. A conflict between the applicant and S.H. had ensued regarding payment for repairs; S.H. had called the police. The applicant had not attempted to leave the scene; instead he had waited for his spouse to arrive, intending to give a statement to the police.
At around 8.45 p.m. the police had arrived at the scene. To his surprise, the applicant had been administratively detained, placed in the police car and had had to undergo a breath test. Subsequently, his spouse had arrived on the scene. She had wished to give a statement to Officer E.P., but he had refused to take it. At 9.05 p.m. the officer had drawn up the first report for driving under the influence of alcohol. At 9.30 p.m. Officer R.S. had drawn up the second report for causing the traffic incident. Both reports had referred to statements made by J.Č., but her statement had not been attached to either of them. The applicant had asked to see J.Č.’s statement; that was refused. He had signed both reports but had disagreed with their contents. In his statement he had submitted that his wife had been sitting in the driver’s seat at the time of the traffic incident.
On 25 November 2015 the applicant had acquainted himself with the case material and had been surprised to discover that written statements of J.Č. and S.H., dated 20 November 2015 and supposedly drawn up at the scene, had been included in the case material. He concluded that those statements had been falsified.
On 25 November 2015 the Riga City Ziemeļu District Court (Rīgas pilsētas Ziemeļu rajona tiesa, hereinafter – the “District Court”) commenced the adjudication of the administrative-offence proceedings as regards driving under the influence of alcohol. The applicant pleaded not guilty and testified that he had not driven the car that evening; his wife had been in the driver’s seat at the time of the traffic incident. The hearing was postponed in order to summon J.Č., her spouse S.H., and Officer N.S. as witnesses. The applicant’s application to summon his spouse, I.Z., was also allowed.
On 11 January 2016 another hearing was held. All those summoned were present save for S.H. J.Č. gave a brief testimony to the effect that the applicant had left the car from the driver’s side; however, she could not give lengthy testimony that day. The applicant’s spouse, I.Z., testified that she had been sitting in the driver’s seat at the time of the traffic incident. She did not have a driving licence. She had wished to give a statement, but had been refused. Officer N.S. testified that he had prepared a report on the traffic incident, but not the administrative-offence reports, and taken statements from J.Č. and S.H. The applicant had denied driving the car, but had not mentioned who had. His colleague had taken the applicant’s statement. The hearing was postponed in order to summon J.Č. following an application by the applicant, and S.H. and Officer E.P. following an application by the other party.
On 25 January 2016 another hearing was held. J.Č. and her spouse S.H. failed to appear. Officer E.P. testified that he had prepared the administrative-offence report for driving under the influence of alcohol, and had taken the applicant’s statement. The latter had provided controversial explanations about the traffic incident to Officer E.P. Firstly, he had stated that his spouse had been driving the car, had got scared and had left the scene. Secondly, he had stated that he had been giving driving lessons to his spouse; she had not had a driving licence. Nobody had presented themselves to Officer E.P. as being the driver of the Mazda. The hearing was postponed in order to summon J.Č. and her spouse S.H. as witnesses following applications by both parties.
On 5 February 2016 the District Court heard evidence from J.Č. and her spouse S.H. J.Č. testified that the applicant had left the car from the driver’s seat, whereas his spouse and their daughter – from the passenger seat some moments later. The following day the police officers had visited them at home because they had not taken a statement from her spouse. S.H. testified that the applicant had initially admitted that he had caused the traffic incident; both parties had been ready to make a joint incident statement. Then he had smelt alcohol on the applicant’s breath and had called the police. The following day the police officers had visited them at home and enquired about something, which he no longer recalled. Having heard those statements, the District Court enquired as to whether parties had any additional requests. The court also asked whether they consented to completion of the adjudication on the merits (lietas izskatīšana pēc būtības). No objections were raised.
In his closing argument (tiesu debates) the applicant found it suspicious that the statements of J.Č. and S.H. had not been annexed to either of the administrative-offence reports. Perhaps, they had not been prepared at the scene and had only been completed the following day. He found that unacceptable. The applicant concluded that the administrative-offence reports had been drafted on officers’ assumptions, which had been subjective. Also, he had been detained on subjective assumptions. The statement of J.Č. had been drafted later on the basis of those reports. His request to have his spouse’s statement taken at the scene had been refused and thus his defence rights had been breached.
On 8 February 2016 the District Court found that the applicant had committed an offence under Article 14915(3) of the Code. The administrative-offence report had contained all the necessary information, the applicant could understand for which events his administrative liability was to be established. Accordingly, he could exercise his defence rights. The District Court held that the police officers had received initial statements indicating that the applicant had been the driver of the car. Thus, the reports were drawn up on the basis of that information. They dismissed the applicant’s allegation that the statement of J.Č. had not been drafted at the scene. The District Court relied on the witness testimony by J.Č. and S.H. and both police officers to establish the applicant’s administrative liability. They did not find the applicant’s and his spouse’s testimony to be reliable. The District Court imposed the following penalties on the applicant: five day’s administrative custody (arests); a fine of 850 euros (EUR); a two-year driving ban; and a ban on obtaining a licence to operate recreational craft (boats) for two years. He had also to compensate the expenses related to the alcohol test in the amount of EUR 15.65.
On 1 March 2016 the applicant lodged an appeal against that judgment. He argued that, inter alia, he had been unlawfully detained. There had been no grounds to detain him under Article 252(1) of the Code because the administrative-offence reports had been drawn up at the scene, he had not been taken anywhere, his identity had been known and there had been no need to prevent the continuation of an administrative offence. He had been placed in the police car with no rights to step out of it or to communicate with others. The applicant questioned the police officers’ and J.Č.’s and S.H.’s objectivity on the grounds that the day following the incident the police officers had visited the witnesses at home and that fact had not been recorded. Thus, their evidence was inadmissible. On 19 May 2016 the applicant further supplemented his appeal and indicated reasons for which he considered the evidence by J.Č., S.H and the police officers to be unreliable and inadmissible.
On 11 March 2016 the Riga Regional Court (Rīgas apgabaltiesa hereinafter – the “Regional Court”) instituted appellate proceedings and informed the parties that the case would be examined using the written procedure.
On 7 June 2016 the Regional Court upheld the judgment of the District Court and dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The Regional Court held that the District Court had established the applicant’s administrative liability on the grounds of its assessment of all the evidence in the case material: the administrative-offence report, the report and printout in relation to the results of the alcohol test, the administrative-detention report, the testimony and internal reports by police officers N.S. and E.P., the testimony and written statements of J.Č. and S.H. (dated 20 November 2015), the testimony by I.Z. and the applicant’s statement and testimony. The Regional Court referred to the written statements of J.Č. and S.H. (dated 20 November 2015) when dismissing the applicant’s allegation that they had not been included in the case material. The Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s allegation that the police officers had breached procedure as follows:
“In contrast to [the applicant’s] allegation, [the Regional Court] does not find any procedural breaches [in actions taken by] the police officers, because the applicant’s administrative-detention report was drawn up in accordance with Article 256 of the Code.”
The Regional Court concluded that they “have not established any breaches of the Code, which would allow [them] to quash the judgment of the District Court.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the Code”), as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
Article 1494(14) 
General road traffic regulation offences
“In the case of offences of road traffic regulations that are not mentioned in this Code –
a warning shall be issued or a fine shall be imposed on the driver of the vehicle in the amount of EUR 7.”
Article 14915(3) 
Driving under the influence of alcohol or narcotics or other intoxicating substances
 “In the case of driving or instructing a driver of a vehicle, if alcohol concentration found in the exhaled air or blood test exceeds 1.0 permilles, but does not exceed 1.5 permilles –
... an administrative custody of five to ten days, a fine of EUR 850 to 1,000 and a suspension of the driving licence for two years shall be imposed on a driver of any other vehicle [bar a bicycle or moped].”
Article 248(1) and (4) 
Content of the administrative-offence report
“An administrative-offence report shall indicate the time and place it was drawn up, the name and surname of person who prepared it, the position and institution which he or she represents; information about the offender; the place, time and nature of the offence, normative act and provision, which stipulates responsibility for the offence; other information necessary to decide the matter ...”
“If the person, who has committed [the administrative] offence, refuses to sign the report, an entry about the refusal shall be included in the report. The person, who has committed [the administrative] offence, shall have the right to make a statement and comment on the content of the report, as well as to indicate the reasons why he or she refuses to sign the report.”
Article 252(1) 
Measures to ensure record-keeping in administrative-offence matters
 “In cases specifically provided for in this Code in order to prevent the continuation of an administrative offence if other means have been exhausted, to determine the identity of the offender, to draw up an administrative-offence report, if this cannot be done on site and if the drawing up of a report is mandatory, and to enforce a decision taken within administrative-offence proceedings, [taking a person into] administrative detention (administratīvā aizturēšana) ... shall be permitted.”
Article 253(1) 
Administrative detention
“An administrative-detention report shall be drawn up indicating the date and place of the drawing up thereof, the position, name and surname of the person who has drawn up the report, information about the detainee, and the time of and reasons for the detention. The report shall be signed by the official who has drawn it up and the detainee. If the detainee refuses to sign the report, an entry about the refusal shall be included in the report.”
Article 254(1)
Institutions (officials) authorised to impose administrative detention
“Only the following institutions (officials) have the right to [take a person] who has committed an administrative offence into administrative detention:
1) police employees (officials) –... if traffic regulations have been violated ...”
Article 255(1) and (4) 
Time-limits for administrative detention
“A person who has committed an administrative offence may be detained for no longer than four hours ...”
“The time-limit for administrative detention ... in respect of a person who has been under the influence of alcoholic beverages, narcotics or other intoxicating substances [shall run] from the time of [his or her] becoming sober.”
Article 260(2) 
Rights and obligations of the person subject to administrative liability
“A person who is subject to administrative liability has the right personally or with an assistance of a representative ... to get acquainted with the material of the case, make a duplicate, an extract or a copy of the material, to participate in the adjudication of the matter, to provide explanations, to submit requests, as well as to appeal against the decision taken in the matter.”
Article 2897(6) 
Hearing [before a regional (city) court]
“In a court hearing, parties to the administrative-offence proceedings shall have the right to submit ... applications, to participate in an examination of evidence and participate in legal debate, to provide their argument in reply, and to participate in the examination of other matters, which have arisen during the course of the adjudication of the administrative-offence matter.”
Article 28921 (1)-(3) 
Adjudication procedure before an appellate court
“A regional court shall adjudicate an appeal collegially by a panel of three judges.
An appeal shall be examined using the written procedure. Parties shall be notified of the examination [of the matter] and sent a copy of the appeal, indicating the right to submit an application for recusal in respect of the composition of the court or a separate judge within two weeks, indicating the right to submit an opinion on the appeal and informing about the date on which the appeal will be examined using the written procedure and the date on which the decision shall be available at the court’s registry.
The court may of its own motion decide on the oral hearing of an appeal giving parties to the administrative-offence proceedings a minimum of two weeks’ notice before the hearing of the case.”
Article 256(1)-(4) of the Code, as in force at the relevant time, laid down the procedure for examination of persons (personas aplūkošana) and inspection of objects (mantu apskate) as follows:
“Examination of persons and inspection of objects shall be carried out by authorised officials of the State police ....
Examination of persons shall be carried out by an official of the same sex.
Inspection of objects shall be carried out in the presence of the owner ...
A separate report shall be drawn up in respect of examination of persons and inspection of objects or a note shall be made in the administrative-detention report [to that effect].”
Since 21 June 2007 Article 259 of the Code, which provided for the right to lodge an appeal against administrative detention with a higher-ranking institution or prosecutor (see Djundiks v. Latvia, no. 14920/05, § 37, 15 April 2014) has no longer been in force.
As of 1 July 2020 the Code of Administrative Offences is to be replaced by a new Administrative Liability Law (Administratīvās atbildības likums).