The case originated in six applications (nos. 10355/09, 14358/11, 12934/12, 76458/12, 25684/13 and 49429/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by six Russian nationals whose names are listed in the Appendix (“the applicants”), on the dates listed in the Appendix.
The applicants were represented by lawyers whose names are listed in the Appendix. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the domestic courts had read out the pre-trial statements of prosecution witnesses without good reason and thus restricted the right to have those witnesses examined at the trial.
On 21 September 2015 the complaints under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (d) were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The facts of the cases, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Between 2008 and 2014 different trial courts in unrelated criminal proceedings convicted the applicants of drug-related offences, except for Mr Dumler, who was convicted of fraud, and sentenced them to terms of imprisonment. An outline of the relevant proceedings is presented in the Appendix.
The prosecution witnesses, who were suspects or accused in certain other criminal proceedings, did not appear in court and their pre-trial statements were read out at trial.
The trial courts admitted the above statements as evidence referring to Article 281, section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which allowed for testimony of a witness to be read out in “exceptional circumstances” precluding appearance in court (see paragraph 15 below).
In the cases of Mr Lobarev and Mr Shkarin the trial courts in the text of the judgments merely referred to the above legislative provision. However, it follows from the trial records that the decision to read out the pre-trial statements was based 1) on information given by a police officer that the witness had been on a national wanted list in the case of Mr Lobarev and 2) on information from an investigator that the witness was wanted by the police and had been searched for months in the case of Mr Shkarin.
In the case of Mr Dumler the trial court mentioned in the text of the judgment that the witness had gone into hiding without providing further details. However, it follows from Mr Dumler’s grounds of appeal that according to the information of the Federal Security Service the witness had gone into hiding and was evading the authorities.
In the cases of Mr Kazakovskiy, Mr Kosov, and Mr Novgorodov the trial courts provided further reasons in the texts of the judgments to justify the witnesses’ absence. In particular, the trial courts referred to 1) a decision of the investigator to place the witness on a wanted list in the case of Mr Kazakovskiy; 2) a decision of another court to place the witness on a wanted list in the case of Mr Kosov; 3) the witness being on a national wanted list in the case of Mr Novgorodov. In the latter case in addition to the text of the judgment it follows from the trial records that meanwhile another district court was examining a criminal case against the witness, it decided to place him on a national wanted list as he had been evading justice, and suspended the criminal proceedings. It further follows that Mr Novgorodov supported the prosecutor’s motion before the trial court to send an official request to the said district court inquiring about the absent witness’s whereabouts. The motion was granted and an official document confirming that the district court had placed the absent witness on a wanted list was received and presented to the prosecutor and Mr Novgorodov.
All of the applicants’ convictions were based on a multiplicity of evidence, including:
a) statements made by the applicants at the pre-trial stage and at trial in the presence of their lawyers, by police officers conducting undercover operations, attesting witnesses, other witnesses for prosecution;
b) testimonies of witnesses during cross-examinations in the court room;
c) physical evidence (in the cases of Mr Lobarev, Mr Shkarin and Mr Kazakovskiy – various amounts of seized drugs, in the case of Mr Novgorodov – almost one kilogram of drugs; in the case of Mr Kosov – seized drugs, scales and more than two hundred plastic zipper bags; in the case of Mr Dumler – second-hand equipment);
d) documentary evidence, such as records of the investigative actions and forensic examination reports;
e) in the cases of Mr Lobarev, Mr Kazakovskiy and Mr Novgorodov – transcripts of the telephone calls between them and buyers or suppliers of the drugs;
f) in the case of Mr Lobarev – a video recording of the test purchase;
g) in the case of Mr Shkarin – records of his pre-trial confrontation with a buyer of the drugs;
h) statements of the defence witnesses, including the applicants’ spouses, relatives and friends, who were examined at the trials.
Admitting the statements of the absent witnesses the domestic courts did not give them any particular value, analysed those statements, cross-referenced them with various pieces of the above evidence, and found them to be coherent and consistent.
The applicants appealed arguing, among other things, that the domestic courts did not make sufficient efforts to secure the presence of the witnesses at trial. Mr Dumler specifically argued that the information received from the department of the Federal Security Service about the fugitive witness had not contained indications as to which competent authorities the witness had been evading, whether any inquiry into the witness’s whereabouts had been in place, whether a criminal case had been instituted against the witness, and if so by which authority, and what the reference number of the criminal case was. The judgments of the trial courts were upheld on appeal.
The provisions of the domestic law and relevant practice on reading out of absent witnesses’ pre-trial statements were previously set out in the judgment Zadumov v. Russia (no. 2257/12, §§ 28-38, 12 December 2017).
Articles 111 to 113 and 188 of the Code of Criminal Procedure set out the legal regime for summoning witnesses for examination, allowing the courts to compel them to appear, relying on the bailiffs service where appropriate.
Domestic law provides for a special legal regime for the search of suspects and accused who go into hiding and evade the authorities.
Article 210, section 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that if a location of a suspect, accused is unknown, an investigator may instruct an inquiry agency to search for that person. Article 5, section 38 of the Code stipulates that the search measures are to be taken by an inquiry officer, an investigator or an inquiry agency.
Under Article 2 of the Operational-Search Activities Act of 12 August 1995 a search for persons hiding from inquiry agencies, investigation bodies and courts or evading criminal sentence is one of the main tasks of the bodies entrusted with operational-search activities. Under Article 6 and 7 of the Act these activities may include questioning, inquiry, observation and identification.
Subparagraph 12 of paragraph 1 of the Police Act of 7 February 2011 provides that the police may conduct a search for individuals hiding from inquiry agencies, investigation bodies and courts. The specific rules governing the organisation and tactics of such search activities by the police were put in place by Order no. 213 of the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation on 5 May 1993.