The case originated in an application (no. 40820/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Goran Marčan (“the applicant”), on 18 June 2012.
The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the minor-offence proceedings against him had not been fair, as required by Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) and (d) of the Convention.
On 3 June 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Rijeka. He is a lawyer by profession.
On 7 July 2010 while driving his car near Vrogorac, Croatia, the applicant was stopped by a police officer alleging that he had dangerously overtaken another car and that he had inappropriate tyres on his car. The police officer drew up a report on the incident.
On 6 October 2010 the applicant received a penalty notice (obvezni prekršajni nalog) dated 12 July 2010 and issued by the Dubrovnik-Neretvanska Police Department (Policijska uprava Dubrovačko-neretvanska; hereinafter: “the police”) which stated that he had committed the minor offences of dangerously overtaking another car under section 12 of the Road Traffic Safety Act, and driving a car with inappropriate tyres under section 236 of the same Act, fining him with 1,500 Croatian kunas (HRK). The statement of facts, which was printed on a form, stated that the offence had been established by the personal observations of a police officer, who had submitted a report on it.
On 7 October 2010 the applicant lodged a request for judicial review, challenging the statement that he had committed the offences and asking to be heard in court. The summary minor-offence proceedings were opened in the Vrgorac Minor Offences Court (Prekršajni sud u Metkoviću, Stalna služba u Vrgorcu).
The Vrgorac Minor Offences Court summoned the applicant for questioning on 23 February and 30 March 2011. The applicant did not appear for questioning, excusing his absence on account of professional commitments. He asked to be questioned by the Rijeka Minor Offences Court (Prekršajni sud u Rijeci) since he lived within its territorial jurisdiction.
On 3 May 2011 the Vrgorac Minor Offences Court forwarded the entire case file to the Rijeka Minor Offences Court and asked it to question the applicant, thereby also providing the applicant access to the case file.
On 17 October 2011 a judge of the Rijeka Minor Offences Court questioned the applicant. The applicant maintained his objection to the penalty notice, arguing that he had not overtaken a car at the time when he had been stopped by the police. He also contended that he had had factory tyres on his car and promised to submit a copy of the relevant documents to support that. He explained that he had no other evidence to put forward.
As the applicant failed to submit the documents concerning the tyres on his car within the relevant time-limit, on 28 October 2011 the Rijeka Minor Offences Court returned the case file to the Vrgorac Minor Offences Court.
On 21 November 2011 the Vrgorac Minor Offences Court found the applicant guilty of the charges of dangerously overtaking another car and driving a car with inappropriate tyres. The applicant was cautioned, fined with HRK 500 and ordered to pay HRK 100 in court fees. When convicting the applicant the Vrgorac Minor Offences Court relied on the police officer’s report of 7 July 2010 (see paragraph 6 above), holding that the applicant’s defence had not cast any doubt on the findings of the report.
On 2 March 2012 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske). He argued that he had never seen the police report on which the verdict was based and that he had had no opportunity to challenge the accusations contained in it. He also complained that the Vrgorac Minor Offences Court had relied solely on the report, without holding a hearing at which he could cross-examine the police officer who had drafted it.
On 2 May 2012 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded. The Constitutional Court held:
“In his constitutional complaint, the appellant was unable to show that the [Vrgorac Minor Offences Court] in the conduct of the proceedings or in the pronouncement of the judgment had acted contrary to the constitutional provisions concerning human rights and fundamental freedoms or had arbitrarily interpreted the relevant statutory provisions. The Constitutional Court therefore finds that the present case does not raise an issue in respect of the complainant’s constitutional rights. Thus, there is no constitutional law issue in the case for the Constitutional Court to decide on. ...”
The decision of the Constitutional Court was served on the applicant on 18 May 2012.
On 20 September 2012 the Vrgorac Minor Offences Court forwarded the judgment to the Rijeka Revenue Service (Porezna uprava u Rijeci) requesting that the fine be enforced. The enforcement proceedings are still pending.
The relevant provision of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010) provides:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.
In case of any criminal charge brought against him, the suspect, defendant or accused shall have the following rights ...
- to defend himself ... ,
- to be present at the hearing ... ,
- to question or to have witnesses for the prosecution questioned and to have witnesses for the defence questioned under the same conditions as witnesses for the prosecution ...”
The relevant part of the Constitutional Court Act (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 49/2002) reads as follows:
“1.  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that the individual act of a state body, a body of local or regional self-government, or a legal person with public authority, concerning his or her rights and obligations, or a suspicion or an accusation of a criminal act, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms or his or her right to local and regional self-government guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter: a constitutional right) ...
If another legal remedy exists in respect of the violation of the constitutional right [complained of], a constitutional complaint may be lodged only after that remedy has been used.”
The relevant provisions of the Road Traffic Safety Act (Zakon o sigurnosti prometa na cestama, Official Gazette nos. 67/2008, 48/2010) read:
“ ...
(4)  Drivers are obliged to comply with the limitations, prohibitions and requirements displayed on traffic signs.
...
(8)  Drivers who do not comply with paragraph 4 of this section shall be fined for a minor offence with 500 Croatian kunas.”
“(1)  Vehicles circulating on the roads must ... have up-to-date and suitable equipment.
...
(7)  A driver of a vehicle which does not meet the required standards as regards ... its tyres shall be fined for a minor offence with 1,000 Croatian kunas.”
The relevant parts of the Minor Offences Act (Prekršajni zakon, Official Gazette no. 107/2007) provide:
“A minor offence is an act which breaches the public order, social discipline or other social values and is not listed as an offence under the Criminal Code or other regulation listing offences.”
“(1)  If a fine is not fully or partially paid within the time-limit set out in the decision imposing it, such fine shall be enforced under the provisions of this Act.
(2)  If a fine is not fully or partially paid within a year after the competent body received the decision for enforcement, the competent court shall, save in the case of a legal entity or a minor, impose a sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of a fine by replacing every unpaid three hundred Croatian kunas with one day of imprisonment, taking into account that the minimum such sentence can be three days and the maximum sixty days. ...”
“(1)  The procedural rules of this Act provide regulations which ensure that proceedings before the courts and other bodies conducting minor-offence proceedings are fair, that human rights are protected, that the facts are properly assessed and that any finding of guilt of a minor offence is made lawfully, so that nobody innocent is convicted and that the perpetrator of the minor offence is sentenced.
...
(3)  In matters not regulated by this Act, taking into account the nature of minor-offence proceedings, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure shall apply accordingly.”
“(1)  In minor-offence proceedings all decisions shall be rendered by a single judge. ...”
“(1)  Summary proceedings shall be conducted:
for a minor offence punishable by a fine of up to 10,000 Croatian kunas for a physical person ...”
“(1)  The prosecutor under section 109 paragraph 1(1) and (2) of this Act shall, before instituting minor-offence proceedings, issue a penalty notice ... for:
...
the minor offences proscribed by law punishable by a fine of up to 2,000 Kunas for a physical person ...”
“(1)  An objection to a mandatory penalty notice may be lodged within eight days by:
the defendant,
the defendant’s legal representative,
[the defendant’s relatives] ... “
“(1) The objection may:
challenge the finding of guilt ,
challenge the sanction imposed and order to pay costs and expenses.
(2)  In the objection the complainant must specify the grounds on which he or she challenges the finding of guilt (e.g. that he or she did not commit the minor offence, that the act at issue is not a minor offence, that there are circumstances excluding guilt).
...”
“(1)  If the court has not rejected an objection challenging [a conviction of] a minor offence, or adopted a judgment under section 196(1)-(4) of this Act, it shall conduct summary proceedings (section 221) and adopt a judgment which shall not be subject to appeal.
(2)  If the objection relates to the sentence imposed or order to pay costs and expenses, the court shall, without holding a hearing or conducting summary proceedings, dismiss the objection and uphold the penalty notice if it finds the objection ill-founded, or lift the sanction or order to pay costs and expenses in the penalty notice by a judgment if it finds the objection wholly or partially well-founded.
(3)  The judgment under paragraph 2 of this section shall not be subject to appeal.”
Amendments to the 2007 Minor Offences Act introduced on 1 June 2013 (Official Gazette no. 39/2013) provided, inter alia, for the possibility of imposing a sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of a fine only when the fine imposed exceeded HRK 2,000 (sections 11 and 43).
The amendments are applicable to all proceedings where the enforcement of a fine imposed under the 2007 Minor Offences Act has not commenced or is still pending (section 58 § 3).
Under these amendments a mandatory penalty notice must be issued for minor offences punishable by a fine of up to HRK 5,000 for a physical person. The procedures for imposing or objecting to such a penalty remain the same as those provided for in the 2007 Minor Offences Act.