The case originated in an application (no. 7636/08) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Ms Ženija Upīte (“the applicant”), on 8 January 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. Skačkovs, a lawyer practising in Riga. The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs K. Līce.
The applicant complained that there had been a breach of the principle of impartiality set out in Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in civil proceedings before the Senate of the Supreme Court, acting as a court of cassation.
On 14 January 2013 the above complaint was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1945 and lives in Riga.
.  In the summer of 2007 a book called “Kitchen of Litigation” (Tiesāšanās kā ķēķis) was published, which contained transcripts of allegedly authentic telephone conversations between the lawyers of a wellknown law office in Latvia and judges working in various courts, including the Senate of the Supreme Court. The judiciary’s allegedly unlawful and unethical behaviour provoked considerable public debate and attracted wide media coverage. The Supreme Court and the Prosecutor General’s Office launched an inquiry (pārbaude).
.  On 17 September 2007 the Supreme Court established a working group consisting of five judges. The working group was tasked with carrying out an assessment of whether “the judges of the Supreme Court who were purportedly involved in the telephone tapping scandal, which raises doubts about the independence of the judiciary and the honesty of judges” had violated the Code of Ethics of Judges. On 8 October 2007 the working group received transcripts of the alleged telephone conversations from the Prosecutor General’s Office.
On 7 November 2007, during the annual conference of judges, the chairman of the Supreme Court made a speech about the effects of the book and the public debate which followed. He stated:
“More than two months have passed since information emerged about alleged telephone conversations between judges and a particular lawyer. That event further confirmed the conviction of at least some people in society that doubts about the impartiality and the independence of courts, and therefore the lawfulness of their judgments, are justified.
Society sees the information that was published as credible, irrespective of whether it was obtained lawfully or unlawfully and no matter what the result of the investigation carried out by the Prosecutor’s Office will be, and it undermines trust in the judiciary. ...
... I think that the information about the alleged conversations between judges and the lawyer [...] should be treated as a signal or a call to look at the problems in the judiciary in a wider context ...
... In relation to this particular situation, I think it was caused by the attitude to the rule of law and the code of ethics which regulate judges’ behaviour. The superficial, irresponsible and perhaps even the unlawful behaviour of certain judges has fundamentally affected trust in the judiciary ...
Therefore [we] should also talk about the responsibility of judges, [we] should be conscious of the fact that a lack of self-criticism and an inability to apply ethical standards properly pose a threat to the independence of the judiciary ....”
.  On an unknown date the inquiry carried out by the Prosecutor General’s Office concluded that the alleged telephone conversations had taken place between November 1998 and April 2000. As there were no audio records of the conversations, the authenticity of the content of the transcripts could not be established. In the course of the inquiry the Prosecutor General’s Office questioned several judges mentioned in the book.
With regard to Judge O.D.J., a judge of the Senate of the Supreme Court, the Prosecutor General’s Office observed that the book had referred to a brief telephone conversation of 24 November 1999 in which the lawyer A.G. had arranged a meeting in the Judge O.D.J.’s office. The impugned conversation had not referred to any specific civil case so the Prosecutor General’s Office concluded that there were insufficient grounds to investigate Judge O.D.J.’s activities.
On 30 November 2007 the working group established by the Supreme Court published a report on their inquiry into alleged ethical wrongdoing by judges. The working group identified that two of the fifteen judges, whose conduct had been assessed, had violated the Code of Ethics of Judges, but that Judge O.D.J., whose conversation with the lawyer had been published in the book, had not. It stated:
“... [12.5] In his submissions [5.5] O.D.J. did not deny that he might have had conversations [with the lawyer] but that they had only concerned German compensation claims, however in those cases [the lawyer] had not been representing any of the parties, and therefore the working group concluded that O.D.J. had not violated the Code of Ethics.”
.  In 2004 the applicant and another person brought a civil claim against a third party. On 25 January 2005 the Riga Regional court, as a firstinstance court, dismissed the claim and on 21 November 2006 the Supreme Court, acting as an appellate court, dismissed an appeal by the applicant.
.  In June 2007 the Senate of the Supreme Court granted leave to the applicant to appeal on points of law. The hearing before the cassation court was held on 29 August 2007. The Senate sat as a panel of three judges, including O.D.J. The applicant’s representative raised objections to O.D.J., arguing that the applicant had reasonable doubts as to his impartiality on the grounds that the judge was under several inquiries at the time for allegedly unethical or unlawful behavior. The applicant also alleged that the defendant’s representative was a former employee of the Supreme Court.
On 29 August 2007 the other two judges, referring to Article 19(1)(4) of the Civil Procedure Law (see paragraph 16 below), dismissed the objections. They noted that the applicant’s doubts were based only on an assumption and that the objection did not contain evidence allowing to conclude that the applicant’s doubts about the impartiality of Judge O.D.J. in the particular case were reasonable in the terms of the above provision. On the same day the Senate of the Supreme Court upheld the appellate court’s judgment on the merits by which the applicant’s claim was dismissed and it became final in that part, but referred the case back for reconsideration in part on the implementation of the judgment.
Section 14 of the Law on Judicial Power provides that a judge does not have the right to participate in the adjudication of a case if he or she, personally, directly or indirectly, has an interest in the outcome of the case, or if there are other circumstances creating well-founded reasons to question the judge’s impartiality. In such cases a judge must withdraw from the case. If a judge or a lay judge has not withdrawn from the case, anyone participating in the proceedings may request such a withdrawal according to a procedure prescribed by law.
Sections 17 and 19 of the Civil Procedure Law contain similar provisions to those stated above. In particular, Article 19(1)(4) provides that a judge cannot participate in the adjudication of a case if he or she is personally directly or indirectly interested in the outcome of the case or if there are other circumstances that give rise to reasonable doubts about his or her impartiality.
Section 479(1) of the Civil Procedure Law lists circumstances in which final judgments may be reexamined. It includes circumstances which are essential to a case and which existed at the time of examination of the proceedings, but which were not and could not have been known to the applicant.
.  The Code of Ethics of Judges, adopted on 20 April 1995, includes a provision that a judge must not create the impression that any one person has a particular status that might influence the judge.
According to a letter prepared by the Senate of the Supreme Court dated 18 April 2013 and addressed to the Government, in 2007 and the first half of 2008 several challenges against Supreme Court judges had been received from litigants in relation to the impugned book. In cases where any of the parties had been represented by lawyers mentioned in the book, the president of the Civil Cases Department of the Supreme Court excluded from sitting in cases those judges whose names also had been mentioned therein.
In April 2008 in the case of SKC-703/2008 L.P. relied on section 479(1) of the Civil Procedure Law and asked the Supreme Court to quash the final judgment adopted by the Riga Regional Court on 24 April 2016 on the grounds that two of the judges sitting in the civil case had been mentioned in the impugned book. On 27 August 2009 the Senate of the Supreme Court in a final decision dismissed the claim finding that there had been no relation between the conversations published in the book and the civil case under consideration.
Value 4 of the Bangalore Draft Code of Judicial Conduct of 2001, adopted by the Judicial Group on Strengthening Judicial Integrity, as revised at the Round Table Meeting of Chief Justices held in the Hague, November 25-26, 2002, states that a judge shall, in his or her personal relations with individual members of the legal profession who practise regularly in the judge’s court, avoid situations which might reasonably give rise to the suspicion or appearance of favouritism or partiality (paragraph 4.3.). For other principles see Harabin v. Slovakia (no. 58688/11, §§ 107108, 20 November 2012).
Paragraph 7 of the Opinion no. (2013) 16 on the relations between judges and lawyers, adopted by the Consultative Council of European Judges (CCJE) on 1315 November 2013, provides that judges and lawyers must be independent in the exercise of their duties, and must also be, and be seen to be, independent from each other, while paragraph 22 states that public confidence in the judiciary and respect for it are the guarantees of the effectiveness of the judicial system: the conduct of judges in their professional activities is understandably seen by members of the public as essential to the credibility of the courts. In this relation see also Morice v. France ([GC], no. 29369/10, § 60, 23 April 2015).