The case originated in an application (no. 60858/15) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Alexandru-Marian Iancu (“the applicant”), on 4 December 2015.
The applicant was represented by Mr V.-E. Vasilică, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Relying on Articles 3 and 6 § 1 of the Convention, the applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions of his detention had been inhuman and that the appeal bench dealing with his criminal case had not been impartial.
On 4 May 2017 notice of the above complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1965 and is currently detained in Rahova Prison.
By a decision of the prosecutor’s office attached to the High Court of Cassation and Justice of 29 September 2005, the applicant was sent to trial for continuous tax evasion and conspiracy to commit money laundering. Eight other people, including foreign citizens, were also sent to trial on similar charges. The prosecutor contended that the applicant had committed the above crimes between the years 2000 and 2003 in his capacity as manager (administrator) or director of several private commercial companies (companies A, B and C) by falsifying accounting records in relation to acquisitions of oil products in order to place illegal products on the market, as well as to evade taxes. It was alleged that the crimes had been committed in collusion with a number of other private companies dealing with the purchase and sale of oil products. The prosecutor also decided to continue to examine additional acts committed by the applicant in cooperation with other suspects separately in another file (no. 692/P/2005) because they were not connected to the facts of the particular case being considered at trial.
On 28 November 2011 the Bucharest County Court convicted the applicant of the above crimes and sentenced him to ten years’ imprisonment. The court had taken into account, when convicting the applicant, specific actions which had taken place within a set period of time, based on a number of invoices and bank transfers – all listed with their corresponding dates and numbers in the judgment. All parties appealed against that judgment.
The appeal was examined by a panel of two judges, C.B. and M.A.M., of the Bucharest Court of Appeal. The applicant requested that he be acquitted and asked the court to examine evidence collected by the prosecutors in the initial phase of the investigation and which was, by that time, the focus of case no. 692/P/2005. That evidence, which included police reports, reports from the tax authorities, and transcripts of telephone conversations between the applicant and one of the defendants in case no. 692/P/2005, proved – in the applicant’s opinion – the minor role that he had had in the administration of the companies in the case before the court and hence his innocence.
At a hearing on 15 February 2013 the court decided to disjoin the accusations concerning one of the applicant’s co-defendants, B.K.M., which fell to be examined within case no. 692/P/2005.
On 14 October 2014, after examining all the evidence, including the evidence mentioned in paragraph 8 above, and after hearing testimony from all the defendants, witnesses and injured parties, in an extensively reasoned judgment of 275 pages, the trial bench, composed of judges C.B and M.A.M., convicted the applicant of continuous tax evasion, conspiracy to commit crimes and continuous money laundering, and sentenced him to twelve years’ imprisonment.
By a decision of the prosecutor’s office attached to the High Court of Cassation and Justice of 24 August 2006, the applicant was sent to trial for being an accessory to fraud, two counts of incitement to commit abuse of office, two counts of instigation of an organised criminal group and two counts of money laundering. The prosecutor contended that the applicant had committed the above crimes between the years 2002 and 2003 in his capacity as manager (administrator) or director of several private commercial companies (namely companies A and B, mentioned in paragraph 6 above, and, in addition, companies E, F and G) thereby causing significant damage to the state budget in the context of the privatisation of a state-owned company (company D). Company D’s main activity was the production of synthetic rubber. Five other people were also sent to trial on similar charges.
On 16 December 2014 the Bucharest County Court convicted the applicant of the above-mentioned crimes and sentenced him to thirteen years and eight months’ imprisonment. All parties appealed against the judgment.
The appeal hearings started before a two-judge panel of the Bucharest Court of Appeal, composed of D.D. and C.B.
At the first appeal hearing, which took place on 11 May 2015, the prosecution requested that, in the interests of justice and to solve the civil aspects of the case, the matter should be examined in the light of the first set of proceedings, which had been finalised by the judgment of 14 October 2014 (see paragraphs 6-10 above). That request was granted and case file no. 171/P/2003 was attached to the case file already before the Court of Appeal.
On 15 May 2015 one of the defendants challenged the appeal panel for bias, claiming that judge C.B. had previously taken a decision in case no. 171/P/2003 which was connected to the case before the court at that time. In addition, it was alleged that judge D.D. had already expressed his opinion on the defendants’ guilt.
On 20 May 2015 a panel of two other judges of the Bucharest Court of Appeal decided to allow the challenge, having heard from the legal representatives and the prosecutor in a hearing held in chambers. Quoting the case-law of the Court and other European materials extensively, the decision held that there were justified doubts as regards the two judges’ impartiality.
The doubts were firstly based on the manner in which the proceedings had been conducted by the two judges during the first two appeal hearings. More specifically, the fact that the prosecution had submitted their grounds for appeal after the designation of the appeal bench and those grounds quoted extensively the opinion of judge C.B. on the issue of confiscation, an opinion which she had made public on various occasions; the fact that a very short adjournment of only three days had been given to the defendants who, at the first appeal hearing, had requested more time to prepare their response; and the fact that certain measures had been ordered at the first appeal hearing without these having first been discussed with the parties. It was also noted that the president of the panel had stated during the same hearing that “we are informing you from the outset that this is a very old case concerning acts which either have already become statute-barred or which are about to become statute-barred, as held by the lower court, so we shall grant very short adjournments, hoping to resolve the case as soon as possible ...” It was considered that this statement created the impression that judge D.D. had adopted the opinion of the lower court on the application of the statute of limitations, which was another element which cast doubt on the impartiality of that particular judge.
Subsequently, as regards judge C.B., it was held that, when she had allowed case no. 171/P/2003 to be joined to the case subject to the appeal, she had implicitly admitted that there was a strong connection between the two cases. This proved that she already had an opinion on the case being appealed. Moreover, the connection between the two cases was clear since certain evidence collected by the investigators (including an expert report and the financial documents of the companies under the control of the defendants) was common to both cases. It was further noted that legal doctrine had shown that “a judge who had given a certain judgment on a case, would find it difficult to change that opinion, even in the presence of new elements.”
In view of the above elements, it was decided that there was a reasonable suspicion that the two judges’ impartiality could have been affected and they were disqualified from acting on the basis that they were incompatible with the impartial examination of the case, under Article 64 (1) (f) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) (see paragraph 38 below). It was ordered that the case be randomly distributed to another appeal panel.
Following the above decision, the case was allocated to another panel, composed of judges M.A.M. and T.G.
On 2 June 2015 judge M.A.M. asked to withdraw from the case on the following grounds:
“The reason for the following request is that I was a member of the appeal panel which delivered judgment no. 1207/14.10.2014 of the Bucharest Court of Appeal ..., concerning, among others, the defendant Alexandru-Marian Iancu.
Although the offences on which the above-mentioned judgment was based were different from those of the current case, in order to eliminate any suspicion concerning my possible lack of impartiality in solving the current case, I submit this withdrawal request, on the basis of Article 64 (1) (f) CCP.”
On 2 June 2015, in a hearing held in chambers, a two-judge panel of the Bucharest Court of Appeal, composed of T.G. and B.O. – who was one of the duty judges for procedural requests that week – dismissed the withdrawal request, holding that there were no reasons to doubt the impartiality of judge M.A.M.
The grounds for this decision were set out in a ten-page interlocutory judgment in which it was held that the principles of a fair trial being held within a reasonable time, the random distribution of cases and the continuity of the trial bench are absolute and any exceptions must be thoroughly justified. The mere fact that the judge in question had taken part in the examination of the case and the adoption of the judgment of 14 October 2014 could not raise a reasonable suspicion that his impartiality would be affected, since the two cases concerned different criminal offences and different accused (with the exception of the applicant and one other).
Quoting the case-law of the Court, the judges went on to examine the crimes on trial in the two sets of proceedings and concluded that the sole connection between them was that the investigation had initially started in the same criminal file but then, in view of the fact that there was no connection between the various crimes, they had been disjoined, leaving two separate files. Moreover, after examination of the two cases in question, no proof was found to support the idea that judge M.A.M. had expressed, in the first case, an opinion on the guilt of any of the accused of the case currently on trial. In addition, the judgment read as follows as regards the use of evidence common to the two cases:
“As regards the administration of the evidence in the current case, the lawfulness, relevance and usefulness of the evidence must be examined in connection with the facts and subjects of each case; it cannot be held, ab initio, that in the current case the use of an expert report, which had been drafted in the context of a complex matter, concerning a large number of activities under investigation, amounted to a ‘prejudgment’ on the existence of all the crimes for which the accused had been sent to trial or on their guilt.”
The appeal proceedings then resumed before the panel composed of judges M.A.M. and T.G.
At the next hearing, on 3 June 2015, the applicant’s representative challenged the two judges of the panel for bias, complaining that there were two contradictory judgments on the impartiality of the judges examining the case: the judgment of 20 May 2015 declaring judge C.B. disqualified on the grounds of incompatibility with the impartial examination of the case and the judgment of 2 June 2015 rejecting the request for withdrawal lodged by judge M.A.M. He requested that the two judgments be put before another panel of judges to be reconciled. Other co-defendants also challenged judge M.A.M. for bias, alleging that the same reasons for which C.B. had been disqualified also applied in M.A.M.’s case, since he had been part, alongside C.B., of the same panel which adopted the judgment of 14 October 2014. The prosecutor asked the court to dismiss those challenges, arguing that there was no contradiction between the decisions taken on the impartiality of the judges determining the case. The appeal panel, presided by M.A.M., decided to reject the challenges, holding that they raised the same facts and reasons which had already been extensively examined in the judgment adopted in respect of M.A.M.’s withdrawal request. As regards judge T.G., it was held that the new Code of Criminal Procedure provided that an application for the recusal of a judge who has been called to decide a challenge for bias or a withdrawal was inadmissible (see paragraph 38 below).
The next hearing was set for 4 June 2015. During that hearing, the applicant’s representative challenged the whole panel for bias once more, arguing that the previous challenges for bias and the request for withdrawal should not have been examined by the same judges who were the subject of the challenge. The prosecution submitted that the challenge was inadmissible based on Article 67 (5) of the CCP for identical reasons to the previous challenges. The panel held that the reasons for rejecting the challenges, as set out in the record of the previous hearing, were still valid and were not to be re-examined. Therefore the challenge was dismissed as inadmissible.
On 8 June 2015 the Bucharest Court of Appeal, in a panel composed of judges M.A.M. and T.G., convicted the applicant with final effect of being an accessory to fraud, two counts of incitement to commit abuse of office with extremely serious consequences, instigation of an organised criminal group and two counts of money laundering, and sentenced him to fourteen years’ imprisonment. The other defendants, including B.K.M. (see paragraph 9 above), were convicted of similar crimes. When convicting the applicant, the court had taken into account specific actions which had taken place on certain dates based on a number of contracts, invoices and bank transfers, which were all listed with their corresponding dates and numbers in the judgment and were different from the ones on which the judgments in the first set of proceedings had been based.
On 8 and 16 June 2015 three of the defendants in the second set of proceedings lodged a request before the High Court of Cassation and Justice for a change in venue for their appeals based on their suspicions of a lack of impartiality on the part of the judges of the Bucharest Court of Appeal.
On 16 June 2015 the High Court of Cassation and Justice informed the president of the Bucharest Court of Appeal of the request and asked for clarification, as required by the appropriate procedure.
On 29 June 2015 the vice-president of the Bucharest Court of Appeal responded to the High Court of Cassation and Justice as follows:
“It is true that the suspicions of lack of impartiality as regards a member of the trial panel should have been dissipated by an adequate resolution on M.A.M.’s withdrawal.
In the current situation (the judgment being final), the only procedural solution would be to allow the request, quash the judgment and change the venue of the case to another court of appeal, thereby dissipating any suspicions as to the lack of impartiality of the judges of the court where the appeal was decided.
Finally, the suspicions as to the judges’ impartiality were amplified by the fact that, after the dismissal of M.A.M.’s withdrawal request, the appeal panel changed the date of the hearing set for 17 June 2015 to 3 June 2015, and set the following hearing on 4 June 2015, within a very short period.
Therefore, in order to avoid a possible judgment by the ECHR for a breach of Article 6 of the Convention, followed by the need for a revision of the conviction judgment after the execution of a long part of the sentence, the above suggestion would be more appropriate.”
On 16 July 2015 the High Court of Cassation and Justice rejected the request as the reasons advanced did not justify a change of venue of the appeals.
On 3 July 2015 the applicant lodged a complaint before the Superior Council of Magistracy (“the SCM”) – the body responsible for management and disciplinary matters within the judiciary – arguing, among other things, that the legal provisions governing the disqualification of judges on incompatibility grounds had been breached in the proceedings on his appeal, as finalised by the judgment of 8 June 2015.
On 23 September 2015 the Judicial Inspection Department of the SCM, after reviewing the entries in the electronic database for the file in question as well as information sent by the Bucharest Court of Appeal, found that the legal provisions and the internal regulations concerning the random distribution of files and the formation of the trial benches had been respected. All requests for recusal or withdrawal had been examined and resolved in accordance with the law, in thoroughly reasoned decisions. The specific argument concerning the participation of judge M.A.M. in previous proceedings in which he had convicted the applicant, had been thoroughly examined and rejected in accordance with the law. The remaining arguments concerning the conduct of the appeal, such as the period between the hearings being excessively short, concerns regarding certain procedural measures or decisions taken by the judges during appeal hearings, and the evidence having been wrongfully assessed, were considered issues connected to the merits of the case that could not be the subject of a verification exercise by the SCM. Nevertheless, it was held that the conviction judgment of 8 June 2015 had been thoroughly reasoned and based on the relevant legal provisions.
During the hearing of 4 June 2015 the applicant, who had insisted on challenging judge M.A.M. and who had disobeyed the court’s order to remain silent, was found in contempt of court and removed from the courtroom.
The applicant alleged that after his removal from the courtroom he had been held in the detention facilities of the Bucharest Court of Appeal in an insalubrious cell, infested with bugs, without ventilation, with a ceiling a little higher than two meters, without furniture and without being given water or food.
The Government submitted a letter from the administrative department of the Bucharest Court of Appeal explaining that their detention facilities consist of several cells provided with toilets, sinks, running water, a ventilation system, heating, artificial lighting and benches. The cells were cleaned on a daily basis. On 4 June 2015 the applicant was held alone in a cell of approximately 5 sq. m. with all the above-listed facilities for approximately seven hours. In addition, documents from the Rahova prison authorities noted that the applicant had had breakfast before leaving the prison and had been able to take his own food with him. In accordance with prison regulations, he could have filed a request with the prison administration to be provided with solid food for the day he was about to spend outside the prison but he had failed to do so.
The relevant provisions of the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“(1) A judge is disqualified from acting on incompatibility grounds:
a) if he was the representative or the lawyer of one of the parties or of a main subject of the trial, even in another case;
b) if he is a relative or related by affinity, up to the fourth degree, or finds himself in one of the situations mentioned in Article 177 of the Criminal Code with one of the parties, with a main subject of the trial or with their lawyer or representative;
c) if he was an expert or a witness in the case;
d) if he is the legal guardian of one of the parties or of a main subject of the trial;
e) if in the same criminal case he has carried out any measures during the investigation or has participated as a prosecutor in any proceedings before a judge or a court;
f) if there is a reasonable suspicion of bias on his part. ...
(3) A judge who has taken part in the delivery of a decision cannot be involved in the delivery of a judgment in respect of the same case by means of an appeal or in a retrial of the same case after the quashing of the decision in question. ...”
“(1) Persons affected by incompatibility grounds are obliged to inform the president of the court, the case prosecutor or the hierarchically superior prosecutor, that they intend to withdraw from the examination of a case and to disclose the reasons for their withdrawal.”
“(1) In the event that the person who is disqualified from acting did not withdraw, the parties, the main subjects of the trial, or the prosecutor may file an application for recusal, as soon as they find out about the existence of an incompatibility ground.
(2) ... An application for the recusal of the judge or prosecutor who has been called to decide upon the recusal application in respect of another judge is inadmissible. ...
(4) The recusal application must be formulated orally or in writing, indicating separately for each person concerned, the disqualification grounds and the factual grounds on which the application is based as known at the time of the application. ...
(5) A recusal application which does not respect the conditions set forth in paragraphs 2-4 above or which has been lodged in respect of the same person for the same reasons and based on the same factual grounds as the ones relied on in a previous request that has already been rejected is inadmissible. The inadmissibility of such a request shall be decided by the prosecutor or the trial panel to which the request was submitted. ...”
“(2) The withdrawal or recusal of a judge who is part of a panel shall be examined by another panel. ...
(5) A decision on the withdrawal or recusal shall be delivered in chambers, within a maximum of twenty-four hours of the request. If it is considered necessary, the judge or panel may carry out any verification required and may hear arguments from the prosecutor, the main subjects of the trial, the parties and the person who is the subject of the withdrawal or recusal application. ...
(7) The interlocutory judgment by which the withdrawal or recusal is determined is not subject to any appeal.”
The High Court of Cassation and Justice, in a decision no. 17/2012, published in the Official Journal on 6 December 2012, examined an appeal lodged in the interests of law, and held that a judge who has determined a case in accordance with the simplified procedure for the admission of guilt as regards one of the defendants, does not become automatically disqualified from determining the case as regards the remaining defendants, in a case where all defendants have been sent to trial by the same decision of the prosecutor for connected crimes. The judge’s position becomes incompatible with an impartial examination of the case only if he has expressed his opinion as regards the outcome to be adopted for the remaining defendants in the reasoning of the judgment delivered in the admission of guilt proceedings.
The Court conducted a comparative study of the legislation of twenty-eight member States of the Council of Europe (Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Lithuania, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine and the United Kingdom). The comparative study suggests that in the criminal legal systems of all these member States there are four common grounds requiring the withdrawal of judges:
(a) if the judge in question is a victim of the offence at issue;
(b) if the judge had or has a relationship (as a spouse or relative up to the third degree) with the accused, the victim or any person participating in the proceedings;
(c) if the judge has previously been involved in the case in a different capacity (for example as a prosecutor, police officer, legal representative, witness, and so on);
(d) if the judge has previously participated in the examination of the case in his or her function as a judge, for example, if he or she has issued a ruling concerning arrest or detention as a preliminary investigation judge.
In seventeen member States, including Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, France, Germany, Italy and Poland, the relevant criminal codes lay down a general clause which requires a judge to withdraw in all other circumstances which may cast doubt on his or her impartiality. In addition, in France a judge must withdraw if there have been other legal proceedings between him or her, or one of his or her close relatives, and one of the participants in the proceedings or one of his or her close relatives and also if the judge is involved in proceedings in a court where one of those participants is a judge. In Italy a judge must also withdraw if he or she has a financial interest in the proceedings or if any of the parties or the legal representatives is a debtor or creditor in respect of him or her, or his or her spouse or children.
In most States an application for withdrawal lodged by a member of a panel of judges is examined in chambers by another panel which does not include the judge in question. In Austria, Norway and Estonia the withdrawal application is examined by the president of the court.
In only eight member States (Azerbaijan, Croatia, Estonia, Finland, Norway, Poland, Slovenia and Sweden) is there a legal obligation to give reasons for the dismissal of an application for withdrawal. In thirteen member States (Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Czech Republic, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, North Macedonia, Portugal, Russian Federation, Spain, Turkey and the United Kingdom) such an obligation is not explicitly provided for but can be inferred from the relevant legal framework. In Belgium, Bulgaria, France, Italy and Lithuania there is no legal obligation, either explicit or inferred, to give reasons for the dismissal of an application for withdrawal.
Relevant international materials concerning the impartiality of judges can be found in the judgment in the case of Harabin v. Slovakia (no. 58688/11, §§ 104-10, 20 November 2012).