The case originated in an application (no. 47938/07) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Lilija Talmane (“the applicant”), on 10 October 2007.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Kalniņa, a lawyer practising in Riga. The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mrs I. Reine, and subsequently Mrs K. Līce.
The applicant alleged that the refusal of the Senate of the Supreme Court to examine her appeal on points of law without a reasoned decision infringed her right to a fair hearing.
On 15 January 2009 the above complaint was communicated to the Government of the Republic of Latvia. The Government of the Russian Federation did not exercise their right to intervene in the above case as a third party.
.  The applicant was born in 1966. At the time she submitted her complaint she lived in Madona Region, Latvia.
.  On 17 November 2006 the Madona District Court, acting as a firstinstance court, found the applicant guilty of a traffic offence which had caused moderate bodily injury to a victim. The court ordered the applicant to perform 100 hours of community service and suspended her driving licence for a year.
In establishing the applicant’s guilt, the first-instance court relied on incriminating statements by the victim and two witnesses. It also relied on other evidence, including a medical expert opinion on the bodily injuries sustained by the victim.
The applicant appealed against the judgment to the Vidzeme Regional Court. She alleged, inter alia, that the first instance court had failed to order an inspection and a technical examination of her vehicle, and had also not carried out a confrontation of witnesses.
On 13 February 2007 the Vidzeme Regional Court upheld the judgment of the first-instance court but changed in part the punishment by revoking the suspension of the applicant’s driving licence.
.  On 8 March 2007 the applicant submitted an appeal on points of law to the Senate of the Supreme Court. She alleged that the appellate court had failed to carry out and to order a number of investigating activities. Specifically, according to the applicant, the appellate court has not carried out a confrontation between the witnesses and the victim. It has not ordered an investigative experiment, an inspection and a technical examination of her vehicle.
The applicant maintained that the evidence in the case was not sufficient to establish her guilt, and thus the appeal court had acted contrary to numerous sections of the Criminal Procedure Law.
In a letter dated 11 April 2007 a judge of the Senate of the Supreme Court informed the applicant that on 11 April 2007 her appeal on points of law was not admitted for examination in the cassation proceedings. It relied on section 573 of the Criminal Procedure Law and stated that “[the appeal on points of law] was not substantiated by any fundamental infringement of the Criminal Law or the Law on Criminal Procedure”. It was also stated that it was not within the competence of the cassation court to re-examine or obtain evidence, or to explain the factual circumstances of the case.
Relevant provisions of Chapter 63 of the Criminal Procedure Law (CPL) on the review of judgments and decisions which have entered into force have been summarised in the case of Dāvidsons and Savins v. Latvia, nos. 17574/07 and 25235/07, §§ 24-26, 7 January 2016.
Section 569 provides that cassation proceedings may be instituted by means of submitting to the Senate of the Supreme Court an appeal on points of law with regard to the legality of an appellate court’s judgment or decision that has not yet entered into force. The cassation court shall not reexamine evidence.
Section 573 of the CPL provides that the legality of a judgment or decision shall be examined in accordance with procedures regulating cassation proceedings only in cases where the complaints in the appeal on points of law have been substantiated with reference to a violation of the Criminal Law or a fundamental violation of the CPL.
With the amendments which entered into force on 1 July 2009, section 573 was supplemented with additional paragraphs, which provide that a judge rapporteur appointed by the President of the Senate of the Supreme Court shall decide on whether a judgment or decision shall be subjected to examination on points of law. The decision is adopted in the form of a written resolution on the appeal on points of law, and that decision is final.
Section 575 provides as follows:
“(1) Fundamental violations of the Criminal Procedure Law are violations which lead to revocation of a court judgment or decision in the event that:
1) a court has adjudicated a case in an unlawful composition;
2) there has been a failure to comply with the conditions that exclude the participation of a judge in the adjudication of a criminal case;
3) a case has been adjudicated in the absence of the accused or individuals involved in the proceedings, if the participation of the accused and of those individuals is mandatory under this Law;
4) the right of the accused to use a language that he or she understands, and to have the assistance of an interpreter, has been violated;
5) the accused was not given the opportunity to make a defence speech or was not given the opportunity to have the last word;
6) there is no transcript of a court hearing, in a case where a transcript is mandatory;
7) in rendering a judgment, the secrecy of court deliberations has been violated.
(2) The expulsion of an accused or victim from a courtroom may be recognised as a substantial violation of this Law, if the expulsion was unjustified, and if the expulsion has substantially restricted the procedural rights of such persons, and, therefore, led to an unlawful adjudication.
(3) Other violations of this Law that [have] led to adoption of an unlawful judgment or decision may also be recognised as fundamental violations of this Law.”