The case originated in an application (no. 69019/11) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Ms Ilona Zirnīte (“the applicant”), on 7 November 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Vārpiņš, a lawyer practising in Riga. The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Līce.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the appellate court’s refusal to examine the witness who the applicant claimed was the principal witness in the case and the resulting prohibition to rely on that witness’ pre-trial testimony had violated her right to a fair trial, guaranteed under Article 6 of the Convention. She further submitted that the criminal penalty of confiscation of her legally acquired property had disproportionately infringed her right of property, in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
On 13 February 2013 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1977 and lives in Riga.
The applicant was the sole owner of a limited-liability company, SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams, whose only asset was an apartment building located in the centre of Riga. In 2005 the applicant and M.R. were negotiating a sale of that apartment building, to be effected via the sale of the company.
In September 2005 the applicant sought a short-term loan of 210,000 euros (EUR) from a bank in order to purchase a property in France. The bank agreed to lend the money to SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams instead. The loan agreement between the bank and SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams was concluded on 28 September 2005 and was conditional on the conclusion of an escrow agreement concerning the sale of the company.
On 3 October 2005 an additional audit of SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams was carried out on M.R.’s request in the light of the loan. According to the Government and the position M.R. maintained before the domestic courts, in view of the loan the purchase price was increased from EUR 5,200,000 to EUR 5,400,000. The applicant maintained that the purchase price had always been set at EUR 5,400,000.
In the evening of 3 October 2005 the applicant, acting as the representative of SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams, requested the bank to transfer EUR 208,000 from the account of SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams to her private bank account. At that time the company’s account contained no funds. The applicant did not inform the auditors or M.R. of the request for the bank transfer.
On 4 October 2005 the escrow agreement was concluded. Immediately afterwards SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams was sold to M.R. and the purchase price of EUR 5,400,000 was transferred to the escrow account. Thereupon, on the basis of the loan agreement of 28 September 2005, the bank transferred EUR 210,000 to SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams. As soon as the money reached the company’s account, the bank, on the basis of the applicant’s request of 3 October 2005, transferred EUR 208,000 to her private account. The applicant used that money to purchase a Deutsche Bank banker’s cheque, which she later used to purchase a property in France.
On 17 October 2005 the formalities relating to the sale of the company were completed and the purchase price – minus the money the company owed to the bank – was transferred to the applicant’s private bank account.
On 22 February 2006 SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams brought civil proceedings against the applicant, seeking that she repay the company the sum of EUR 208,000, that is the money that had been transferred to the applicant’s private account on 4 October 2005. The applicant submitted a counterclaim for EUR 210,000 asserting that on 17 October 2005 SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams’ loan to the bank had been repaid from her funds. The case was examined before three levels of jurisdiction, and by a final decision of 11 June 2008 the claim against the applicant was upheld and her counterclaim was dismissed. The applicant was ordered to repay the company the equivalent of EUR 208,000 in Latvian lati (LVL) and to compensate the company for its costs and expenses. The applicant has complied with this ruling.
On 1 March 2006 criminal proceedings were instituted concerning the above-mentioned chain of transactions. The applicant, M.R. and other witnesses gave statements on numerous occasions. On 7 July 2006 the police organised a pre-trial confrontation between the applicant and M.R.
On 16 April 2007 the applicant was charged with large-scale misappropriation of funds and on 29 October 2007 also with large-scale money laundering.
On 5 November 2007 the investigator imposed a restriction against the title to two immovable properties belonging to the applicant, effectively seizing them (uzlika arestu). One of those properties was a manor called Bramberģes pils.
The Riga Regional Court, examining the case as a first-instance court, heard evidence from the applicant and eleven witnesses, including M.R., who was cross-examined by the applicant’s lawyer. It also heard evidence from V.R. – M.R’s husband – who had participated in all the negotiations concerning the purchase of SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams. Both V.R. and M.R. acted as the representatives of SIA Raiņa bulvāra nams which had the status of a victim in the proceedings (hereafter “the victim company”). The Riga Regional Court observed that M.R.’s and V.R.’s testimony was identical. In particular, they had both testified that the purchase price of the victim company had been raised from EUR 5.2 million to EUR 5.4 million to take into account the loan the victim company was taking from the bank. M.R. had not been happy about the fact that the loan was being taken but could not have prevented it as at that time the applicant had still been the sole owner of the victim company. The loaned money would have remained part of the victim company’s assets and could have been used for renovations. In view of the loan, they had carried out an additional audit of the victim company but neither they, nor the auditors, had been informed of the 3 October 2005 request to transfer the loaned money to the applicant.
Both the applicant and the Government asserted that the Riga Regional Court also read out M.R.’s pre-trial statements. This fact is not reflected in the minutes of the hearing or confirmed by any other material in the case. The applicant maintained that this omission was due to a clerical error. As to the cross-examination, while the applicant’s lawyer did put questions to M.R., minutes of the hearing do not suggest that he confronted her about the statements made during the pre-trial proceedings.
On 19 August 2009 the Riga Regional Court acquitted the applicant of both charges. While it considered that the factual basis of the charges had been established, it was unable to make a finding on the mens rea required for the conviction. In particular, the applicant had acted on the advice of a bank employee and it could not be established beyond reasonable doubt that she had intended to misappropriate the funds.
The prosecutor and the victim company lodged an appeal.
The Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court, acting as an appellate court, examined the case in an oral hearing. The applicant, her lawyer, and two representatives of the victim company (V.R. and a lawyer) were present throughout the proceedings. V.R. was examined by the appellate court and was also cross-examined by the applicant’s representative. The applicant did not make use of her right to give a further statement but she did respond to the court’s questions. According to the minutes of the hearing, the appellate court then proceeded to review the relevant case material, including the testimony given by M.R. and other witnesses before the first-instance courts; M.R.’s request to the police and its addenda; and the minutes of the pre-trial confrontation between M.R. and the applicant. The Government maintained that the appellate court also reviewed M.R.’s pre-trial statements; however, this assertion finds no support in the case-file.
According to the applicant’s submissions, which are contested by the Government, during his closing arguments the applicant’s lawyer had been prevented from relying on M.R.’s pre-trial statements, as they had not been reviewed by the court. The minutes of the hearing show that following a question by the court the applicant’s lawyer requested the court to reopen the court investigation stage of the hearing on the grounds that he had referred to evidence that had not been reviewed. He also requested a recess to prepare his request in writing. Following the recess he submitted a written request to call three witnesses, including M.R. He indicated that he had referred to M.R.’s pre-trial statements, which had not been reviewed by the court but were part of the criminal case file. It was necessary to refer to those statements as the victim company had relied on them in its appeal. In response, the victim company’s lawyer withdrew the relevant part of its appeal. Responding to the appellate court’s question, the applicant’s lawyer stated that he had cross-examined those witnesses before the first-instance court. As to the necessity of a repeated examination, he submitted that during the pre-trial investigation M.R. had testified that she had not needed the loan of EUR 200,000.
After having deliberated in chambers, the appellate court dismissed the request to reopen the court investigation stage. It noted that it had no doubts about the completeness of the examination of those witnesses before the first-instance court with respect to the circumstances that were relevant to the case. This was shown by, inter alia, the failure of the parties to the proceedings to request the examination of the pre-trial statements of those witnesses – a step they had had the right to take after having received the victim company’s appeal. Furthermore, the victim company’s lawyer had withdrawn its appeal in so far as it referred to testimony that had not been reviewed by the first-instance court, and the appellate court had no grounds to extend the scope of the appeal.
On 26 November 2010 the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court delivered a judgment whereby it quashed the judgment of the first-instance court and found the applicant guilty on both charges. The Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court took into account, in particular, that M.R., V.R., the victim’s lawyer and two bank employees had consistently testified that the purchase price of the company had been raised from EUR 5.2 million to EUR 5.4 million on the understanding that after the completion of the sale there would be EUR 210,000 in the company’s bank account. That had been confirmed by several documents in the case file. Thus, the appellate court dismissed the applicant’s assertions that the price had always been set at EUR 5.4 million and that it had been she who had covered the company’s loan to the bank. The appellate court also noted that both during the confrontation in the pre-trial proceedings and during the appeal hearing the applicant had acknowledged that she had failed to inform M.R. of the money transfer from the victim company’s account to her private account. With respect to mens rea, the appellate court inferred an intent on the part of the applicant to misappropriate the funds from certain aspects of her conduct (such as filing the request to transfer the money from the victim company’s account to her private account at such a moment that ensured it would be effected when she no longer represented the company; requesting the transfer in contravention of the conditions of the loan agreement between the bank and the victim company; and failing to inform either M.R. or the auditor of the request). Finally, the applicant was found guilty of money laundering on the basis of the fact that she had used the misappropriated funds to purchase the Deutsche Bank cheque, which she later used to purchase a property in France.
After finding that there were no mitigating or extenuating circumstances, the Supreme Court decided to impose a suspended prison term of six years. The Supreme Court also ordered the confiscation of the applicant’s property, providing the following reasoning:
“Taking into consideration that reparation has been made for the damage [and] that two minor children are under I. Zirnīte’s care, the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court finds that a partial confiscation of property should be applied to I. Zirnīte, by confiscating the property over which a restriction was registered [uzlikts arests] in the course of the criminal proceedings”.
The operative part of the judgment specified that the property to be confiscated was the manor Bramberģes pils.
On 10 May 2011 the Senate of the Supreme Court adopted the final decision, dismissing an appeal on points of law by the applicant.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution, the General Part of the Criminal Law and the Criminal Procedure Law have been summarised in Markus v. Latvia (no. 17483/10, §§ 31-36 and §§ 39-40, 11 June 2020).
Section 179 of the Criminal Law provides for criminal liability for misappropriation of funds. At the time when it was applied to the applicant it was worded as follows:
 “(1)  For unlawfully acquiring or squandering property, if committed by a person to whom such property has been entrusted or in whose charge it has been placed (misappropriation), –
the punishment shall be deprivation of liberty for up to five years, detention, confiscation of property, community service, or a fine of up to fifty times the minimum wage.
...
(3) For misappropriation, if committed on a large scale ..., –
the punishment shall be deprivation of liberty for six to fifteen years, with confiscation of property.”
Section 195 of the Criminal Law provides for criminal liability for money laundering. At the time when it was applied to the applicant it was worded as follows:
 “(1)  For legalising criminally acquired financial resources or other property, –
the punishment shall be deprivation of liberty for up to three years or a fine of up to a hundred times the minimum wage, with or without confiscation of property.
...
(3)  For actions referred to in subsections 1 or 2 of this section, if they have been committed on a large scale ..., –
the punishment shall be deprivation of liberty for five to twelve years, with confiscation of property, and with or without police supervision for a period of up to three years.”
Section 549 of the Criminal Procedure Law provides that an appeal against a judgment of the first-instance court may be lodged both on factual and on legal grounds. Section 562(1) limits the appellate court’s review to the scope of the appeal, except in situations when the appellate court calls into question the first-instance court’s findings on guilt or aggravating circumstances. Sections 562(4) and 565(3)(2) of the Criminal Procedure Law give the appellate court the competence to convict a person who has been acquitted by the first-instance court if the acquittal has been appealed by the prosecutor or, in certain cases, by the victim.
Sections 560(1) and 560(2) of the Criminal Procedure Law provide that persons who are neither parties to the proceedings nor their representatives may be summoned to an appeal hearing if such a request has been made in the appeal and the persons concerned have not been examined before the first-instance court. The appellate court may, on its own initiative, summon persons who have been examined by the first-instance court if it has reasonable doubts about the completeness of their evidence given before the first-instance court or about the potential guilt of the accused.
On 21 April 2010 on the basis of a constitutional complaint lodged by Mr D. Markus, the Constitutional Court instituted proceedings concerning the compatibility of the ancillary punishment of property confiscation with the right of property (case no. 2010-31-01). Mr Markus challenged the Criminal Law provision that imposed that punishment for the crime of bribery. While the Constitutional Court found that there were “serious deficiencies” in the legal regulation for imposing and enforcing the punishment, as well as divergences in its application, it considered that those issues could not be resolved by reviewing the specific provision of the Specific Part of the Criminal Law in isolation. Instead, the confiscation punishment had to be assessed by analysing the provisions of the General Part of the Criminal Law. Since the applicant had not challenged the pertinent legal provisions, the Constitutional Court by its decision of 6 January 2011 discontinued the proceedings (for more details on the Constitutional Court’s reasoning see Markus v. Latvia, cited above, §§ 1523). Following this judgment the relevant legislation was notably altered, particularly by the 13 December 2012 amendments to the Criminal Law that took effect on 1 April 2013.
On 8 April 2015 the Constitutional Court delivered a judgment on the amended regulation of the ancillary punishment of property confiscation in a case that had been instituted on the basis of a constitutional complaint lodged by R.K. (case no. 2014-34-01). R.K. had challenged the constitutionality of section 36(2)(1) and section 42 of the Criminal Law, as well as the section of the Specific Part of the Criminal Law that imposed the confiscation punishment for the crime of fraud. The Constitutional Court examined the merits of the complaint and found that the challenged legal provisions, as formulated following the amendments, were compatible with the right of property (for a summary of the Constitutional Court’s reasoning see Markus v. Latvia, cited above, §§ 41-42).
The applicant submitted two decisions of the Constitutional Court, which, according to her, showed that the Constitutional Court did not examine complaints about the severity of a criminal punishment. By its decision of 12 December 2008 the Constitutional Court had refused to institute proceedings on the basis of an application by H.I. whereby he had challenged solely the provision of the Specific Part of the Criminal Law that provided for criminal liability for conducting illegal activities with financial instruments. On 7 January 2009 the Constitutional Court had refused to institute proceedings on the basis of a repeated application by H.I. concerning the same legal provision. In his applications H.I. had complained of the weight of the sanction for the particular crime prosecuted, as well as of the fact that the sanction for conducting illegal activities with financial instruments was heavier than for other criminal offences.