The case originated in four applications (nos. 5623/09, 12460/09, 33656/09 and 20758/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by seven Russian nationals (“the applicants”), whose details are tabulated in the Appendix.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants complained about the quashing by way of the supervisory review procedure in force between 2008 and 2012 of domestic judgments delivered in their favour and deemed final and enforceable under the domestic procedural law.
On 27 March 2013 the applications were communicated to the Government.
.  The applicants were claimants in civil proceedings.
.  In the applications Trapeznikov v. Russia and Bychkov and Others v. Russia, the applicants were former participants of the Chernobyl clean-up operation who sued the relevant authorities for an inflation adjustment to their social benefits.
.  In the application Markova v. Russia, the applicant sought the eviction of her late son’s wife and her granddaughter from the flat she was living in, alleging that she was the sole owner because her son had renounced his share in the flat in her favour.
.  In the application Ryabchikov v. Russia, the applicant inherited a house in accordance with a will drawn up by his late mother. Later he discovered that she had two plots of land which she transferred back in 1994 to an agricultural company to which she was a member. The applicant sought to recover the property of these two plots of land alleging that the transfer had not been duly formalised and that consequently the land formed part of his inheritance.
.  In all of the applications, the first-instance courts found for the applicants, the judgments were upheld on appeal and they became enforceable. Subsequently, at the defendants’ requests, the presidia of the relevant regional courts quashed the judgments by way of supervisory review. In the applications Trapeznikov and Bychkov and Others, the presidia found that the lower courts failed to take into account the specific method of calculation of indexation established by the Government for this particular category of social benefits. In the applications Markova and Ryabchikov, they concluded that the findings of the lower courts favorable to the applicants were based on the retrospective application of the law (see Appendix).
.  The avenues of appeal in Russia, particularly the supervisory review procedure, have been amended repeatedly over the years.
.  Under Russian procedural law, domestic judgments are deemed to be final and enforceable after the statutory time-limit for appeal has expired or the appellate court has delivered its judgment.
.  Before 2012 such judgments were amenable to supervisory review by higher judicial instances at three consecutive levels, namely the presidia of the regional courts, the Civil Chamber of the Supreme Court and the Presidium of the Supreme Court. A supervisory review application could be lodged irrespective of whether the judgment complained of had been previously challenged on appeal (this was changed in 2008, see paragraph 15 below). At each level, the admissibility of the supervisory review application was first decided by a single judge, whose decision to dismiss it could be complained about to the president of that court, who had unfettered powers to decide otherwise (the presidents’ unfettered powers were abolished at regional level in 2008, see paragraph 15 below).
In particular, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) in force until 1 February 2003 governing the supervisory review procedure were summarised in the case of Ryabykh v. Russia (no. 52854/99, §§ 31-40, 24 July 2003). It provided that a number of State officials could, at any time, at the request of the person concerned or of their own motion, lodge with a higher court an “application for supervisory review” (протест) of a final decision of a lower court on all questions of fact and law.
On 1 February 2003 the new Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation entered into force. Its provisions governing the supervisory review procedure were summarised in the case of Kot v. Russia (no. 20887/03, § 17, 18 January 2007). It limited the possibility of initiating supervisory review proceedings to only the parties in the case and introduced a one-year timelimit for lodging the application.
.  On 7 January 2008 new amendments to the procedure entered into force, which were summarised in the case of Martynets v. Russia ((dec.), no. 29612/09, 5 November 2009). They reduced the time-limit for lodging a supervisory review application from one year to six months, abolished the discretionary power of the regional court presidents to overrule decisions taken by judges of those courts dismissing such applications, and made it obligatory to exhaust the available avenues of appeal before applying for supervisory review.
.  The latest reform entered into force on 1 January 2012 (for further details, see Abramyan and Others v. Russia ((dec.), nos. 38951/13 and 59611/13, §§ 29-53, 12 May 2015). It converted the first two levels of supervisory review, namely the presidia of the regional courts and the Civil Chamber of the Supreme Court, into courts of cassation while limiting the supervisory review procedure to the Presidium of the Supreme Court.