The case originated in an application (no. 25717/03) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ms Karina Oganova, a Georgian national, on 18 July 2003.
The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms I. Bartaia of the Ministry of Justice.
On 18 November 2005 the Court decided to communicate to the Government the applicant's complaint concerning the absence of an oral hearing before the Supreme Court. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The Government and the applicant each filed observations on admissibility and merits (Rule 54A of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in .
On 8 May 2002 the applicant brought a civil action, claiming back the money which she had lent to a private person on 14 September 1998, further to a note envisaging repayment within two months.
On 22 May 2002 the respondent replied in writing, claiming that she had repaid the debt and that the applicant's action was time-barred under Articles 129 and 130 of the Civil Code (“the CC”).
On 14 June 2002 the Isani-Samgori District Court allowed the applicant's claim at an oral hearing. The court found that the respondent's assertion about payment of the debt was unsubstantiated. It did not reply to the time-bar objection.
On 5 August 2002 the respondent appealed, reiterating, inter alia, that the applicant's action was time-barred.  The latter replied that, in view of the respondent's continuous promises to discharge the debt, she could not have concluded that her rights had been breached between 1998 and 2001.
On 18 September 2002 the  quashed the judgment of 14 June 2002 and decided the case anew, dismissing the applicant's action as time-barred. The appellate court found that the limitation period had started to run from the date of non-compliance with the note of 14 September 1998, that is two months after the loan, on 14 November 1998. It noted that the case materials did not substantiate the applicant's assertion that the respondent had continuously promised to return the money.
On 16 October 2002 the applicant lodged a cassation claim. Referring to various circumstances of the case, she reiterated that the respondent's verbal assurances had prevented her from applying to the court earlier. She consequently claimed that the appellate court had wrongly applied Articles 129 and 130 of the CC.
On 19 November 2002 the Supreme Court of Georgia declared the applicant's cassation claim admissible but decided to dispense with an oral hearing on the merits. Both parties were informed of that decision on 22 November 2002. On the same day, the cassation claim was forwarded to the respondent for comments. No reply was forthcoming from the latter.
On 6 February 2003 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant's cassation claim. Endorsing the facts of the case as established by the appellate court, the cassation court found that the disputed Articles 129 and 130 of the CC had been correctly interpreted and applied in the appellate judgment of 18 September 2002 and that, consequently, there was no ground, under Article 393 §§ 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, to quash it.
Pursuant to Articles 129 § 1 and 130, the period for bringing contractual claims was limited to three years, and it started to run from the moment the person learnt or should have learnt about the breach of his or her rights.
Pursuant to Article 393 §§ 1 and 2, only the lawfulness of an appellate judgment could be challenged in cassation. The disputed judgment could be found to be unlawful if the appellate court had wrongly applied or interpreted the law.
Article 396 § 1 (f) required the appellant to mention in his or her cassation claim those facts which supported the alleged breaches of procedural law if the cassation claim was calling into question the application of procedural legal provisions.
Article 404 § 1
“The cassation court shall review the [disputed] judgment only in so far as challenged in the cassation claim. The cassation court cannot go beyond the facts referred to under Article 396 § 1 (f) and inquire of its own motion into other procedural breaches.”
Article 407 §§ 1 and 2
“The cassation court shall take into account the party's submissions only in so far as disclosed by the case file or the appellate judgment; only the facts submitted under Article 396 § 1 (f) can be taken into account.
The establishment of the facts [by the appellate court] is binding on the [cassation] court, unless an additional and well-founded cassation argument has been raised.”
Article 408 § 3
“In the event the cassation court finds it appropriate..., it can decide the case without an oral hearing. The parties shall be notified of such a decision.”
Article 411
“The cassation court shall take a [final] decision itself if the circumstances of the case have been established by the appellate court without procedural breaches and there is no need for additional fact finding.”
Article 412 § 1 and 2
 “If it is not possible for the cassation court to decide the case in accordance with Article 411, it shall quash the appellate judgment and remit the case for a retrial.
If the cassation court quashes the disputed judgment because of the legal assessment, it shall indicate to the appellate court which circumstances of the case require additional examination, what kind of evidence has to be collected further and what other procedural acts are to be conducted.”
The  dismissed the applicants' complaint challenging Article 408 § 3 of the CCP, which provided for the possibility to dispense with an oral hearing in cassation proceedings.
The  noted that, unlike an appellate court which established facts, the cassation court could only review the application of legal provisions. It could however examine, on the basis of Articles 396 § 1 (f) and 407 §§ 1 and 2 of the CCP, the facts which have been explicitly raised by the appellant in relation to the alleged violations of procedural law.
Consequently, whilst the scope of the review was mostly limited to the assessment of the application of procedural and substantive law, the  concluded that the right to an oral hearing in cassation proceedings was not absolute.
In its judgment of 28 February 2006 in the case of “Gokhi” v. “Telasi” JSC, the Supreme Court defined the notion of an “additional and well-founded cassation argument” (Article 407 § 2 of the CCP), as follows:
“...'An additional and well-founded cassation argument' is ... a reference to those procedural breaches which, having been committed by the appellate court during the examination of the case, have resulted in an erroneous assessment of the matters of fact and/or the incorrect interpretation and application of substantive legal provisions.”