The case originated in ten separate applications against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by twelve Montenegrin nationals whose personal details are set out in the annex to this judgment.
The applicants were represented by Mr V. Bjeković, a lawyer practising in Podgorica. The Montenegrin Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Pažin.
The applicants alleged an inconsistent practice on the part of the domestic courts. In particular, they complained that their claims had been rejected by the domestic courts whereas the same courts had at the same time allowed identical claims filed by their colleagues.
On 7 October 2010 the applications were communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The facts of the cases, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The first, second, third, fourth, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth applicants, and legal predecessor of the fifth, sixth and seventh applicants, were all employees of the Aluminium Plant in Podgorica (Kombinat aluminijuma Podgorica).
On various dates they were all certified as totally unfit for work (potpuni gubitak radne sposobnosti). Their disability (invalidnost) was partly the result of a work-related illness.
Between 10 and 16 November 2005 they were made redundant and received a severance payment.
On various dates thereafter the Pension Fund (Republički fond penzijskog i invalidskog osiguranja) in Podgorica recognised their right to a disability pension (pravo na invalidsku penziju), effective from the date on which they had respectively been certified disabled.
On various subsequent dates the first, second, third, fourth, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth applicants, and legal predecessor of the fifth, sixth and seventh applicants, filed claims against their former employer, seeking damages consisting of the difference between the disability pension they were receiving and the salary which they would have received had they not been made redundant. The amounts claimed varied between 581 euros (EUR) (for the third applicant) and EUR 9,273.64 (for the fourth applicant). They expressly stated, either in their claims or further submissions made in the context of appeals, appeals on points of law and/or replies to the defendant’s submissions, that these were labour-related claims exempted from court fees. The fifth, sixth and seventh applicants continued the proceedings in their legal predecessor’s stead as he had passed away in the meantime.
Some of the applicants were successful before the Court of First Instance (Osnovni sud) in Podgorica, while others were not. However, all the applicants were unsuccessful in the second-instance proceedings before the High Court (Viši sud) in Podgorica, which rendered its decisions between 7 November 2008 and 9 October 2009. The first, third, fourth, eighth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth applicants lodged an appeal on points of law (revizija) with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud) in Podgorica. Between 18 February and 3 December 2009 the Supreme Court upheld the High Court’s judgments and, in substance, endorsed its reasoning. The second, fifth, sixth, seventh and ninth applicants did not lodge an appeal on points of law.
In its reasoning in the applicants’ cases, the High Court and the Supreme Court held, inter alia, that the applicants’ employment had been terminated because they had been made redundant, not because their right to a disability pension had been recognised. In particular, when their right to a pension was subsequently recognised they were no longer employed and thus had no salary in any event; accordingly, no damage had been sustained and their claims were unfounded.
In six other judgments, submitted by the applicants, rendered between 7 December 2006 (by the Supreme Court) and 2 February 2009 (by the High Court) the same courts had ruled in favour of the applicants’ colleagues, notwithstanding the fact that their claims were based on the same facts and concerned identical legal issues. In their reasoning in those other cases, the courts explained, inter alia, that the claim for damages was justified on grounds of their disability and that the employer had to compensate them according to the extent to which the work-related illness had caused the disability. At the same time, the courts found that the claimants’ redundancy and the accompanying payment, which the claimants had received, had nothing to do with the legal grounds for seeking damages for their disability. These judgments became final and enforceable (pravosnažne i izvršne).
All the applicants lodged constitutional appeals. On 24 March 2011 the  (Ustavni sud) rejected (odbacio) the constitutional appeal lodged by the ninth applicant on the grounds that he had not exhausted all effective domestic remedies; in particular, he had not lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court. Between 24 December 2009 and 10 March 2011 the  dismissed (odbio) the constitutional appeals lodged by all the other applicants on the grounds that the impugned judgments did not depart from established case-law.
Article 17 of the 1992 Constitution provided that “everyone shall be entitled to the equal protection of his or her freedoms and rights in legal proceedings”.
This Constitution was repealed in October 2007, when the new Constitution, published in OG RM no. 01/07, entered into force.
Article 19 of the 2007 Constitution provides that everyone has the right to equal protection of his or her rights and freedoms.
Article 32 provides that “everyone shall have the right to a fair ... trial ... before a ... tribunal.”
Article 124 § 2 provides that the Supreme Court shall ensure that the courts apply the laws consistently.
Article 149 § 1 provides, inter alia, that the Constitutional Court shall rule on constitutional appeals lodged in respect of an alleged violation of a human right or freedom guaranteed by the Constitution, after all other effective legal remedies have been exhausted.
Sections 48 to 59 contain additional provisions as regards the processing of constitutional appeals.
This Act entered into force in November 2008.
Section 5 § 2 provides that everyone shall be equal before the courts.
Section 27 provides that the Supreme Court shall establish general legal principles and opinions in order to ensure consistent application of the Constitution, laws and other acts.
Section 2 § 1 provides that the court shall decide the case within the limits of the claims submitted in the proceedings (u granicama zahtjeva koji su stavljeni u postupku).
Section 397 § 2 provides that an appeal on points of law is “not admissible” in pecuniary disputes where the “value of the part of the final judgment being challenged does not exceed EUR 5,000”. However, as provided for in section 397 § 4(2), an appeal on points of law is always admissible in disputes concerning loss of earnings or other labour-related income where the relevant damages have been awarded or revoked for the first time.
Section 438 provides that an appeal on points of law is admissible in disputes relating to the establishment, existence or termination of employment.
Section 401 provides, inter alia, that, when deciding on an appeal on points of law, the competent court shall confine its examination to that part of the judgment which has been challenged by the appeal on points of law and to the stated grounds of appeal.
Section 352 § 1 provides that a judgment becomes final (pravosnažna) when it can no longer be challenged by an appeal.
Section 24 of this Act amended section 397 § 2 of the Civil Procedure Act 2004 by providing that an appeal on points of law is “not admissible” in pecuniary disputes where the “value of the part of the final judgment being challenged does not exceed EUR 10,000”.
Section 26 of this Act amended section 438 of the Civil Procedure Act 2004 by providing, under the “labour disputes” heading, that an appeal on points of law is allowed “only” in disputes relating to the establishment, existence or termination of employment.
This Act entered into force on 20 December 2006.
However, it contained no transitional provisions specifying which of these two Acts should be applied in pending proceedings.
Section 8 provides, inter alia, that parties to proceedings concerning labour rights and employment shall be exempted from paying court fees.
Between 20 February 2007 and 21 December 2010 the domestic courts ruled in eighty-nine other cases lodged by the applicants’ colleagues. In one of the cases in which the claimant was successful before the Court of First Instance, neither of the parties appealed and the relevant judgment thus became final and enforceable.
The High Court examined eighty-eight appeals, in which four of the claimants were successful and the others were not. In two of those four cases neither of the parties lodged an appeal on points of law and those two judgments thus became final and enforceable.
Between 20 November 2008 and 21 December 2010 the Supreme Court decided eighty-six appeals on points of law. Two of them were rejected on procedural grounds: one had been lodged out of time and in the other one the value of the claim was considered to be below the statutory threshold allowing for this remedy. Eighty-four appeals on points of law were examined on the merits regardless of the value of the claim, including two cases in which the claimants had been successful before the High Court. In all cases the Supreme Court ruled against the claimants.
In December 2006 another colleague of the applicants was successful before the domestic courts, including before the Supreme Court. It is clear from the case file that the claimant in question had never been made redundant and that he had retired after being certified totally unfit for work.