The case originated in an application (no. 1399/07) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Ali Eser (“the applicant”), on 6 January 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mrs G. Altay, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government were represented by their Agent.
The applicant complained under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 of the Convention, in particular, of the restrictions on his right of access to a lawyer while in police custody and the use by the trial court of statements that he had allegedly given under coercion. He further alleged, under Article 3 of the Convention, that he had been subjected to ill-treatment while in police custody.
On 27 May 2015 notice of the above complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
On 7 October 2016 the Vice-President of the Second Section invited the Government to submit further observations, if they so wished, following the judgment in Ibrahim and Others v. the United Kingdom ([GC], nos. 50541/08 and 3 others, 13 September 2016).
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Istanbul.
On 5 August 1997 the applicant, who was in possession of fake identity papers in the name of Kenan İnci, was arrested in the course of a police operation against an illegal armed organisation, namely TKPML/TIKKO (Communist Party of Turkey/MarxistLeninist/Turkish Workers and Peasants’ Liberation Army) in a house belonging to A.Ö. The police also arrested A.Ö. and M.Y. in that same house.
According to the arrest record dated 5 August 1997, which was signed by A.Ö., M.Y. and the police officers, 1,100 German Marks were found on the applicant. Furthermore, the police found in the house, inter alia, an issue of the journal “Komünist” (which, according to the Government, was a central publishing body within the illegal organisation), forged registration certificates for two cars, and mobile telephones. The applicant refused to sign the arrest record.
The applicant was taken to the police station for questioning. A record was issued by the police on 8 August 1997, indicating, inter alia, that the applicant had been arrested on suspicion of being a member of the TKPML/TIKKO while in possession of a fake identity card, and that he had remained silent when questioned. The applicant did not have any legal assistance and was allegedly subjected to torture while held in police custody, which lasted seven days.
On 8 August 1997, Z.Ş., who was among the accused in the same case as the applicant, gave detailed self-incriminating statements to the police, in which he stated that he was a member of the TKP-ML/TIKKO and that he had stolen cars for the organisation with K.T. and Ö.K. on the instructions of the applicant, whom he had known by the name Bedrettin.
On 9 August 1997 the applicant underwent a medical examination. The doctor issued an interim medical report which concluded that no signs of ill-treatment had been found on his body. However, it was recommended in the report that the applicant also be examined by a urologist.
On an unknown date, another interim medical report was drawn up in respect of the applicant by the urology department. That report indicated that the applicant’s left testicle might have been subjected to trauma. The report lastly indicated that the applicant would receive a medical follow-up.
On 12 August 1997 a final medical report was drawn up by the State Security Court branch of the Forensic Medicine Institute. The report noted the applicant’s complaint that he had pain in his testicles but stated that there were no signs of injury on the applicant’s body.
On the same day, the applicant was examined by the public prosecutor, in the absence of a lawyer. The applicant denied the accusations against him and maintained that he had chosen to remain silent while in police custody since he had been ill-treated by the police. The applicant further stated that he had been convicted of membership of the TKPML/TIKKO in 1980 and served his sentence, and that after his release in 1986 he had not rejoined the illegal organisation. He also stated that after his release from prison and while working as a manager of a publishing company, he had been taken into police custody and then released on five or six occasions and that he had been ill-treated by the police several times while in their custody. The applicant argued that he had subsequently used a fake identification card in order to avoid being taken into police custody again.
On the same day, the applicant was examined by an investigating judge of the Istanbul State Security Court, again in the absence of a lawyer. During the interview, the applicant confirmed that his statements as made to the public prosecutor were correct. He further stated that since he had been subjected to inhuman treatment while in police custody, he had gone on hunger strike and he had exercised his right to remain silent. Lastly, the applicant denied the content of an identification record signed by another suspect, Z.Ş., which included statements incriminating him, submitting that he did not know Z.Ş. Following his questioning, the investigating judge ordered that the applicant be held on remand.
During the preliminary investigation stage Z.Ş. remained silent before the prosecutor, and denied the statements that he had given to the police when appearing before the investigating judge.
On 22 August 1997 the public prosecutor at the Istanbul State Security Court filed an indictment with that court, charging the applicant with membership of the illegal armed organisation TKP/ML TİKKO.
In the course of the proceedings the applicant denied the accusations against him and reiterated that he had been tortured by the police. He maintained that he had sustained injuries to his stomach and testicles while in police custody.
During the proceedings, Z.Ş. denied his statements as given to the police in part, alleging that he had been tortured while in police custody. However, he stated that he had committed car theft with K.T. and Ö.K. on behalf of the illegal organisation and that he knew the applicant by another name, Bedrettin.
On 30 April 2003 Istanbul State Security Court found the applicant guilty as charged, and convicted him under Article 168 of the former Criminal Code, Law no. 765, of membership of an illegal organisation, namely the TKP/ML-TIKKO. The trial court found that the applicant had engaged in the activities of the illegal organisation on the basis of, in so far as relevant to the case before the Court, his arrest in possession of a fake identity card; the documents related to the organisation, the forged traffic documents and vehicle registration certificates that had been seized from the house where he had been arrested; and the statements of his co-accused, Z.Ş.
On 23 July 2003 a lawyer representing the applicant lodged an appeal against the judgment. In the appeal, the applicant denied the accusations against him, arguing that the people who had testified against him had been tortured at the police station. He further stated that he had refused to give any statements to the police since he had been under duress.
On 12 April 2004 the Court of Cassation quashed the judgment of 30 April 2003 on the ground that the certified copies of the statements taken from İ.S., H.M., İ.B., E.E., M.G. and M.P. at various stages of the proceedings were not included in the case file.
On 21 May 2008 the Istanbul Assize Court convicted the applicant under Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code of membership of an illegal organisation, namely the TKP/ML-TIKKO and sentenced him to imprisonment for six years and three months. The trial court found that the applicant had engaged in the activities of the illegal organisation on the basis of, in so far as relevant to the case before the Court, the applicant’s arrest in possession of a fake identity card; the documents related to the organisation and the forged car registration certificates that had been seized from the house in which he had been arrested; and the statements of his coaccused, Z.Ş.
In its reasoned decision the trial court stated, inter alia:
“... Although the accused [the applicant] did not admit having committed the offence imputed to him during the preliminary investigation stage and denied the accusations throughout the proceedings, the accused is found to be a member of the illegal organisation TKP/ML-TIKKO on the basis of the arrest report, the fake identity card and the expert report drawn up in respect of it, the statements of Z.Ş. and the case file as a whole ...”
The applicant’s lawyer lodged an appeal against the judgment of 21 May 2008 by means of a petition dated 28 May 2008. In the petition the applicant’s lawyer stated that she intended to submit a further appeal petition containing the arguments of the defence, once they had been served with the reasoned judgment. However, there is nothing in the case file showing that the applicant or his lawyer actually submitted another appeal petition to the domestic authorities.
On 13 July 2009 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment. It did not assess the applicant’s allegations of torture and illtreatment.
The relevant provisions of the former Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 1412), namely Articles 135, 136 and 138, provided that anyone suspected or accused of a criminal offence had a right of access to a lawyer from the moment he or she was taken into police custody. Under section 31 of Law no. 3842 of 18 November 1992, which amended the legislation on criminal procedure, the above-mentioned provisions were not applicable to persons accused of offences falling within the jurisdiction of the State Security Courts. On 15 July 2003, by virtue of Law no. 4928, the restriction on an accused’s right of access to a lawyer in proceedings before the State Security Courts was lifted (see Salduz v. Turkey [GC], no. 36391/02, §§ 2729, ECHR 2008).