The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 21 May 1990 and then by the Austrian Government ("the Government") on 20 July, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 par. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 12398/86) against the  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by an Austrian national, Mr Johann Asch, on 22 August 1986.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46); the Government’s application referred to Article 48 (art. 48). The object of the request and of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 paras. 1 and 3 (d) (art. 6-1, art. 6-3-d).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 par. 3 (d) of the Rules of Court, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr F. Matscher, the elected judge of Austrian nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 par. 3 (b)). On 24 May 1990, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Sir Vincent Evans, Mr R.Macdonald, Mr C. Russo, Mr R. Bernhardt, Mr A. Spielmann, Mr J. De Meyer and Mr N. Valticos (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 par. 4) (art. 43).
Mr Ryssdal assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 par. 5) and, through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, the Delegate of the Commission and the lawyer for the applicant on the need for a written procedure (Rule 37 par. 1). In accordance with the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the applicant’s memorial on 3 October; the latter had been authorised by the President to use the German language (Rule 27 par. 3). On the same day the Government indicated that they did not wish to submit a memorial.
In a letter of 5 November 1990 the Deputy Secretary to the Commission informed the Registrar that the Delegate would submit his observations at the hearing. The Commission produced various documents which, on the instructions of the President, the Registrar had requested from it.
Having consulted, through the Registrar, those who would be appearing before the Court, the President directed on 27 July 1990 that the oral proceedings should open on 19 November 1990 (Rule 38).
The hearing took place in public in the , , on the appointed day. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
- for the applicant
The Court heard addresses by the above-mentioned representatives.
Mr Johann Asch, an Austrian national, resides at Laaben in .
In the night of 5 to 6 July 1985 a dispute broke out between him and the woman he lived with, Mrs J.L. She left the house and took refuge at her mother’s home.
The following morning she consulted a doctor. He sent her the same day to the St Pölten hospital then transmitted to that establishment a certificate dated 9 July attesting that she was suffering from multiple bruising and headaches. A report drawn up by the hospital, dated 11 July, stated that she claimed to have been struck with a belt and that she had several bruises on her body and one on her head.
In the evening of 6 July Mrs J.L. reported the incident to the Brand-Laaben police (Gendarmerie). She alleged that the applicant had threatened to use violence on her if she did not get out immediately. As she had refused to obey, he had hit her with a belt on her back, on her arms and on her legs. Seeing him seize a rifle, she had tried to reason with him and then taken advantage of a moment of calm to escape.
The police officer who had taken down this statement, Officer B., informed the public prosecutor’s office of St Pölten by telephone the same evening; he was instructed by that office to file a report (anzeigen) concerning Mr Asch, but not to arrest him.
On the morning of 10 July Mrs J.L. went back to the Brand-Laaben police station to inform the relevant officers that she and the applicant had been reconciled and that she had returned to live with him on 7 July. She expressed her wish to withdraw her complaint.
Questioned at the police station in the evening, the applicant denied that he had ill-treated Mrs J.L. or threatened her with a rifle. She had, he claimed, only a scratch on her back; in addition, she had explained to him that she had lodged a complaint because she had been furious with him.
On 16 July 1985 the Brand-Laaben police sent a report on Mr Asch to the Neulengbach District Court. They substantially repeated the allegations made by Mrs J.L. and produced the medical certificate of 9 July, the hospital report of 11 July and the records of the statements of the applicant and his woman friend, of 6 and 10 July (see paragraphs 9-10 and 13 above).
On 7 August 1985 the St Pölten public prosecutor’s office committed the applicant for trial before the Regional Court (Kreisgericht) of that town on charges of intimidation (Nötigung, Article 105 of the Criminal Code) and causing actual bodily harm (Körperverletzung, Article 83). At the hearing on 15 November 1985 Mr Asch protested his innocence; according to him, Mrs J.L. had hurt herself in the night of 5 to 6 July when she struck the end of the bed. However, he admitted having attacked her and having pushed her away from him.
When questioned by the court, Mrs J.L. availed herself of her right to refuse to give evidence (see paragraph 20 below). Subsequently Officer B. testified; he recounted the statements that she had made before him on 6 July 1985 and told the court that she had appeared to him to have been scared. She had shown to him the bruises on her arm and the bandage which covered a part of her back. No further applications being made by the parties, the judge ordered the report of 16 July, the interview record of 6 July 1985 (see paragraphs 10-11 and 14 above) and an extract from Mr Asch’s criminal record to be read out.
On 15 November 1985 the court convicted Mr Asch of intimidation and causing actual bodily harm and sentenced him to a fine of 80 schillings per day for 180 days. On the basis of the statements made at the hearing by the accused and by Officer B., the police investigation and the other evidence before it, the court found the facts to be established as described by Mrs J.L. on 6 July. According to the judgment, they were corroborated by the doctor’s diagnosis. Moreover the evidence revealed Mr Asch’s irascible and unpredictable personality and thus made the version given by Mrs J.L. plausible. The court did not find credible the accused’s claims that she had deliberately falsely accused him.
The applicant appealed. He complained inter alia that the first-instance court had had the record of Mrs J.L.’s statements (see paragraphs 10-11 above) read out at the hearing, without having asked him to comment on this document or having questioned him or Mrs J.L. He also asked the appeal court to order an expert medical opinion and to effect a search of the premises, as, he contended, the first-instance court ought to have done. In his view, the fact that Mrs J.L. had withdrawn her complaint had deprived the prosecution brought against him of its legal basis.
On 19 March 1986 the Court of Appeal (Oberlandesgericht) of  upheld the contested judgment. It ruled inter alia that, according to well-established case-law, Article 252 par. 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 21 below) required the court before which the proceedings were pending to have the statements made outside court by witnesses who had refused to appear in court read out at the hearing, when such statements related to important points. The Court of Appeal also held that Mr Asch had failed to give sufficient reasons for his request for an expert opinion, since he had provided no evidence casting doubt on the cause of the victim’s injuries.
Under Article 152 par. 1, sub-paragraph 1, of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the members of the accused’s family as referred to in Article 72 of the Criminal Code are exempted from giving evidence; they include cohabitees.
Paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 252 of the Code of Criminal Procedure are worded as follows:
"2. The records of on-the-spot inspections and police reports, as well as the accused’s criminal record and any other material documents or written evidence, shall be read out at the hearing, unless both parties agree to dispense with this proceeding.
After each such document has been read out, the accused shall be asked if he wishes to make any comments thereon."
In his application (no. 12398/86) lodged with the Commission on 22 August 1986, Mr Asch complained that he had been convicted solely on the basis of the statements of Mrs J.L., who had not given evidence before the Regional Court; he relied on Article 6 paras. 1 and 3 (d) (art. 6-1, art. 6-3-d) of the Convention.
The Commission declared the application admissible on 10 July 1989. In its report of 3 April 1990 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the opinion by twelve votes to five that there had been a violation of paragraph 1 of Article 6, taken together with paragraph 3 (d) (art. 6-1, art. 6-3-d) thereof. The full text of its opinion is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.