The case originated in an application (no. 62784/09) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Ms Yordanka Eftimova Kamenova (“the applicant”), on 10 November 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Yankulov, a lawyer practising in Sofia. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms V. Hristova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had been denied access to a court to seek compensation for her daughter’s death.
On 11 February 2016 the above complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1942 and lives in Montana.
On 20 August 1997 the applicant’s daughter was killed in a traffic accident. Several other people were killed or injured as well. The accident was the fault of H.H., a lorry driver.
Criminal proceedings were opened against H.H. and in 1998 he was indicted and brought to court. At the first court hearing the relatives of the other victims brought civil claims against H.H. and his employer. The applicant did not bring such a claim.
In a judgment of 30 June 1999 the Vidin Regional Court (hereinafter “the Regional Court”) convicted H.H. of negligently causing the deaths of several people, including the applicant’s daughter, and injuring others, and sentenced him to a term of imprisonment. It allowed the civil claims, finding H.H. and his employer jointly liable to pay damages to the civil parties.
Upon appeal, the Regional Court’s judgment was quashed on 19 April 2000 by the Sofia Court of Appeal (hereinafter “the Court of Appeal”). Finding serious breaches of the procedural rules, it remitted the case to the prosecuting authorities, so that it could be restarted from the stage of the preliminary investigation.
On an unspecified date in 2000 or 2001 the prosecution prepared a new indictment against H.H. and he was once again brought to court.
The first court hearing was held on 30 March 2001. The Regional Court accepted for examination a civil claim against H.H. and his employer brought by the applicant, and recognised her as civil party to the proceedings.
In a judgment of 18 September 2002 the Regional Court convicted H.H. of causing the deaths of several people and injuring others, and sentenced him to a term of imprisonment. In addition, it awarded damages to the remaining civil claimants – damages due jointly from H.H. and his employer – but it did not make any decision in respect of the applicant’s claim.
On 12 March 2003 the Court of Appeal upheld H.H.’s conviction, reducing his sentence. That part of the judgment became final on 8 October 2003 when it was upheld by the Supreme Court of Cassation. However, as concerns the civil claims, the Court of Appeal quashed the lower court’s judgment and remitted the case for fresh examination. It reasoned that the Regional Court had committed serious procedural breaches by, among other things, not taking a decision on the applicant’s claim.
The Regional Court examined the case for a third time, only in relation to the part concerning the civil claims, and on 6 April 2004 gave a judgment. It ordered H.H. and his employer to pay damages to the civil parties, including 10,000 Bulgarian levs (BGN – the equivalent of 5,100 euros (EUR)), plus default interest, to the applicant.
Upon an appeal by H.H. and his employer, on 8 March 2006 the Court of Appeal quashed the lower court’s judgment in so far as it concerned the award made to the applicant, and discontinued the examination of her claim. It found that that claim was inadmissible, on the grounds that it had been submitted outside the time-limit provided for in Article 61 § 4 of the 1974 Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 22 below). It pointed out that the requirement under that provision that a claim should be brought before the commencement of the examination of a case by a court had to be interpreted as referring to the initial examination by a court of first instance. The applicant had brought her claim during the subsequent examination of the case, after its remittal.
Upon an appeal by the applicant, that conclusion was upheld by the Supreme Court of Cassation on 4 March 2007.
On 22 August 2007 the applicant brought a tort action against H.H. and his employer before the civil courts. She claimed BGN 10,000 in respect of non-pecuniary damage, plus default interest as of 20 August 1997.
In a judgment of 17 July 2008 the Sofia District Court dismissed the claim. It held that the applicant’s inadmissible civil claim brought in the context of the criminal proceedings could not have interrupted the running of the relevant limitation period, which was five years. Only a claim brought in accordance with the relevant procedural requirements and subsequently found to be well-founded could have had such an effect. In addition, even if the running of the limitation period could be considered to have been interrupted by the applicant’s bringing her claim in the context of the criminal proceedings, that interruption had been retroactively invalidated by the Court of Appeal’s decision of 8 March 2006 finding that the claim was inadmissible and discontinuing the proceedings. Accordingly, the running of the limitation period – which had started in 1997 because the perpetrator’s identity had been known immediately after the accident in which the applicant’s daughter had died – had never been validly interrupted. The applicant’s claim for damages, brought ten years later, was time-barred. The applicant had brought her claim before a tribunal, namely the criminal court, which had been barred from examining it; this meant that this tribunal had had to transfer the claim to the civil courts with jurisdiction, but this had not been done.
The applicant filed an appeal, which was dismissed by a judgment of the Sofia City Court of 13 March 2009. While it considered the applicant’s claim well-founded in principle, since the tort resulting in the liability of H.H. and his employer had been proven, that court agreed that the claim was time-barred. It pointed out that the applicant’s bringing her claim in the context of the criminal proceedings could only have interrupted the running of the relevant time-limit if the claim had been allowed. However, after the proceedings had been discontinued, in the absence of recognition of the applicant’s right to receive damages, the time-limit had to be considered to have never been interrupted. The applicant had to bear the adverse consequences of having brought her claim in the context of the criminal proceedings in breach of the rules, and this was so notwithstanding the fact that the claim had been, erroneously, initially accepted for examination by the Regional Court.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law. In a final decision of 9 July 2009 the Supreme Court of Cassation refused to accept the appeal for a cassation review.
Article 60 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1974, in force until 29 April 2006, provided that the victim of an offence could bring a civil claim in respect of the damage resulting from the offence in the context of the criminal proceedings concerning that offence. An identical provision is contained in Article 84 § 1 of new Code of Criminal Procedure, in force as of 29 April 2006. By Article 64 § 2 of the 1974 Code (Article 88 § 2 of the 2006 Code), the criminal court may refuse to accept a civil claim for examination where it considers that this would encumber the examination of the case.
Article 61 § 4 of the 1974 Code (Article 85 § 3 of the 2006 Code) provides that a civil claim has to be brought before the commencement of the examination of the case by a court of first instance (започване на съдебното следствие пред първоинстанционния съд). The national courts have construed this provision as prohibiting the introduction of a civil claim by the victim after the proceedings have been sent back to the first-instance court by a higher court (Решение № 7 от 9.02.1998 г. по н. д. № 12/1998 г., ВКС, II н. о.; Решение № 767 от 11.11.1991 г. по н. д. № 648/1991 г., ВС, I н. о.; Решение № 650 от 24.12.1985 г. по н. д. № 664/1985 г., ВС, Военна колегия).
In some cases where the criminal proceedings were sent back to the stage of the preliminary investigation, the national courts have found that the victim of the offence can validly bring a civil claim once the court proceedings start anew (Решение № 450 от 22.10.1980 г. по н. д. № 370/80 г., ВС, I н. о.; Присъда № 20 от 23.05.2012 г. на ОСПазарджик по н. о. х. д. № 175/2012 г.).
A civil claim cannot be brought before the criminal courts where it has already been brought before the civil courts (Article 60 § 2 of the 1974 Code and Article 84 § 2 of the 2006 Code). The claim is to be examined under the rules of the respective Code of Criminal Procedure, but for matters not regulated by that Code, the rules on civil procedure apply on a subsidiary basis (Article 64 § 1 of the 1974 Code and Article 88 § 1 of the 2006 Code). The criminal court is obliged to rule on a civil claim already accepted for examination even where the criminal prosecution has become time-barred or the accused has been acquitted (Article 305 of the 1974 Code and Article 307 of the 2006 Code).
In domestic practice, victims of an offence are considered to be in a more advantageous position when their claims in respect of damage resulting from an offence are examined in the context of the criminal proceedings concerning that offence. The reasons for that, summarised in an interpretative decision of the Supreme Court of Cassation of 4 February 2013 (Тълкувателно решение № 1 от 4.02.2013 г. на ВКС по тълк. д. № 2/2012 г., ОСНК), are as follows: in criminal proceedings, victims are not liable to pay the court fees payable at the start of civil proceedings; they can rely on the evidence collected and presented by the prosecution in so far as it substantiates the civil claims; the rules on the admissibility of evidence are more lenient; and lastly, the avenue provides more rapid redress, as a second set of proceedings specifically concerning claims in respect of damage becomes unnecessary.
Article 95 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure of 1952, in force until 1 March 2008, prohibited the examination of the same claim by two different tribunals, stating that if two sets of proceedings concerning the same claim were ongoing, the proceedings initiated on a later date were to be discontinued.
Article 182 § 1 (d) of the Code provided that civil proceedings were to be stayed where:
“criminal elements, the determination of which is decisive for the outcome of the civil dispute, are discovered in the course of the civil proceedings.”
This provision has been seen as obliging the civil courts to stay the examination of claims where an alleged civil right was derived from a fact which constituted an offence under the Criminal Code and criminal proceedings in relation to that offence were ongoing.
Article 93 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure provided that where a claim had been lodged with a court lacking the jurisdiction to examine that claim (делото не е подсъдно нему), the court had to transfer the claim to a court with jurisdiction. In such a case, the claim was considered to have been brought on the date it had been lodged before the court lacking jurisdiction.
Section 110 of the Obligations and Contracts Act provides that the limitation period for all claims is five years, save for those for which a special period is set out. By section 114(3) of the same Act, with regard to claims in respect of damage, the limitation period starts running from the moment the identity of the person responsible for the damage has become known. Limitation periods are not to be applied by the courts of their own motion, but only when an objection has been raised by the interested party (section 120 of the Act).
Section 116(b) of the Act provides that the running of the limitation period is interrupted by the bringing of a claim. However, if the claim is not allowed, it is considered that the running of the limitation period was never interrupted.
By section 115(1)(g) of the Act, the time-limit ceases to run during the “pendency of the judicial proceedings relating to the [tort] claim”. Before 2006 the application of this rule in relation to criminal proceedings was unclear and there were two different approaches. On certain occasions the courts construed the rule as meaning that the time-limit stopped running not only during the pendency of a civil suit, but also during the pendency of criminal proceedings relating to the same facts, even at their preliminary investigation phase and in the absence of a civilparty claim. On other occasions it was held that under section 115(1)(g) of the Obligations and Contracts Act time stopped running only when the victim brought a claim for damages, whether in the context of criminal proceedings or in separate civil proceedings. The issue was conclusively settled by the General Assembly of the Civil and the Commercial Chambers of the Supreme Court of Cassation, which, in a binding interpretative decision of 5 April 2006, endorsed the latter view (Тълкувателно решение № 5 от 5 април 2006 г. по тълк.д. № 5/2005 г., ОСГК и ОСТК на ВКС).