The case originated in an application (no. 51357/07) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Tunisian national who has acquired Swiss nationality, Mr Abdennacer Naït-Liman (“the applicant”), on 20 November 2007.
 2.  Relying on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the applicant alleged that the refusal by the Swiss civil courts to examine his civil claim for compensation in respect of the non-pecuniary damage caused by the alleged acts of torture, inflicted in Tunisia, had infringed his right of access to a court.
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court, in accordance with Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court (“the Rules”).
On 30 November 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The Redress Trust and the World Organisation against Torture (“the OMTC”), the latter being represented by the former, were given leave to intervene in the written procedure, in accordance with Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules.
On 21 June 2016 a Chamber of that Section, composed of Işıl Karakaş, President, Nebojša Vučinić, Helen Keller, Paul Lemmens, Egidijus Kūris, Robert Spano and Jon Fridrik Kjølbro, judges, and also of Stanley Naismith, Section Registrar, unanimously declared the application admissible and held, by four votes to three, that there had been no violation of Article 6 of the Convention. The concurring opinion of Judge Lemmens and the joint dissenting opinion of judges Karakaş, Vučinić and Kūris were annexed to the Chamber judgment.
On 19 September 2016 the applicant requested that the case be referred to the Grand Chamber under Article 43 of the Convention. On 28 November 2016 a panel of the Grand Chamber accepted the request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined in accordance with Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicant and the Government each filed written observations (Rules 59 § 1 and 71 § 1).
Observations were also received from the UK Government, which had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3). In addition, observations were received from the Redress Trust jointly with the OMCT, from Amnesty International jointly with the International Commission of Jurists, and from Citizens’ Watch. The parties replied to these observations in the course of their oral submissions at the hearing (Rule 44 § 6).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 14 June 2017 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Grant, Mr Membrez and Mr Schürmann and replies by Mr Membrez, Mr Grant and Mr Schürmann and Mr Meier to questions put by the judges.
The applicant was born in 1962 in Jendouba, in the Tunisian Republic (“Tunisia”), and lives in Versoix in the Canton of Geneva.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
According to the applicant, on 22 April 1992 he was arrested by the Italian police at his place of residence in Italy and taken to the Tunisian Consulate in Genoa, where he was presented with a bill of indictment stating that he represented a threat to Italian State Security. He alleges that he was then taken to Tunis by Tunisian officials. By his own account, he has never instituted proceedings against the Italian authorities in respect of those events.
The applicant further submits that he was arbitrarily detained and tortured in Tunis in the premises of the Ministry of the Interior, from 24 April to 1 June 1992, on the orders of A.K., the then Minister of the Interior. He submits that he was subjected to the so-called “roast chicken” position throughout the entire period of detention and deprived of his basic physiological needs, particularly sleep; he was also beaten on the soles of his feet with a baseball bat and struck all over his body with telephone cords.
The applicant submits that he suffers from a series of physical and psychological injuries and disorders.
After having been subjected to the alleged torture in Tunisia in 1992, the applicant fled that country in 1993 and took refuge in Switzerland, where he applied for asylum in the same year. The applicant has since been living in the Canton of Geneva.
On 8 November 1995 the Swiss authorities granted the applicant asylum.
On 14 February 2001, having learnt that A.K. was being treated in a Swiss hospital, the applicant lodged a criminal complaint against him with the Principal Public Prosecutor for the Republic and the Canton of Geneva (“the Principal Public Prosecutor”), for severe bodily injury, illegal confinement, insults, causing danger to health, coercion and abuse of authority. The applicant applied to join these proceedings as a civil party seeking damages.
On the same date the Principal Public Prosecutor transmitted to the head of the security police, by internal mail, a request to “attempt to locate and identify the accused individual, who [was] supposedly hospitalised in the Geneva University Hospital, for heart surgery” and “if possible, to arrest him and bring him before an investigating judge”. On receipt of this request, the police immediately contacted the hospital, which informed them that A.K. had indeed been a patient there, but that he had already left the hospital on 11 February 2001.
On 19 February 2001 the Principal Public Prosecutor made an order discontinuing the proceedings on the grounds that A.K. had left Switzerland and that the police had been unable to arrest him. This decision to discontinue the proceedings was not challenged by the applicant.
By his own account, on 22 July 2003 the applicant asked a Tunisian lawyer to represent him with a view to bringing a civil action for compensation against A.K. and the Tunisian Republic. On 28 July 2003 the lawyer informed the applicant that this type of action had never been successful and advised him not to lodge such a claim. It was allegedly impossible to lodge a civil action of this sort in Tunisia.
By a writ dated 8 July 2004, the applicant lodged a claim for damages with the Court of First Instance of the Republic and the Canton of Geneva (“the Court of First Instance”) against Tunisia and against A.K. He claimed 200,000 Swiss francs (CHF), with 5% interest from 1 June 1992, as compensation in respect of the non-pecuniary damage arising from the acts of torture to which he had allegedly been subjected. The applicant submitted that the conditions for reparation of non-pecuniary damage provided for by Articles 82 et seq. of the Tunisian Code of Obligations and Contracts, applicable under section 133 (2) of the Federal Law on Private International Law (Loi fédérale sur le droit international privé, the LDIP, see paragraph 37 below), had been met.
On 9 June 2005 a hearing was held before the Court of First Instance; neither of the defendants was in attendance or represented.
By a judgment of 15 September 2005, the Court of First Instance declared the claim inadmissible on the grounds that it lacked territorial jurisdiction. The relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“With regard to an action in tort based on the unlawful acts that were allegedly committed in Tunisia by the defendants, to the claimant’s detriment, the Swiss courts do not have territorial jurisdiction under international law to examine the complaint, given that the defendants are not domiciled or habitually resident in Switzerland, and given also that no illegal act or detrimental outcome occurred in Switzerland, pursuant to sections 2 and 129 of the LDIP.”
Under section 3 of the LDIP (see paragraph 37 below), the Swiss courts also lacked jurisdiction under the forum of necessity, given the lack of a sufficient connection between, on the one hand, the case and the facts, and, on the other, Switzerland. In this connection, the Court of First Instance ruled as follows:
“All of the acts with regard to whose after-effects the claimant, a Tunisian national, seeks compensation for non-pecuniary damage, were allegedly inflicted on him, as he submits, in Tunisia in 1992, within the premises of the Tunisian Ministry of the Interior, by the Tunisian State and its officials. The mere fact that on account of those acts the claimant applied for and received political asylum in 1995 in Switzerland, where he has since been domiciled, does not, in itself and in the light of current case-law, amount to a sufficient connection enabling a forum of necessity to be established against the defendants in Switzerland and Geneva.”
By a writ dated 16 November 2005, the applicant appealed against that decision before the Court of Justice of the Republic and the Canton of Geneva (“the Court of Justice”). His appeal was rejected in a judgment of 15 September 2006. After noting that the appellant had shown that he was unable to bring a civil action in Tunisia, the Court of Justice found as follows:
“As the outcome of the present appeal depends on the immunity from jurisdiction of the respondent parties, the question whether there exists a forum of necessity in the appellant’s place of residence can, however, remain undecided.”
The Court of Justice thus held that the respondents enjoyed immunity from jurisdiction, since the acts of torture had been perpetrated in the exercise of sovereign authority (iure imperii) and not under private law (iure gestionis). Referring to the judgment delivered by the Court in the case of Al-Adsani v. the United Kingdom ([GC], no. 35763/97, ECHR 2001-XI), it further considered that there had been no violation of the applicant’s right of access to a court.
The applicant lodged an appeal with the Federal Supreme Court, dated 20 October 2006, in which he asked it to rule that the courts of the Republic and the Canton of Geneva had territorial jurisdiction and to find that the defendants did not enjoy immunity from jurisdiction. With regard to the jurisdiction of the Swiss courts, he argued that the purpose of the introduction of a forum of necessity in section 3 of the LDIP (see paragraph 37 below) had been to avoid denials of justice, especially in cases of political persecution, and that he had provided sufficient evidence that he could not reasonably bring proceedings before a foreign court. As to the immunity from jurisdiction purportedly enjoyed by Tunisia and A.K., the applicant submitted that the exercise of public power did not include an entitlement to commit international crimes such as torture. He specified in this regard that the very definition of torture in Article 1 of the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment of 10 December 1984 (hereafter: “the Convention against Torture”; see paragraphs 45 et seq. below) ruled out any immunity. Lastly, he referred, in very general terms, to Article 16 of the United Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (see paragraph 60 below).
By a judgment of 22 May 2007, the reasoning of which was notified to the applicant on 7 September 2007, the Federal Supreme Court dismissed the appeal. Reiterating the reasoning in the first-instance judgment, the Federal Supreme Court considered that the Swiss courts did not in any event have territorial jurisdiction. The relevant passages of the Federal Supreme Court’s judgment read as follows:
“It must first be considered whether the Swiss courts have jurisdiction to examine the action.
1 As Tunisia is not a party to the Convention of 16 September 1988 on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (Lugano Convention, RS 0.275.11), there exists no convention rule between the two States governing the question of forum, which must therefore be examined in the light of the LDIP (sections 1(1)(a) and 1(2) LDIP).
2 In this instance, the jurisdiction of the Swiss authorities cannot be derived from the general rule concerning the international jurisdiction of the State of domicile of the defendant contained in section 2 of the LDIP, since the respondents are not domiciled in Switzerland. The cantonal court was, moreover, right in finding that the criteria, set out in section 129 of the LDIP, for establishing jurisdiction over actions in respect of wrongful acts were not met in so far as the defendants had neither their domicile nor their place of habitual residence or business in Switzerland (section 129(1) LDIP), and neither the wrongful act nor the resultant injury occurred in Switzerland (section 129(2) LDIP).
3 In the absence of an ordinary forum, the problem must be addressed under section 3 of the LDIP, which concerns the forum of necessity ... Under the latter provision, where no forum is provided for in Switzerland by the LDIP and where proceedings in another country prove impossible or one cannot reasonable require that they be brought in that country, the Swiss judicial or administrative authorities of the locality with which the case has a sufficient connection have jurisdiction.
The application of this rule for assigning jurisdiction thus calls for three cumulative conditions to be met: firstly, the Swiss authorities do not have jurisdiction under another provision; secondly, legal proceedings in another country are impossible or cannot reasonably be required; and, thirdly, the case in question has a sufficient connection with Switzerland. In the present case, the first condition is indisputably fulfilled. Fulfilment of the second condition appears more problematic, but in the light of the third condition, which merits more extensive discussion, it is not necessary to elaborate further on this question.
4 Section 3 of the LDIP, which must be interpreted restrictively ... represents a safety valve, intended to avoid denials of justice ... in the event of a negative conflict of jurisdiction.
In this connection, the Federal Council, in its authoritative interpretation of this provision, noted that “there are cases that have such a tenuous connection with Switzerland that it is not appropriate to set in motion the entire judicial system in order to resolve them. However, section 3 lays down an exception to this principle. The Swiss authorities must assume jurisdiction even in cases where the connection with our country is very tenuous, where it is impossible to bring proceedings or to lodge an appeal abroad. It is for the claimant or the appellant to demonstrate this impossibility. Where this evidence has been adduced, jurisdiction reverts to the authority of the locality with which the case has a sufficient connection. Where there are several competing fora in Switzerland, it is the first authority before which an action is brought that has jurisdiction. Clearly, the impossibility of bringing and pursuing proceedings abroad can only be examined in the light of the tangible circumstances and of the possible consequences for the individual concerned in the particular case; it will ultimately be for the court to recognise, or not, its jurisdiction” .... .
Although section 3 LDIP may thus seem innately paradoxical in so far as proceedings for which there is no basis for connection with an ordinary forum in Switzerland are, ipso facto, lacking in any particular connection with this country, in such a way that determining a “sufficient connection” may prove challenging, and the aim pursued by the law – to prevent a formal denial of justice – difficult to achieve, this legal provision has not in practice been without effect; the cantonal courts in particular have recognised its applicability in the areas of family law, inheritance and proceedings on debt-enforcement and bankruptcy... .
Moreover, legal writers have noted that a subsidiary forum must necessarily be recognised in situations of political persecution... However, neither the case-law nor legal opinion provide much in the way of guidance concerning civil actions for compensation in respect of damage resulting from crimes against humanity, life and physical integrity, committed abroad, by foreign perpetrators.
5 That being stated, it is necessary to consider what is meant by “case” [“cause” in the French version] in section 3 LDIP.
It is settled case-law that the law must, in the first instance, be interpreted literally. An interpretation which deviates from the literal meaning of a text expressed in clear terms is allowable only where there are objective reasons for considering that the text fails to convey the true meaning of the provision concerned. Such reasons may derive from the drafting history, from the aim and sense of the provision concerned and from the structure and layout of the law. If the text is not absolutely clear, if it can be interpreted variously, the approach must be to seek out the true import of the provision having regard to all relevant factors, including in particular the drafting history, the intention pursued by the rule, the spirit and values on which it is based or again its relationship with other legal provisions. The Federal Supreme Court does not favour any one method of interpretation but adopts a pragmatic plurality in its search for the true meaning of the rule; in particular, it takes as a basis a literal understanding of the text only where this offers, with no ambiguity, a solution that is substantively just (ATF 133 III 175 § 3.3.1, V 57 § 6.1; 132 III 226 § 3.3.5 and the judgments cited therein).
In itself, the meaning to be attributed to the term “cause” is uncertain in the sense that it does not have a general definition in the laws of civil procedure of the French-speaking cantons (see, however, Bertossa/Gaillard/Guyet/ Schmidt, Commentaire de la loi de procedure civile genevoise, vol. I, Geneva 2002, n.10 ad Article 99/LPC/GE, concerning the force of res judicata, in which the authors consider that identical claims, in terms of their content, based on the same arguments and the same combination of alleged facts, constitute the objective limit of res judicata; that identity is determined by the complete set of legal considerations which formed part of the first application and were adjudicated upon; this was how “cause” was to be understood in former Article 99(2); the alleged facts of the case determine an overall situation [“Sachverhalt”, “Prozessstoff”] which it is for the court to assess) but would appear to equate to “procédure” or “demande en justice” or in German to “Rechtsstreit”, “Rechtssache”, “Prozess”, “Angelegenheit”, “causa litigandi” or “Streitgrund”. At all events, “cause” is not the literal and unambiguous translation of the terms “Sachverhalt” or “fattispecie” used in the German and Italian versions of section 3 of the LDIP. It should be borne in mind, at this point, that the latter terms are usually translated in French as “énoncé” or “exposé des faits” or “état des faits”.
 As the versions of the law drafted in the three official languages have the same standing, the question arises whether the difference between the French wording and that of the other two versions results from an error in the legislative process, from a difference in meaning which becomes apparent only in the context of specific cases according to a varying understanding of the legal provision in each of the languages, or, lastly, from a linguistic difference attributable either to the non-translatability knowingly taken into account in the drafting or to uncertainty on the part of the legislator as to the meaning to be conveyed (see Schubarth, Die Auslegung mehrsprachiger Gesetzestexte, in Rapports suisses présentés au XVIIe Congrès international de droit comparé, Zurich 2006, p. 11 et seq., especially p. 12 s.).
 It seems clear that the first of these possibilities can be ruled out. To distinguish between the second and third possibilities the understanding of the term “cause” in legal French terminology must be considered. In this regard, the “cause” of the action is the basis of the claim [“base de la prétention”] (‘Streitgrund” rather than “Sachverhalt”), though it should be noted that the legal writers are in some disagreement as to the content and scope of that basis. Some argue that the “cause” must be seen as a legal concept allowing the claim to be defined, while for others the “cause” comes down to a set of facts giving rise to the legal issues in debate or the legal interest invoked (see Vincent/Guinchard, Procédure civile, 24th edition, Paris 1996, n. 519 p. 386 et seq., who conclude that the “cause” of the action is constituted by a legally characterised set of facts).
 In the case in point, it must be acknowledged that a comparison with the German and Italian versions assists in the interpretation of the French text, supporting the view that the term “cause” should be assigned the restricted meaning of “set of facts” or, to take a literal translation of “Sachverhalt” and “fattispeccie”, “exposé” or “état de faits” and not “procédure”. In other words, it is the “cause” – which concerns the set of facts and the legal argumentation – rather than the person of the applicant which must have a sufficient connection with Switzerland.
In the present case, however, the claimant complains of acts of torture that were allegedly committed in Tunisia, by Tunisians resident in Tunisia, against a Tunisian residing in Italy. All of the specific features of the case come back to Tunisia, except for the fact of residence in Italy at the relevant time. The facts of the case thus have no connection with Switzerland, so that the question of whether or not the link with this country is sufficient does not arise. In those circumstances, it is not possible to recognise the jurisdiction of the Swiss courts, short of disregarding the clear text of s[ection] 3 of the LDIP [see paragraph 37 below]. The fact that the claimant then chose to come to Switzerland cannot change anything, since it is a fact subsequent to the events of the case and, moreover, does not form part of it.
Since the absence of a sufficient connection between the facts of the case and Switzerland suffices to establish the Swiss courts’ lack of jurisdiction, the appeal must be dismissed, without it being necessary to examine the issue of immunity from jurisdiction.
...”
The Swiss Government made submissions before the Grand Chamber describing the action taken by the Tunisian Republic after the fall of the regime in January 2011 in order to establish a new democracy and a political system based on respect for human rights and the rule of law. They considered that the possibility of submitting complaints to the newly established courts was the most direct and “natural” means of promoting reconciliation, re-establishing social peace and improving prevention, whilst also respecting the steps taken to repair the harm done to the victims. In this context, the Government referred to Article 148 § 9 of the Tunisian Constitution of 14 January 2014, worded as follows:
“The State commits to implementing the transitional justice system in all areas within the timeline set by the related legislation. In this regard, no claim in respect of the non-retrospective nature of laws, or the existence of a previous amnesty or pardon, or the binding force of double jeopardy, or the statute of limitations or prescription of the crime or punishment, shall be admitted.”
The Government observed that the constituent elements of transitional justice had already been set out in “Organic Law no. 2013-53 of 24 December 2013, on the introduction of transitional justice and related organisational arrangements”, enacted by the Tunisian Parliament on 23 December 2013 and published in the Official Gazette on 31 December 2013. The respondent Government specified that Part III of Title I covered “Accountability and criminal liability”, in order to “prevent impunity and ensure that offenders do not escape punishment” (section 6). Section 8 provided for the establishment of specialised divisions in the courts of first instance, composed of judges who would receive special training in transitional justice. They “[would] rule on cases relating to serious violations of human rights”, including torture (section 8 (2)(3)), which – in accordance with section 9 – were not subject to statutory limitation.
The Government explained that Part IV of Title I focused more specifically on “Reparation and Rehabilitation” (sections 10 to 13). Pursuant to section 11 § 1:
“[t]he compensation of victims of violations is a right guaranteed by law and the State shall offer every form of sufficient, effective redress commensurate with the extent of the violations committed and the individual situation of each victim.”
The Government further added that Title II of the law established a “Truth and Dignity Commission” (TDC), which was an independent body whose members were chosen by the Legislative Assembly from among public officials known for their neutrality, impartiality and competence (sections 16, 19 and 38 of the Organic Law). Under section 17, the TDC’s work was to cover the entire period from 1 July 1955 to 31 December 2013, the date of the law’s promulgation. The duration of the TDC’s work was limited to four years, starting from the date of appointment of its members (section 18).
Lastly, the Government informed the Court that, according to information obtained by it from the Swiss Embassy in Tunis, persons who considered themselves victims of the former regime had until 15 June 2016 to apply to the TDC. The Commission was currently dealing with over 60,000 cases. In this capacity, it was holding hearings which, since November 2016, had also been held in public. According to the information received, it was foreseen that selected cases would be transmitted to the courts at a later stage in the investigation process.
The applicant has not contested these submissions by the Swiss Government (see paragraphs 31-35 above). He specified at the hearing of 14 June 2017 that he had in fact contacted the TDC and had received a simple acknowledgment of receipt in February 2016, but had had no further communication from the TDC since then.
The relevant parts of the Federal Act on Private International Law of 18 December 1987 (LDIP), as in force at the material time, provide:
“Unless specially provided otherwise in this Act, the Swiss judicial or administrative authorities of the defendant’s domicile shall have jurisdiction.
Where this Act does not provide for any forum in Switzerland and proceedings abroad prove impossible or it cannot reasonably be required that they be brought, the Swiss judicial or administrative authorities of the locality with which the case has a sufficient connection shall have jurisdiction.
The Swiss courts of the domicile or, in the absence of domicile, those of the defendant’s habitual residence or place of business shall have jurisdiction to examine actions based on a wrongful act.
Where the defendant has neither a domicile nor a place of habitual residence or place of business in Switzerland, the action may be brought before the Swiss court of the place in which the act took place or of its outcome.
Where several defendants can be found in Switzerland and where the claims are essentially based on the same legal and factual grounds, proceedings may be brought against all of them before the same court having jurisdiction; the first court to be seised has exclusive jurisdiction.
Where the perpetrator and the injured party have their habitual residence in the same State, the claims submitted in respect of a wrongful act shall be governed by the law of that State.
Where the perpetrator and the injured party do not have their habitual residence in the same State, those claims shall be governed by the law of the State in which the wrongful act was committed. However, if the result was produced in another State, the law of that State shall be applicable if the perpetrator ought to have foreseen that the result would be produced there.
  Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs, where a wrongful act violates a legal relationship between the perpetrator and the injured party, the claims submitted in respect of that act shall be governed by the law applicable to that legal relationship.”
Article 41 of the Swiss Code of Obligations provides for liability for a wrongful act:
“A person who unlawfully causes damage to another, whether wilfully or through negligence or imprudence, is required to make reparation.
A person who intentionally causes damage to another by acting contrary to moral standards is also required to make reparation.”
The Federal Council’s dispatch of 10 November 1982 on section 3 of the LDIP contains the following paragraphs (FF 1983 I 290):
“The draft law seeks to determine, in an exhaustive manner, the Swiss authorities’ international jurisdiction. It follows that there is no international jurisdiction in Switzerland if this is not provided for in the draft law. The reasons for this are known. There are cases where the connection with Switzerland is so tenuous as not to justify setting in motion the whole machinery of justice in order to settle them. But section 3 provides for an exception to this principle. The Swiss authorities are bound to declare themselves competent even in cases presenting a highly tenuous connection with our country where it is impossible to bring an action or lodge an appeal abroad. It is for the applicant or the appellant to prove that impossibility. Where such proof has been adduced, jurisdiction lies with the authority at the place with which the facts have a sufficient connection. If there exist several competing fora in Switzerland, jurisdiction lies with the first authority seised.
Clearly, the impossibility of bringing and proceeding with an action abroad can be examined only in the light of the actual circumstances of the case and that of any consequences that may have arisen for the person concerned; ultimately, it will be for the court concerned to decide whether it has jurisdiction.”
The general index of the Federal Supreme Court Reports (ATF) contains no case-law concerning section 3 of the LDIP. There is relatively little case-law from the Swiss courts concerning section 3 of the LDIP. Indeed, the present case led the Federal Supreme Court to interpret section 3 of the LDIP in detail for the first time in its judgment of 22 May 2007. The Federal Supreme Court had previously mentioned this provision in a judgment of 5 March 1991 (5C.244/1990, point 5), without however applying it. In an action for release from liability for a debt, the Federal Supreme Court upheld the application of section 3 of the LDIP, which had not been challenged by the defendant, in a judgment of 15 December 2005 (5C.264/2004, point 5), holding that there existed a sufficient connection with the forum of Lugano, where the claimant had its headquarters, taken together with the place in which the proceedings were brought.
Without wishing to be exhaustive, the Court also considers it appropriate to take into consideration cantonal practice, to which the parties and the Federal Supreme Court, in its judgment regarding the present case (4C.379/2006, cons. 3.4), also referred. In a judgment of 2 April 1993 (LGVE [Luzerner Gerichts- und Verwaltungsentscheide] 1993 I No. 14), the Supreme Court of the Canton of Lucerne confirmed that there was a sufficient connection with the facts of the case in the context of proceedings to vary the terms of a divorce order. In so doing, it specifically noted the Swiss nationality of the parties, the Swiss residence of the claimant at the time that the action was brought, and the fact that the former spouse’s divorce had already been pronounced by a Swiss court. The court confirmed that section 3 of the LDIP was to be interpreted restrictively in order to avoid, inter alia, forum shopping.
In a judgment of 2 March 2005 (AR GVP [Ausserrhodische Gerichts- und Verwaltungspraxis] 17/2005 no. 3469), the Cantonal Court of Appenzell Outer Rhodes accepted that the claimant’s place of residence met the connection criterion in a case concerning a German national, resident in Switzerland, who had brought an action before the Swiss courts against her husband, a German national resident in Spain, seeking to obtain an advance on legal costs in the context of an application for measures to preserve the marital union.
In a judgment of 14 November 2008 (C/5445/2007, point 2), the Canton of Geneva Court of Justice, in additional proceedings to a divorce order involving a Swiss and Spanish national and a French national who were resident in France, and in so far as French law did not recognise the system of offsetting vested benefits in an occupational pension plan, accepted the existence of a forum of necessity in the place of the headquarters of the respondent’s insurance institution, namely Geneva.
In a judgment of 17 May 2013 (NC130001), the Supreme Court of the Canton of Zurich confirmed the existence of a sufficient link regarding a Swiss national domiciled abroad and requesting registration, in Switzerland, of a change of gender.
The United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (hereafter “the Convention against Torture”) was ratified by Switzerland on 2 December 1986 and entered into force on 26 June 1987. Article 1 provides:
“1. For the purposes of this Convention, the term ‘torture’ means any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person ... when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person acting in an official capacity ...”
Article 5 of that Convention provides for the States Parties’ jurisdiction in criminal matters as follows:
“1. Each State Party shall take such measures as may be necessary to establish its jurisdiction over the offences referred to in article 4 in the following cases:
(a) When the offences are committed in any territory under its jurisdiction or on board a ship or aircraft registered in that State;
(b) When the alleged offender is a national of that State;
(c) When the victim is a national of that State if that State considers it appropriate.
Each State Party shall likewise take such measures as may be necessary to establish its jurisdiction over such offences in cases where the alleged offender is present in any territory under its jurisdiction and it does not extradite him pursuant to article 8 to any of the States mentioned in paragraph I of this article.
This Convention does not exclude any criminal jurisdiction exercised in accordance with internal law.”
Articles 6 and 7 of that Convention also relate to the manner in which jurisdiction in criminal matters is exercised:
“1. Upon being satisfied, after an examination of information available to it, that the circumstances so warrant, any State Party in whose territory a person alleged to have committed any offence referred to in article 4 is present shall take him into custody or take other legal measures to ensure his presence. The custody and other legal measures shall be as provided in the law of that State but may be continued only for such time as is necessary to enable any criminal or extradition proceedings to be instituted.
Such State shall immediately make a preliminary inquiry into the facts.
Any person in custody pursuant to paragraph I of this article shall be assisted in communicating immediately with the nearest appropriate representative of the State of which he is a national, or, if he is a stateless person, with the representative of the State where he usually resides.
When a State, pursuant to this article, has taken a person into custody, it shall immediately notify the States referred to in article 5, paragraph 1, of the fact that such person is in custody and of the circumstances which warrant his detention. The State which makes the preliminary inquiry contemplated in paragraph 2 of this article shall promptly report its findings to the said States and shall indicate whether it intends to exercise jurisdiction.
The State Party in the territory under whose jurisdiction a person alleged to have committed any offence referred to in article 4 is found shall in the cases contemplated in article 5, if it does not extradite him, submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution.
These authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any ordinary offence of a serious nature under the law of that State. In the cases referred to in article 5, paragraph 2, the standards of evidence required for prosecution and conviction shall in no way be less stringent than those which apply in the cases referred to in article 5, paragraph 1.
Any person regarding whom proceedings are brought in connection with any of the offences referred to in article 4 shall be guaranteed fair treatment at all stages of the proceedings.”
Article 14 of that Convention provides for the right of victims of torture to obtain redress:
“1. Each State Party shall ensure in its legal system that the victim of an act of torture obtains redress and has an enforceable right to fair and adequate compensation, including the means for as full rehabilitation as possible. In the event of the death of the victim as a result of an act of torture, his dependants shall be entitled to compensation.
Nothing in this article shall affect any right of the victim or other persons to compensation which may exist under national law.”
During the deliberations in 1981 the working group accepted a proposal by the Netherlands to include the words “committed in any territory under its jurisdiction” after the expression “act of torture”. When the Convention was adopted, however, this phrase had disappeared, for reasons that are unclear (see Manfred Nowak/Elizabeth McArthur, The United Nations Convention against Torture: A Commentary, Oxford University Press 2008, p. 457).
When ratifying the Convention against Torture the United States made the following declaration:
“It is the understanding of the United States that Article 14 requires a State Party to provide a private right of action for damages only for acts of torture committed in territory under the jurisdiction of the State Party.”
When submitting the bill for ratification of the Convention against Torture to the Senate, the President of the United States made the following remarks:
“The negotiating history of the Convention indicates that Article 14 requires a State to provide a private right of action for damages only for acts of torture committed in its territory, not for acts of torture occurring abroad. Article 14 was in fact adopted with express reference to ‘the victim of an act of torture committed in any territory under its jurisdiction.’ The italicized wording appears to have been deleted by mistake. This interpretation is confirmed by the absence of discussion of the issue, since the creation of a ‘universal’ right to sue would have been as controversial as was the creation of ‘universal jurisdiction’, if not more so.” (‘Summary and Analysis of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment’ in Message from the President of the Unites States transmitting the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 20 May 1998 10th Congress, 2nd Session, reproduced in Nowak/McArthur, op. cit., pp. 460-61).
The United Nations Committee against Torture, the entity entrusted with implementing the Convention against Torture, adopted General Comment no. 3 (2012) on the Implementation of Article 14 by States parties (CAT/C.GC/3, 13 December 2012). In it, the Committee asserted that Article 14 does not contain any geographical limitation:
“22. Under the Convention, States parties are required to prosecute or extradite alleged perpetrators of torture when they are found in any territory under its jurisdiction, and to adopt the necessary legislation to make this possible. The Committee considers that the application of article 14 is not limited to victims who were harmed in the territory of the State party or by or against nationals of the State party. The Committee has commended the efforts of States parties for providing civil remedies for victims who were subjected to torture or ill-treatment outside their territory. This is particularly important when a victim is unable to exercise the rights guaranteed under article 14 in the territory where the violation took place. Indeed, article 14 requires States parties to ensure that all victims of torture and ill-treatment are able to access remedy and obtain redress.”
With regard to the practical and legal obstacles inherent in the right to redress for acts of torture, the Committee stated:
“38. States parties to the Convention have an obligation to ensure that the right to redress is effective. Specific obstacles that impede the enjoyment of the right to redress and prevent effective implementation of article 14 include, but are not limited to: inadequate national legislation, discrimination with regard to accessing complaints and investigation mechanisms and procedures for remedy and redress; inadequate measures for securing the custody of alleged perpetrators, State secrecy laws, evidential burdens and procedural requirements that interfere with the determination of the right to redress; statutes of limitations, amnesties and immunities; the failure to provide sufficient legal aid and protection measures for victims and witnesses; as well as the associated stigma, and the physical, psychological and other related effects of torture and ill-treatment. In addition, the failure of a State party to execute judgements providing reparative measures for a victim of torture, handed down by national, international or regional courts, constitutes a significant impediment to the right to redress. States parties should develop coordinated mechanisms to enable victims to execute judgements across State lines, including recognizing the validity of court orders from other States parties and assisting in locating the assets of perpetrators.”
However, in several individual communications lodged with the Committee against Torture, the latter has shown a more reserved attitude towards the geographical scope of Article 14. In the case of Marcos Roitmann Rosenmann v. Spain (no. 176/2000), the complainant argued that the handling of an extradition request against General Pinochet, then resident in the United Kingdom, was in breach of Article 14 of the Convention against Torture. In a decision of 30 April 2002, the Committee declared this complaint inadmissible for the following reasons:
“6.6 With respect to (c) [the objection based on the Committee’s lack of jurisdiction ratione personae], the Committee notes that the complainant’s claims with regard to torture committed by Chilean authorities are ratione personae justiciable in Chile and in other States in whose territory General Pinochet may be found. However, to the extent that General Pinochet was not in Spain at the time of the submission of the communication, the Committee would consider that articles 13 and 14 of the Convention invoked by the complainant do not apply ratione personae to Spain. In particular, his ‘right to complain to, and to have his case promptly and impartially examined by, [the] competent authorities’, and his claim to compensation would be justiciable vis-à-vis the State responsible for the acts of torture, i.e. Chile, not Spain.”
In the case of Z. v. Australia (no. 511/2012, decision of 26 November 2014), the Committee against Torture examined an individual communication lodged by an Australian citizen of Chinese origin who submitted that she had been tortured by the police during a visit to the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”) in the period 1999-2000. She had attempted, unsuccessfully, to bring a civil action for compensation before the Australian courts against, inter alia, the former President of China and a member of that country’s communist party. The action had been dismissed by the Australian courts on the grounds that members of the government of a foreign State enjoyed immunity. The Committee, called upon to examine the case, reiterated its approach concerning the geographical application of Article 14 of the Convention against Torture, but dismissed the communication, accepting that the State Party had been unable to establish its jurisdiction for acts of torture committed outside its territory by officials of another State (references omitted):
“6.3 The Committee notes the State party’s argument that the communication is inadmissible ratione personae under article 22 of the Convention because the communication requires the Committee to consider whether China itself has violated article 14 by allegedly not providing an effective remedy to the complainant, and China has not made the declaration under article 22 of the Convention. The Committee also notes the complainant’s assertion that article 14 applies irrespective of the places of the acts of torture; and that, because the Australian courts have not declined jurisdiction on the ground of forum non conveniens, the State party is required to afford an enforceable right to fair and adequate compensation. The Committee recalls its general comment No. 3 (2012) on the implementation of article 14 by States parties, in which it considers that ‘the application of article 14 is not limited to victims who were harmed in the territory of the State party or by or against nationals of the State party’ and that ‘article 14 requires States parties to ensure that all victims of torture and ill-treatment are able to access remedy and obtain redress’. However, the Committee observes that, in the specific circumstances of this case, the State party is unable to establish jurisdiction over officials of another State for alleged acts committed outside the State party’s territory. Accordingly, the Committee considers that, in the case under review, the complainant’s claim to redress and compensation is inadmissible.”
Academic opinion is divided on the question whether Article 14 of the Convention against Torture has extra-territorial jurisdiction. In the opinion of certain commentators, this provision does not lay down an obligation to exercise universal jurisdiction, but equally it does not prohibit States, in the light of paragraph 2 and of the object and purpose of the Convention, from providing for such a possibility (see Nowak/McArthur, op.cit., p. 494 et seq., and Kate Parlett, Universal Civil Jurisdiction for Torture, European Human Rights Law Review, Issue 4 (2007), pp. 385-403, 398).
Other authors argue that Article 14 does apply to acts of torture committed abroad, given that it provides for no geographical limitation (see Christopher Keith Hall, The Duty of States Parties to the Convention against Torture to Provide Procedures Permitting Victims to Recover Reparations for Torture Committed Abroad, European Journal of International Law, vol. 18 no. 5 (Nov. 2007), pp. 921-37, 926, and Alexander Orakhelashvili, State Immunity and Hierarchy of Norm: Why the House of Lords Got It Wrong, European Journal of International Law, vol. 18 no. 5 (Nov. 2007), pp. 955-70, 961).
Still other commentators consider that no inference can be drawn from Article 14 as to whether a State Party is obliged to make available to victims of torture remedies in respect of acts which were perpetrated outside its jurisdiction (see, for example, Paul David Mora, The Legality of Civil Jurisdiction over Torture under the Universal Principle, German Yearbook of International Law, Vol. 52, 2009, pp. 367-403, 373).
The United Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 28 July 1951 entered into force on 22 April 1954. It was ratified by Switzerland on 21 January 1955 and entered into force in respect of Switzerland on 21 April 1955.
The relevant provision for the present case reads as follows:
“1. A refugee shall have free access to the courts of law on the territory of all Contracting States.
A refugee shall enjoy in the Contracting State in which he has his habitual residence the same treatment as a national in matters pertaining to access to the Courts, including legal assistance and exemption from cautio judicatum solvi.
A refugee shall be accorded in the matters referred to in paragraph 2 in countries other than that in which he has his habitual residence the treatment granted to a national of the country of his habitual residence.”
On 16 December 2005 the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted Resolution 60/147, containing, in the annex, the “Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law”. The relevant paragraphs are worded as follows:
 “The General Assembly,
...
Recognizing that, in honouring the victims’ right to benefit from remedies and reparation, the international community keeps faith with the plight of victims, survivors and future human generations and reaffirms the international legal principles of accountability, justice and the rule of law,
Convinced that, in adopting a victim-oriented perspective, the international community affirms its human solidarity with victims of violations of international law, including violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law, as well as with humanity at large, in accordance with the following Basic Principles and Guidelines,
Adopts the following Basic Principles and Guidelines:
...
The obligation to respect, ensure respect for and implement international human rights law and international humanitarian law as provided for under the respective bodies of law, includes, inter alia, the duty to:
...
(c) Provide those who claim to be victims of a human rights or humanitarian law violation with equal and effective access to justice, as described below, irrespective of who may ultimately be the bearer of responsibility for the violation; and
(d) Provide effective remedies to victims, including reparation, as described below.
...
Remedies for gross violations of international human rights law and serious violations of international humanitarian law include the victim’s right to the following as provided for under international law:
A victim of a gross violation of international human rights law or of a serious violation of international humanitarian law shall have equal access to an effective judicial remedy as provided for under international law. Other remedies available to the victim include access to administrative and other bodies, as well as mechanisms, modalities and proceedings conducted in accordance with domestic law. Obligations arising under international law to secure the right to access justice and fair and impartial proceedings shall be reflected in domestic laws...
Adequate, effective and prompt reparation is intended to promote justice by redressing gross violations of international human rights law or serious violations of international humanitarian law. Reparation should be proportional to the gravity of the violations and the harm suffered. In accordance with its domestic laws and international legal obligations, a State shall provide reparation to victims for acts or omissions which can be attributed to the State and constitute gross violations of international human rights law or serious violations of international humanitarian law. In cases where a person, a legal person, or other entity is found liable for reparation to a victim, such party should provide reparation to the victim or compensate the State if the State has already provided reparation to the victim.
States should endeavour to establish national programmes for reparation and other assistance to victims in the event that the parties liable for the harm suffered are unable or unwilling to meet their obligations.
States shall, with respect to claims by victims, enforce domestic judgements for reparation against individuals or entities liable for the harm suffered and endeavour to enforce valid foreign legal judgements for reparation in accordance with domestic law and international legal obligations. To that end, States should provide under their domestic laws effective mechanisms for the enforcement of reparation judgements.
In accordance with domestic law and international law, and taking account of individual circumstances, victims of gross violations of international human rights law and serious violations of international humanitarian law should, as appropriate and proportional to the gravity of the violation and the circumstances of each case, be provided with full and effective reparation, as laid out in principles 19 to 23, which include the following forms: restitution, compensation, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition.
...”
On 30 August 2015 the Institute of International Law (hereafter “the IIL”) adopted at its Tallinn Session a Resolution entitled “Universal Civil Jurisdiction with regard to Reparation for International Crimes”. It is worded as follows:
“The Institute of International Law,
Conscious that appropriate and effective reparation has to be provided for the harm suffered by the victims of international crimes;
Considering that “international crimes” means serious crimes under international law such as genocide, torture and other crimes against humanity, and war crimes;
Recalling that universal criminal jurisdiction is a means of preventing the commission of such crimes and to avoid their impunity, as affirmed in the 2005 Krakow Resolution on “universal criminal jurisdiction with regard to the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes”;
Noting that the prosecution of the authors of international crimes and their punishment provides only a partial satisfaction to the victims;
Considering that universal civil jurisdiction is a means of avoiding the deprivation of the victims of international crimes to obtain reparation of the harm suffered, in particular because the courts ordinarily having jurisdiction do not provide for an appropriate remedy;
Adopts the following Resolution:
Victims of international crimes have a right to appropriate and effective reparation from persons liable for the injury.
They have a right to an effective access to justice to claim reparation.
These rights do not depend on any criminal conviction of the author of the crime.
A court should exercise jurisdiction over claims for reparation by victims provided that:
For the purposes of paragraph 1(b), courts shall be considered to provide an available remedy if they have jurisdiction and if they are capable of dealing with the claim in compliance with the requirements of due process and of providing remedies that afford appropriate and effective redress.
The court where claims for relief by victims have been brought should decline to entertain the claims or suspend the proceedings, in view of the circumstances, when the victims’ claims have also been brought before:
States should see that the legal and financial obstacles facing victims and their representatives are kept to a minimum in the course of procedures relating to claims for reparation.
States should endeavour to develop procedures to allow groups of victims to present claims for reparation.
The immunity of States should not deprive victims of their right to reparation.
It is recommended that in the course of the preparation of an instrument on jurisdiction and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters, in particular by the Hague Conference on Private International Law, the rights of victims as set out in these Articles be taken into account.”
In his background report to this Resolution (Yearbook of the Institute of International Law, Tallinn Session, Justitia et Pace, 2015 vol. 76, pp. 1266), the rapporteur Andreas Bucher argues that Article 14 of the Convention against Torture does not impose universal civil jurisdiction in the area of international crimes, in the following terms:
 “65. ....the cited provisions do not define the connection that a victim must have with a State in order to be able to benefit from its system for reparation; equally, they do not indicate that even victims who have no connection with the territory of a State may apply in it for compensation in respect of acts of torture sustained elsewhere. Admittedly, it is evident that the obligation to put in place a compensation system lies on the State responsible for acts of torture, and on the State in which such acts were prepared or on the territory of which the torturers have attempted to obtain refuge. However, the system recommended by the Convention against Torture does not impose on a State an obligation to provide reparation in respect of acts having no connection with that State or for victims whose protection does not fall within its sphere of interest, whether that is expressed in terms of jurisdictional criteria, political stakes, or in any other manner. In other words, the Convention does not require that a State endow its courts with universal civil jurisdiction.
Moreover, we note that in Articles 5 to 8, the Convention against Torture defines its criminal scope in detail. This international criminal jurisdiction is not universal, although it might be thought that its effects appear to be so. However, even if this were correct, one cannot assign a similar scope to Article 14 on the obligation to provide redress, which is worded in terms that are significantly more general and thus less binding on the States Parties. Nor does this difference in the texts allow for the conclusion that the system for civil jurisdiction ought to be defined in parallel with the grounds for criminal jurisdiction; a mere affirmation that these two systems for redress would be complementary is insufficient to overcome the difference between them as that was intended by the authors of the Convention.”
The background report to the Resolution adopted by the IIL in 2015, mentioned above (see paragraph 63), also refers to the concept of the forum of necessity. It argues that this concept is not generally accepted by the States, as follows:
“188. The idea of accepting a forum of necessity with so many clarifications would require implementation at the level of private international law, whether national or international in source. As matters currently stand, it is not possible to derive such a solution from general international law. In particular, its adoption conflicts with the fact that the concept of a forum of necessity, like that of a denial of justice, is not generally accepted in the various legal systems...”
In addition, referring to the present case as judged before the Swiss courts, the rapporteur notes the lack of precision in the criteria used by the domestic legal orders, such as “sufficient connection” or “connection with the dispute”:
“189. Indeed, attention should be drawn to the lack of clarity surrounding use of the criterion of a ‘sufficient connection’ with the forum State or a “connection with the dispute’, especially with regard to a provision as it exists in Switzerland and Quebec. Its indeterminacy creates a risk that it will be misunderstood and interpreted to the detriment of victims’ legitimate interests. This has been confirmed by a judgment of the Swiss Federal Court, refusing to accept a forum of necessity in the case of a Tunisian national, resident with his family for ten years in Switzerland, where he had obtained political asylum, and who was claiming reparation for non-pecuniary damage from the Republic of Tunisia on account of torture experienced in the premises of the Ministry of the Interior in Tunisia in 1992; at the end of a purely literal interpretation, it was concluded that the forum of necessity could not be recognised, since it required a sufficient connection with the “facts of the case”, while the connection with the claimant’s person was not decisive.”
At its Sofia Session in 2012, the “Committee on International Civil Litigation and the Interests of the Public” of the International Law Association (hereafter, “the ILA”) adopted Resolution no. 2/2012. This Resolution addresses problems of coordination between different jurisdictions and is limited to claims against individuals, corporations and other non-State actors (see paragraph 1.1 below). Among the elements which could serve as grounds for State jurisdiction, the Resolution proposes, inter alia, the forum of necessity. The relevant paragraphs are worded as follows:
“1.1 These Guidelines apply to civil claims against corporations, individuals and other non-State actors arising out of or brought to redress conduct constituting a human rights violation, in view of the nature of the norm allegedly violated or the gross or systematic nature of the breach alleged.”
“2.3(1) The courts of any State with a sufficient connection to the dispute shall have jurisdiction in order to avert a denial of justice.
3(2) A denial of justice in the sense of paragraph 2.3(1) occurs if the court concludes upon hearing all interested parties, and after taking account of reliable public sources of information, that:
3(3) A sufficient connection in the sense of paragraph 2.3(1) consists in particular in:
The Court has updated the comparative-law analysis that was prepared for the Chamber (see paragraphs 48-76 of the Chamber judgment). The updated version takes into account 39 member States of the Council of Europe (Albania, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Monaco, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine and the United Kingdom), and also certain States which are not members of the Council of Europe.
In the context of the comparative-law research, the Court analysed the situation in the various States with regard to universal jurisdiction for civil actions to obtain compensation for damage sustained as a result of acts of torture.
It follows from the above-mentioned study that, of the 39 European States included in the analysis, only the Netherlands recognise universal civil jurisdiction in respect of acts of torture. In the Akpan case (judgment of 30 January 2013, case no. C/09/337050/HA), the District Court of The Hague found against a subsidiary of the Dutch company Shell, holding that it had breached its responsibility to protect the Ogoni people in Nigeria in the course of its petroleum-extraction activities. The parent company was also subject to an obligation to provide protection under Nigerian law, but it was found that, in this particular case, the conditions for applying that obligation were not met. Previously, in the El-Hojouj v. Amer Derbas and Others case (judgment of 21 March 2012, case no. 400882/HA), the same court had awarded damages to a Palestinian doctor who had been tortured by Libyan officials.
The other Contracting States studied do not recognise universal international jurisdiction before the civil courts, whether for acts of torture or for other criminal acts or offences.
In Italy, for example, there is neither a provision of positive law nor clear case-law conferring on the civil courts universal jurisdiction for compensation claims in cases of torture and crimes against humanity. However, part of Italian academic opinion considers that certain decisions by the Italian courts may be moving in the direction of recognising such jurisdiction. These include the Court of Cassation’s judgment in the Ferrini case (6 November 2003, 11 March 2004), concerning Germany’s liability for the claimant’s arrest in Italy and his deportation to Germany during the Second World War. In the context of those proceedings, the Court of Cassation placed particular emphasis in its reasoning on the need to ensure respect for jus cogens as a fundamental value of the international community. Reference should also be made to a series of subsequent judgments delivered by the Italian courts against Germany in the period 2004-2008. One of those judgments declared enforceable in Italy a judgment by a Greek court which ordered Germany to compensate the victims of the Distomo (Greece) massacre of 10 June 1944. These Italian judgments were the subject of the judgment by the International Court of Justice (hereafter, “the ICJ”) of 3 February 2012, in the case on Jurisdictional Immunities of the State (Germany v. Italy: Greece intervening), judgment, ICJ Reports 2012, p. 99), which found that Italy had breached customary international law guaranteeing States jurisdictional immunity.
In the United Kingdom, in the case of Jones v. Saudi Arabia ([2006] UKHL 26), the House of Lords held that Article 14 of the Convention against Torture did not provide for universal civil jurisdiction, and that there was no evidence that States had recognised an international-law obligation to exercise universal jurisdiction over claims arising from alleged breaches of peremptory norms of international law. Equally, there was no consensus of judicial and learned opinion that they should. The House of Lords distinguished the Jones case from another case previously examined by it, namely Pinochet (no. 3) [ex parte Pinochet Ugarte (No. 3) [2000] 1 AC 147], concerning the former Chilean dictator, on the grounds, specifically, that the Pinochet case concerned criminal proceedings which fell squarely within the universal jurisdiction mandated by the Convention against Torture (see §§ 25-32 of the judgment). The House of Lords thus found no reason to set aside the applicability of the rule laying down absolute State immunity for acts committed by their representatives acting in their official capacity. That case subsequently came before this Court, which held that there had been no violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention (see Jones and Others v. the United Kingdom, nos. 34356/06 and 40525/06, ECHR 2014). In a recent judgment in the case of Belhaj and another v. Straw and others ([2017] UKSC 3), Lord Mance and Lord Sumption reiterated the findings of the House of Lords with regard to the non-existence of universal civil jurisdiction for acts of torture.
Turning to non-member States of the Council of Europe, the Court notes that the Canadian courts enjoy universal jurisdiction in examining civil claims – but solely in cases concerning terrorism, under the 2012 Justice for Victims of Terrorism Act. However, this jurisdiction is subject to the condition that the victim is a Canadian citizen or is a permanent resident of Canada, or that the civil action has a “real and substantial connection to Canada”. In contrast, universal jurisdiction does not apply to actions in respect of damage sustained as a result of other violations of international law, including torture, except where it is shown that it took place in the context of acts of terrorism. In the case of Bouzari v. Islamic Republic of Iran ([2004] 243 DLR (4th) 406), the Ontario Court of Appeal held that Article 14 of the UN Convention against Torture did not impose an obligation on Canada to ensure civil-law remedies for acts of torture committed outside its territory. In the case of Kazemi (Succession) v. the Islamic Republic of Iran (2014 SCC 62, [2014] 3 S.C.R 176), the Supreme Court of Canada, noting the absence of State practice and of opinio juris, held that Canada was not obliged to open its courts so that its citizens could seek civil redress for acts of torture committed abroad.
Of all the States included in the present survey, only the United States provides, at federal level, for universal jurisdiction in respect of civil claims for compensation with regard to damage sustained as a result of torture, on the basis of two federal laws: the 1789 Alien Tort Statute and the 1991 Torture Victim Protection Act.
The first ascribes jurisdiction to the federal courts for “any civil action by an alien for a tort only, committed in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the United States”. In other words, it is not necessary that the impugned act was committed in the territory of the United States or by a national of that State. The first significant application of the Alien Tort Statute was in the landmark case of Filártiga v. Peña-Irala, examined before the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in 1980 [630 F.2d 876 (2d Cir. 1980)]. In that case, the court accepted the complaint by the parents of a victim who had been tortured to death in Paraguay; the complaint was brought against the perpetrator of the impugned acts, who was then resident in the United States. The court found that federal jurisdiction could be exercised whenever an alleged torturer was found and served with process by an alien within the borders of the United States (ibid., at p. 878).
The Torture Victim Protection Act provides as follows:
“An individual who, under actual or apparent authority, or color of law, of any foreign nation subjects an individual to torture shall, in a civil action, be liable for damages to that individual...” (section 2 (a) § 1).
It is clear from these two laws that cases can, a priori, be submitted to the courts of the United States without there being a jurisdictional link with that country. For a court to be entitled to take action on a case, the person against whom the claim is brought must nonetheless fall within the jurisdiction of the United States at the time that the action is lodged. Furthermore, even where the court’s jurisdiction is accepted, there exist other legal obstacles. In reality, it seems that about 80% of the cases brought under those two Acts have been dismissed on various grounds, such as the “act of State” doctrine, sovereign immunity or the forum non conveniens doctrine (see Nowak/McArthur, op.cit., p. 494).
Moreover, limitations have been placed on the scope of the Alien Tort Statute in recent years. In the case of Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., Nigerian nationals who had obtained refugee status in the United States applied to the American courts under the Alien Tort Statute, alleging that Dutch, British and Nigerian companies had aided and abetted violations of international law committed by the Nigerian Government [Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., 133 S. Ct. 1659 (2013)]. On 17 April 2013 the US Supreme Court ruled as follows:
“We therefore conclude that the presumption against extraterritoriality applies to claims under the ATS, and that nothing in the statute rebuts that presumption. ‘[T]here is no clear indication of extraterritoriality here,’ Morrison, 561 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 16), and petitioners’ case seeking relief for violations of the law of nations occurring outside the United States is barred.
IV
On these facts, all the relevant conduct took place outside the United States. And even where the claims touch and concern the territory of the United States, they must do so with sufficient force to displace the presumption against extraterritorial application. See Morrison, 561 U. S. ___ (slip op. at 17–24). Corporations are often present in many countries, and it would reach too far to say that mere corporate presence suffices. If Congress were to determine otherwise, a statute more specific than the ATS would be required.”
The question of the civil courts’ universal jurisdiction must be distinguished from the possibility of applying to join the proceedings as a civil party in criminal proceedings brought before the criminal courts on the basis of the principle of universal jurisdiction in criminal matters. Several States provide for this possibility (including Belgium, Spain, France, Ireland, Norway, the Czech Republic and Slovenia).
Thus, in Belgium the universal jurisdiction of the national criminal courts is governed by Article 12bis of the preliminary part of the Code of Criminal Procedure, introduced by the Law of 5 August 2003. This article enables the Belgian criminal courts to extend their jurisdiction to include offences that do not have a connection with the national territory, either in application of a rule of international law (as provided for by the Convention against Torture), or in application of a rule of customary international law (as regards the crime of genocide and crimes against humanity).
Equally, the Judicature Act in Spain provides for the universal criminal jurisdiction of the Spanish courts for certain crimes, including crimes against humanity and acts of torture, committed in other States by Spanish citizens or by non-nationals, subject to certain conditions. In the context of criminal proceedings, the victims of crimes may join the proceedings as a civil party and claim redress in respect of the damage sustained (Article 112 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
In France, the Code of Criminal Procedure allows criminal charges to be brought against persons responsible for acts of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, even when committed outside French territory, and to try them before French courts if those persons are present in France. In such cases, the civil-party proceedings can be joined to the public prosecution.
In Ireland the legislation also recognises universal criminal jurisdiction in respect of torture and crimes against humanity, and the general national scheme of compensation for victims of crime applies in principle to cases examined by the Irish courts on that basis; however, there is no practical example to date of such compensation being awarded by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Tribunal.
The Court’s comparative-law analysis has shown that the rules governing universal civil jurisdiction in eleven of the European States considered (Austria, Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal and Romania) explicitly recognise either the forum of necessity or a principle bearing another name but entailing very similar if not identical consequences (as in the case of France). Including Switzerland, there are therefore twelve States in this category. Among the non-member States of the Council of Europe, the forum of necessity is recognised by the Civil Code of Quebec (in Canada), but the domestic case-law has recently introduced it into the domestic law of some other Canadian provinces.
In eight of these States, the forum of necessity is provided for by law (Austria, Belgium, Estonia, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania and Switzerland), even if it was in some instances initially defined by the caselaw and subsequently enacted in law by the legislature. Quebec also comes within this category. In the four other States (France, Germany, Luxembourg and Norway), the forum of necessity is a creation of case-law, and has not been enacted into law by the legislature. The same is true in respect of Canada (except for Quebec).
In France, private international law does not include the jurisdictional principle of a “forum of necessity” as such. In some rare cases, however, the national courts have held, on the basis of international public policy and in order to avoid a denial of justice, that they have jurisdiction.
As to the types of dispute to which the principle of the forum of necessity applies, the Court notes that in all of the States studied which recognise this concept, the forum of necessity is applied, barring the occasional exception, without distinction being made on the basis of the nature of the dispute. It seems, however, that this forum is primarily applied in the areas of family law or contract law. It does not appear that the courts in these member States have been required to rule on a case similar to the present one, that is, concerning a civil action to obtain compensation for damage sustained as a result of torture.
As to the conditions of application of the forum of necessity, the Court observes that in all the States which recognise this principle – whether it has been established by case-law or codified by the legislature – its application is always subject to two cumulative conditions, namely, the de facto or de jure impossibility of bringing the dispute before the courts of another State, and the existence of at least a certain proximity (or at least a certain connection) between the dispute and the State of the forum applied to.
With regard to the first condition, the Court observes that the forum of necessity is by nature subsidiary, and that it enters into play where examination of the case by the courts of another State is (de jure or de facto) impossible, or is unreasonably difficult. With regard to the second condition, namely the existence of a certain connection between the dispute and the forum State in question, the Court notes that the relevant legislative provisions require either “close ties” (as in Belgium and Estonia), or “sufficient” (Poland, Romania) or “sufficiently strong” ties (Portugal), without further precision. Identification of the relevant connection and of its effective existence is carried out in the specific circumstances of the case by the domestic court before which it is brought. The factors which indicate a connection accepted by the courts may vary depending on the nature of the dispute or the identity of the parties (legal entities, natural persons).
The Court further notes that in those States and territories with a legal system based on the Anglo-American tradition, the question of a forum of necessity is not posed in the same terms. The broad scope of judicial power leads the courts to set limits on it. These limits are the equivalent of the grounds of jurisdiction in the civil-law tradition, in that they determine the cases that may be heard and determined by the courts. In the majority of cases, therefore, the aim is not to resolve a conflict as to proper jurisdiction by allowing for an additional or exceptional forum, but, conversely, to prevent too broad an exercise of judicial power at international level. To this end, an exception known as the forum non conveniens has been developed. Under this exception “a national court can decline jurisdiction on the grounds that a court with equal jurisdiction, situated in another State, would, objectively speaking, be a more appropriate forum for examining a dispute, that is, before which the dispute could be suitably settled, for the interests of all parties and for the ends of justice” (see House of Lords judgment in Spiliada Maritime Corporation/Cansulex Ltd, [1987] AC 460, esp. p. 476). The concept of denial of justice is relevant only for ensuring that the court before which a forum non conveniens claim is brought does not relinquish jurisdiction without verifying that an alternative forum exists.
The Court also considers it appropriate to refer to certain relevant elements of European Union law. The recast version of the Brussels I Regulation (known as “Brussels I-bis”, introduced by Regulation (EU) No. 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (recast), in force since 10 January 2015) does not provide for a forum of necessity. However, the forum of necessity is explicitly recognised in three special regulations covering certain fields which are excluded from the scope of the Brussels Ibis Regulation pursuant to Article 1 § 2.
Thus, Article 11 of Regulation (EU) no. 650/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on jurisdiction, applicable law, recognition and enforcement of decisions and acceptance and enforcement of authentic instruments in matters of succession and on the creation of a European Certificate of Succession explicitly provides for a forum of necessity in the following terms:
“Where no court of a Member State has jurisdiction pursuant to other provisions of this Regulation, the courts of a Member State may, on an exceptional basis, rule on the succession if proceedings cannot reasonably be brought or conducted or would be impossible in a third State with which the case is closely connected.
The case must have a sufficient connection with the Member State of the court seised.”
Furthermore, a similar provision is contained in Article 7 of Council Regulation (EC) no. 4/2009 of 18 December 2008 on jurisdiction, applicable law, recognition and enforcement of decisions and cooperation in matters relating to maintenance obligations. This is also the case with regard to Article 11 of Council Regulation (EU) 2016/1103 of 24 June 2016 implementing enhanced cooperation in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions in matters of matrimonial regimes. However, it should be noted that none of these texts provides more specific information on the nature of this connection. Identification of the relevant connection and the effective existence of a sufficient connection are left in each case to the assessment of the domestic court.