The case originated in three applications (nos. 59588/12, 59632/12 and 59865/12) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by eleven Hungarian nationals, Mr András Béres, Mr Gergő Ambrus, Mr Balázs Polákovics, Ms Ágnes Seregély, Mr Levente Stork, Ms Anna Bende, Ms Kinga Regina Kalocsai, Mr László Moldován, Ms Katalin Ámon, Mr Áron Gajárszki and Ms Judit Székelyné Rákosi (“the applicants”), on 10 September 2012.
The applicants were represented by Mr D. Karsai, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that the grounds on which the criminal proceedings against them had been terminated violated the presumption of innocence and the right to their reputation.
On 4 March 2015 the complaints concerning Articles 6 and 8 of the Convention were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible according to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
A list of the applicants is set out in the appendix.
On 23 December 2011 the applicants, political activists, participated in a demonstration organised by the political party “Politics Can Be Different’” (Lehet Más a Politika). The demonstrators blocked the entrance of a car park adjacent to the Parliament building by chaining themselves to each other and to concrete columns situated next to the entrance.
Following the incident the Budapest main police department opened criminal investigations against twenty-nine persons, including the applicants, on charges of violation of personal liberty under Article 175(1) of Act no. IV on the [old] Criminal Code.
On 9 March 2012 Parliament enacted Act no. XII of 2012 (“the Amnesty Act”) (see paragraph 12 below), which entered into force on 10 March 2012.
.  On 29 March 2012 the Budapest main police department discontinued the criminal investigation against the twenty-nine suspects, pursuant to Article 190 §§ 1 (e) and 2 of the Code on Criminal Procedure on the grounds that they had been granted amnesty. The applicants did not appeal against that decision.
.  On 6 September 2012 six of the applicants, Ms Bende, Ms Kalocsai, Ms Ámon, Ms Székelyné Rákosi, Mr Moldován and Mr Gajárszki, lodged a constitutional complaint requesting the Constitutional Court to declare sections 1, 2 and 4 of the Amnesty Act unconstitutional as infringing the right to their reputation and the principle of presumption of innocence.
.  The Constitutional Court declared the complaint inadmissible. It reasoned that the complaint did not raise any constitutional-law issues of “fundamental importance”, since it was based on an erroneous interpretation of the law. The Constitutional Court pointed out that the language employed by the Act could not be interpreted as establishing that the applicants had indeed committed the offence. In any event, the complaint was time-barred since it had been lodged outside the statutory 180 days’ time-limit following the entry into force of the legislation.
Act no. XII of 2012 (the Amnesty Act) enacted by Parliament on 9 March 2012 reads as follows:
“On the occasion of the entry into force of the Fundamental Law of Hungary, Parliament exercises its power under section 1(2) point j) of the Fundamental Law to grant amnesty in the following terms:”
“Az Országgyűlés Magyarország Alaptörvényének hatályba lépése alkalmából az Alaptörvény 1. cikk (2) bekezdés j) pontjában meghatározott hatáskörében eljárva közkegyelmet gyakorol a következők szerint:”
“No criminal procedure can be instituted or continued on account of the crime of violation of personal liberty within the meaning of Article 175 of Act no. IV of 1978 (Criminal Code), committed on 23 December 2011 in the context of blocking entrances to the restricted area around the Parliament building, carried out by several persons chaining themselves to each other and to the gates.”
“Nem indítható, illetve nem folytatható büntetőeljárás a 2011. december 23-án az Országházat körülvevő elzárt terület egyes bejáratainak több személy egymáshoz, illetve a kapukhoz láncolásával megvalósított lezárásával összefüggésben elkövetett, a Büntető Törvénykönyvről szóló 1978. évi IV. törvény (a továbbiakban: Btk.) szerinti személyi szabadság megsértése bűntette miatt (Btk. 175. §).”
“Any person convicted prior to the entry into force of the present Act, solely of the crime specified in section 1 and falling under amnesty, shall be exempted from punishment and their name deleted from the criminal register.”
“Mentesül a büntetés végrehajtása, valamint a büntetett előélethez fűződő hátrányok alól az az e törvény hatálybalépése előtt jogerősen elítélt, akivel szemben kizárólag az 1. §-ban meghatározott és közkegyelem alá eső bűncselekmény miatt szabtak ki büntetést.”
“The amnesty shall extend to any minor offence committed in connection with the blocking of the entrance of the restricted area around the Parliament building by persons chaining themselves to each other and to the gates.”
“A közkegyelem kiterjed a 2011. december 23-án az Országházat körülvevő elzárt terület egyes bejáratainak több személy egymáshoz, illetve a kapukhoz láncolásával megvalósított lezárásával összefüggésben elkövetett szabálysértésekre is.”
“The amnesty shall extend to any confiscated object used for committing the criminal acts defined in the present Act (Article 77(1) point a) of the Criminal Code).”
“A közkegyelem kiterjed az e törvényben meghatározott bűncselekmény elkövetéséhez eszközül használt dolgok elkobzására is [Btk. 77. § (1) bekezdés a) pontja].”
“The present Act enters into force on the day following its promulgation.”
“Ez a törvény a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.”
.  Act no. IV of 1978 on the [old] Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“(1) Any person who deprives another person of his personal freedom is guilty of an offence punishable by imprisonment for up to three years.
(2) Any person who acquires another person through trafficking in human beings and maintains the status of the victim by depriving him or her of personal freedom, and forces such victim into forced labour, is guilty of an offence punishable by imprisonment of between two and eight years.
(3) The punishment shall be imprisonment for up to five years in respect of subsection (1) and imprisonment of between five and ten years in respect of subsection (2), if the criminal act was committed: