The case originated in an application (no. 1814/11) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Ms Marilena-Carmen Popa (“the applicant”), on 15 December 2010.
The applicant was represented by Ms I.M. Peter a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged under Article 6 of the Convention that the criminal proceeding opened against her had been unfair because, on the one hand, she had not been properly heard by the court in view of the quashing by the High Court of Cassation and Justice of her acquittal and of the amending of the charges against her, and because, on the other hand, the aforementioned court had overturned her acquittal without a direct assessment of the relevant evidence on which it had relied. The applicant alleged further that, by fixing her probation period to three years, the domestic courts had breached Article 7 of the Convention in that they had imposed a heavier penalty than the one prescribed by law.
On 18 September 2015 the above-mentioned complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Bucharest.
Until 10 September 2010 the applicant was a notary public practising in Bucharest.
On 28 November 2003 the applicant authenticated a contract of sale of land concluded between two companies, namely, the seller S.C. V. S.R.L., represented by E.C., and the buyer S.C. O.E. S.R.L., represented by M.S.
On 1 July 2005 the prosecutor’s office attached to the High Court of Cassation and Justice (hereinafter “the prosecutor’s office”) indicted the applicant for continuous acts of forgery and sent her case to the Bucharest Court of Appeal (hereinafter “the Court of Appeal”) for trial. The prosecutor’s office asserted that between 31 January 2003 and 9 February 2004 the applicant, acting as a notary public, had forged several separate contracts of sale. In particular she had authenticated a number of contracts, including the contract of sale of 28 November 2003, in the absence of the signatory parties.
During the proceedings, the Court of Appeal heard evidence from the applicant, who was assisted by a lawyer. It also heard evidence from thirtynine witnesses, including E.C.
E.C. stated before the court that she had not been present at the notary public’s office when the contract of sale of 28 November 2003 had been concluded and that the signature on the contract belonged to someone else. She further stated that she had no connection to or knowledge of the company S.C. V. S.R.L.
On 9 July 2008 the Court of Appeal acquitted the applicant, relying on the evidence available in the file, including a forensic expert report produced on 28 June 2005 with regard to the veracity of the signatures on the contract of 28 November 2003. The court stated as follows:
“Witness E.C., an associate and administrator of S.C. V. S.R.L. and representative of the company, as mentioned in the contract of 28 November 2003 ..., declared that she did not know anything concerning the activity of the company [S.C. V. S.R.L.] and that she had not signed the impugned contract. Her statement is also supported by the conclusions of the forensic report of 28 June 2005, which confirm the fact that the signatures on the contract are not hers.
...
Concerning the contract of sale of 28 November 2003, according to the prosecutor’s office the witness E.C. was never present before a notary public to sign the documents, and the signature is not hers, [a fact proven] by the forensic report. ... E.C. declared before this court that the documents presented to her, that is to say statements, specimen signatures, and fiscal certificate, ‘[had not been] signed by [her] but by [her] daughter L.C.’.
Also, ... E.C. did not recognise the signature on the statement she had given before the prosecutor’s office.”
The court held the following:
“In this situation, as long as the conclusion from the forensic report has not been confirmed also by other evidence which would rebut the defendant’s statement that E.C. was present in the notary public’s office on 28 November 2003 in order to finalise the contract of sale of 28 November 2003, ... the material element of the criminal offence [under examination] does not exist.”
The prosecutor’s office appealed on points of fact and law against the judgment to the High Court of Cassation and Justice (hereinafter “the Court of Cassation”).
At a hearing of 28 May 2010 before the Court of Cassation the applicant’s lawyer made oral submissions and submitted additional documentary evidence. He did not raise any preliminary objection or ask for more evidence to be adduced in the case.
On the same date the Court of Cassation heard arguments from the applicant. In her statement the applicant reiterated that all the impugned contracts had been signed by the contracting parties in her presence. The court did not hear any witnesses.
In a final judgment of 29 June 2010 the Court of Cassation allowed the prosecutor’s office’s appeal on points of fact and law, quashed the judgment of the lower court and re-examined the merits of the case. It amended the charge brought against the applicant and convicted her of a single act of forgery because she had forged the contract signed on 28 November 2003. Subsequently, the court sentenced the applicant to six months imprisonment, stayed conditionally (suspendare condiționată) and imposed on her a period of probation (termen de ȋncercare) of three years.
The court stated as follows:
“The witness E.C. declared that she did not know anything concerning the activities of S.C. V. S.R.L. and that she had not signed the impugned contract.
Her statement was supported by the conclusions of the forensic report of 28 June 2005, which confirms the fact that the signatures on the contract are not hers.
...
The first-instance court argued that it could not definitively adjudge that the material element of the offence was present as long as the conclusion of the forensic report was not confirmed also by other evidence which would rebut the defendant’s statement, specifically that E.C. had been present in the notary public’s office on 28 November 2003 in order to finalise the contract of sale.”
The court held the following:
“However, it was ... E.C. herself who declared that she did not know anything concerning the activity of company S.C. V. S.R.L. and that she had not signed the impugned contract. Moreover, her statement is supported by the conclusions of the forensic report of 28 June 2005, which confirms that the signatures on the contract are not hers, an aspect of scientific order which erases any doubt that may arise in this case and which did not apply in the other instances, where such forensic reports were not produced.”
The court held further that, since the applicant was guilty of a single act of forgery, the legal classification of her offence had to be changed from continuous acts of forgery to a single act of the same offence.
By an interlocutory judgment of 15 July 2010 the same formation of judges of the Court of Cassation decided of its own motion to rectify certain obvious errors concerning the final judgment of 29 June 2010. However, it did not examine or change the probation period imposed on the applicant.
On 2 July 2010 the applicant lodged an extraordinary application for annulment (contestaţie în anulare) against the final judgment of 29 June 2010. She argued that the final-instance court had quashed the acquittal decision delivered by the first-instance court and had changed the legal classification of the charge against her and had convicted her without allowing her to express her views on the question of the change of the legal classification of the charge against her and without hearing her directly. Moreover, the final-instance court had wrongfully imposed on her a probation period longer than the lawfully allowed maximum one of two years and six months.
In a judgment of 16 November 2010 the Court of Cassation, sitting in a different formation of judges than the one which had delivered the final judgment of 29 June 2010 (see paragraphs 16-19 above), rejected the applicant’s extraordinary application for annulment as inadmissible. It held that the applicant had been heard by the court and her deposition had not been censured in any way. Moreover, the applicant’s chosen legal representative had submitted only additional documentary evidence to the case file. The court did not expressly examine the applicant’s argument concerning the probation period imposed on her.
On 10 September 2010 the Ministry of Justice issued an order removing the applicant from the register of notaries public following her criminal conviction.
The provisions of the former Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
Article 195
“Obvious material errors found in a procedural document shall be rectified by the ... court that produced the document following an application by the interested party or of its own motion.
In order to correct the error, the parties may be summoned for clarifications.”
Article 334
“If it is estimated during the trial that the legal classification given to the offence in the act of indictment will be changed, the court must allow the parties to express their views on the question of the change of the legal classification and to inform the defendant that he or she has a right to ask for the proceedings to be delayed or possibly adjourned in order for him or her to prepare his or her defence.”
Article 38514
...
“Upon examining an appeal on points of fact and law, the court has the obligation to hear a defendant who is present ... when he or she was not heard by the first-instance court or the appellate court, as well as when these courts have not convicted the defendant.
...”
Article 38516
“When a final-instance court quashes the decision and holds that the case must be re-examined ..., it takes a decision also on the evidence to be produced, setting a hearing for the retrial. At the hearing set for retrial, the court has the obligation to hear a defendant who is present ... when he or she was not heard by the first-instance court or the appellate court, as well as when these courts have not convicted the defendant.
...”
Article 386
“An extraordinary application for annulment may be lodged against a final judgment delivered by a criminal court in the following circumstances:
a)  when notification of the hearing during which the final-instance court examined the case had not been sent to the party in accordance with the law;
b)  if the party proves that it was impossible for him or her to participate in the hearing during which the final-instance court examined the case and to inform the court of that hindrance;
c)  when the final-instance court did not examine one of the reasons for terminating the criminal trial, provided by Article 10 § 1 f) -i1), [if those reasons were] supported by evidence in the file;
d)  when the courts rendered two final decisions for the same facts concerning the same person;
e)  when, while examining an appeal on points of fact and law or upon reexamination of the case, the final-instance court did not hear a defendant who was present and his or her hearing was mandatory pursuant to Articles 38514 or 38516.”
With regard to the conditional stay of execution of the sentence and its probation period, the former Criminal Code read as follows:
Article 81
“A court may decide to stay the execution of the sentence imposed on a natural person conditionally, for a certain period of time, if the following conditions are met:
a)  the penalty imposed is detention of no more than three years or a fine;
b)  the offender was not sentenced before to more than six months imprisonment ...;
c)  it is assessed that the purpose of the sentence may be achieved even without serving it;
The conditional stay of the execution of the sentence does not result in a stay of execution of the preventive measures and of the civil obligations set out in the judgment.
The court must provide reasons for the conditional stay of the execution of the sentence.”
Article 82
“The length of the conditional stay of the execution of a sentence amounts to a probation period for the convicted person and is composed of the length of the prison sentence imposed to which a period of two years is added ...”
Article 83
“If the convicted person commits a new offence during the probation period, for which the person was convicted by a final judgment delivered even after the lapse of the probation period, the court shall revoke the conditional stay and order the execution of the full sentence, which cannot be joined to the sentence delivered for the new offence.
...”
Article 86
“If the convicted person has not re-offended during the probation period and the stay of execution has also not been revoked ..., the said person is considered lawfully rehabilitated.”
The Government submitted two judgments of the Court of Cassation delivered on 20 June 2008 and 2 May 2012.
In its judgment of 20 June 2008, the Court of Cassation upheld an interlocutory judgment delivered by a lower court of its own motion in order to correct an obvious material error concerning the length of the probation period imposed on a convicted person. The Court of Cassation held that the probation period was provided for by law and the court had only to determine its length. Since the lower court, by mistake, had not calculated the length of the probation correctly, it had acted lawfully by correcting the error of its own motion.
In its judgment of 2 May 2012, the Court of Cassation held, inter alia, that in the legal sense material errors were exclusively those errors which did not regard the content of the procedural document, in particular the meaning of what was contained in the procedural document. An error was obvious when it was apparent without any doubt and without being necessary to prove its existence by adducing evidence or to determine it by deliberating or expressing views.