The case originated in an application (no. 35289/11) against the Czech Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Czech national, Mr Václav Regner (“the applicant”), on 25 May 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr L. Trojan, a member of the Prague Bar. The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V.A. Schorm.
The applicant alleged that he had been unable to gain access to decisive evidence in the proceedings on the grounds that it was classified as confidential information.
On 6 January 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Prague.
On 19 July 2005 the National Security Authority (hereinafter “the Authority”) issued the applicant with a certificate, valid until 18 July 2010, confirming that he had access to State classified information in the “secret” category (hereinafter “security clearance”). That clearance was a precondition for holding the post he then occupied as deputy to a vice-minister of Defence.
On 7 October 2005 the Authority received confidential information, classified as “restricted”, on the applicant from an intelligence service.
Following an internal investigation, the Authority decided on 5 September 2006 to revoke the applicant’s security clearance. According to that decision, the applicant posed a national security risk, inter alia on the grounds provided for in section 14(3)(d) of the Protection of State Classified Information Act (Law no. 412/2005). The decision stated that the facts established in respect of his conduct, as documented and substantiated by information received by the Authority on 7 October 2005, cast doubt on his trustworthiness and his ability not to be influenced and not to disclose secret information (preconditions for issuing him with security clearance). It was noted that as the information was classified as “restricted”, section 122(3) of the Act precluded any mention thereof in the decision or any disclosure of the Authority’s reasoning regarding its assessment of the facts in question.
According to information supplied by the Government, on 4 October 2006 the applicant asked the Minister of Defence to discharge him, on health grounds, from his post as deputy to the vice-minister. His request was granted on the same day. The ministerial decree discharging him from his duties specified that this did not terminate the applicant’s employment contract. That contract did not end until 31 January 2007, following an agreement by mutual consent signed by the parties on 20 October 2006.
In the meantime the applicant challenged the decision of 5 September 2006 before the director of the Authority, who confirmed the decision on 18 December 2006 regarding the risk referred to in section 14(3)(d) of the Protection of State Classified Information Act. That risk, which had been unknown on 19 July 2005, had transpired from the results of an investigation carried out by the Authority. Those results constituted “restricted” information and the decision could only refer to them and not mention their content.
On 19 January 2007, relying on section 133(1) of the Protection of State Classified Information Act, the applicant lodged a request with the Prague Municipal Court for judicial review of the decision of 18 December 2006. In his submission, that decision had deprived him of acquired rights in that he had been obliged to give up his post as deputy to the vice-minister of the Defence whereas he had adapted his activities within the public service and within the sphere of his private life. Accordingly, he asked the court to assess the lawfulness of that decision which was based exclusively on undisclosed classified information.
On 16 April 2007 the Authority sent the applicant’s file to the Municipal Court, including the documents classified as “restricted”, which in its opinion could not be exempted from the obligation of confidentiality laid down in section 133(3) of Law no. 412/2005. It also submitted its comments on the applicant’s request. These were sent to the applicant for his reply. In his reply of 14 May 2007 the applicant commented on, inter alia, the necessity alleged by the Authority of protecting the confidentiality of the documents in question.
Subsequently, the applicant and his lawyer were permitted to study the file, except the confidential parts.
At the hearing on 1 September 2009 the applicant was given the opportunity to submit his arguments and to state what he thought were the reasons for revoking his security clearance. He observed that, in his view, the information in question had been provided by a military intelligence service which had sought to punish him for his refusal to co-operate.
Pursuant to section 133(3) of the Protection of State Classified Information Act, the Municipal Court refused the applicant access to the section of the legal file containing the classified information from the Authority’s file and in a judgment of 1 September 2009 dismissed his request for judicial review. Referring to section 122(3) of the Protection of State Classified Information Act, the court held that the Authority, which had disclosed to the applicant the source of the classified information and the general conclusions that it had drawn from that information but not the content thereof, had acted neither arbitrarily nor unlawfully. Furthermore, the fact that the impugned decision was amenable to judicial review had enabled the court to examine the information in question and rule on whether it justified the conclusion that the applicant posed a security risk, which was the case here. The court also observed that there was no fundamental individual right to hold a post in the civil service, that the State was authorised to restrict the access of individuals to such posts and that it could also determine the conditions in which those individuals could have access to confidential information necessary for the performance of their duties. The applicant had not satisfied those conditions in the present case. According to that rationale, an individual could not have knowledge of the confidential information on the basis of which his right of access to confidential information had been refused. The court considered, lastly, that the confidentiality of the information that had led to the applicant’s security clearance being revoked prevented it from examining his submission that the information in question had concerned his refusal to co-operate, beyond his statutory obligations, with the military intelligence service. In any event that submission was deemed to be speculative because unsupported by verifiable documents.
The applicant appealed on points of law against the Municipal Court’s judgment, complaining first about his inability to gain access to the relevant part of the legal file. He submitted that the disclosure of information in the “restricted” category (which was the lowest level of confidentiality) could not constitute a serious threat to the activities of the intelligence services within the meaning of section 133(3) of the Protection of State Classified Information Act. He stated that he was convinced that the revocation of his security clearance was connected with his refusal to co-operate with the military intelligence service, of which he had no written proof. However, as he had no knowledge of the content of the information in question he could not refute its accuracy.
In a judgment of 15 July 2010 the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law as unfounded. It observed that the possibility, provided for in section 133(3) of the Protection of State Classified Information Act, of prohibiting access to part of the file was not limited to a specific category of confidential information. In the present case the conditions for prohibiting access were met because communication of the information in question to the applicant could have led to the disclosure of the intelligence service’s working methods, the disclosure of its sources of information or attempts on the applicant’s part to influence possible witnesses. Referring to the judgment of the Constitutional Court no. II. ÚS 377/04, the Supreme Administrative Court held that the applicant’s complaints of unfairness of the proceedings were unfounded because, having regard to the special nature of the proceedings on account of the nature of the confidential information in question, not all the applicant’s procedural rights could be guaranteed. Whilst the executive did indeed, in certain circumstances, have the right not to inform the individual concerned of the reasons for not issuing him or her with security clearance, that restriction was counterbalanced by the guarantee of having that decision examined by the administrative courts, which had unlimited access to the documents contained in the administrative file. In the present case the Supreme Administrative Court observed that the confidential document emanating from the intelligence service contained specific, comprehensive and detailed information concerning the conduct and lifestyle of the applicant on the basis of which the court was satisfied in the present case as to its relevance for determining whether the applicant posed a national security risk. It observed, further, that the information did not in any way concern the applicant’s refusal to co-operate with the military intelligence service.
On 25 October 2010 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint. He complained of the unfairness of the proceedings in his case. He argued, in particular, that the parties had not been treated equally because he had not been allowed to have knowledge of the sole evidence on which the decision against him had been taken and which had resulted in his being declared unsuitable for public office. He also expressed his firm conviction that he should have been able to consult the relevant part of the file.
In a decision of 18 November 2010, which was served on the applicant’s lawyer on 26 November 2010, the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint as manifestly ill-founded. Referring to its judgment no. Pl. ÚS 11/2000, it observed that, having regard to the special nature and the importance of decisions adopted in connection with confidential information where there was a clear national security interest, it was not always possible to apply all the procedural guarantees of fairness in such proceedings. In the present case the Constitutional Court held that in so far as the courts’ conduct was duly justified and the reasoning in their decisions comprehensible and in conformity with the Constitution and they had not departed from procedural standards and constitutional principles to an inordinate degree, the Constitutional Court was not required to intervene in their decision-making process.
In their observations of 30 April 2014 the Government submitted to the Court a bill of indictment of 16 March 2011 in which the applicant and some fifty co-defendants were formally charged with participating in an organised criminal group between 2005 and 2007 with a view to illegally influencing public tender procedures in the Ministry of Defence. This document shows that investigative measures had been carried out from May 2006. In a judgment of 25 March 2014, which was not final as at 17 July 2014, the applicant was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment and ordered to pay a fine.
The Government also submitted a letter from the Authority dated 24 March 2014 in which it confirmed that the document in question was still classified “restricted” because disclosure of the information contained in it was liable to disrupt the work of the intelligence service, reveal its methods and sources of information and adversely affect the legitimate interests of third parties. In that context the Authority referred to the above-mentioned criminal proceedings against the applicant.
Law no. 412/2005 on the protection of State classified information and access thereto (version in force until 23 May 2007)
Under section 4, State classified information is divided into the following categories: a) “top secret”, where disclosure to an unauthorised person or unlawful use may very seriously harm the interests of the Czech Republic; b) “secret”, where disclosure to an unauthorised person or unlawful use may seriously harm the interests of the Czech Republic; c) “confidential”, where disclosure to an unauthorised person or unlawful use may harm the interests of the Czech Republic; and d) “restricted”, where disclosure to an unauthorised person or unlawful use may be disadvantageous for the interests of the Czech Republic. In respect of the latter category, section 3(5) provides that the disclosure of confidential information to an unauthorised person or unlawful use thereof may be disadvantageous for the Czech Republic if has the effect of
a)  disrupting the activities of the armed forces of the Czech Republic, NATO or one of its Member States or a Member State of the EU;
b)  thwarting, complicating or endangering an investigation into criminal offences other than particularly serious offences, or facilitating the perpetration thereof;
c)  adversely affecting major economic interests of the Czech Republic or the EU or one of its Member States;
d)  disrupting major commercial or political negotiations between the Czech Republic and a foreign power; or
e)  disrupting security or intelligence operations.
Sections 11-14 of the Act lay down the conditions of access of individuals to classified information in the “top secret”, “secret” and “confidential” categories (which are stricter than for access to information in the “restricted” category).
Under section 11(1), an individual may be granted access to such classified information where necessary in order to perform his or her professional duties or activities, provided that he or she has obtained valid security clearance for the necessary category of information and has received appropriate instructions.
Section 12(1) defines the conditions for granting security clearance to an individual as follows:
“The Authority shall issue security clearance to an individual who
a) is a national of the Czech Republic, of a Member State of the EU or of NATO;
b) satisfies the conditions laid down in section 6(2) [full legal capacity, aged 18 or over, no criminal record];
c) is of trustworthy character;
d) is trustworthy from the point of view of national security.”
Pursuant to section 12(2), the individual in question must satisfy the conditions laid down in 12(1) throughout the entire period of validity of the security clearance.
Section 13(1) provides that an individual can be deemed to be of trustworthy character if he or she does not suffer from a disorder capable of adversely affecting his or her trustworthiness or ability to keep information secret. In accordance with section 13(2), this shall be certified by a statement that the individual concerned is of trustworthy character and, where required by law, also by an expert report.
Section 14(1) provides that a person who does not pose a security risk shall be deemed trustworthy from the point of view of national security.
Under section 14(2), the following shall be deemed to pose a national security risk:
a)  a serious or recurrent activity directed against the interests of the Czech Republic, or
b)  an activity consisting in suppressing fundamental rights and liberties, or supporting such an activity.
Section 14(3) lists the factors which can be deemed to pose a national security risk. Under letter (d), this can be conduct which affects a person’s trustworthiness and ability not to be influenced and to keep information secret.
Section 89(7) provides that a party to the proceedings under this Act and his or her representative is entitled, prior to adoption of the decision, to consult the file and make notes from it except for the part containing confidential information.
Section 122(3) provides that the reasons given in a decision taken under that Act must state the grounds for reaching the decision, the evidence on which the decision is based and the reasoning adopted by the Authority when assessing that evidence and applying the regulations. Where some of the reasons constitute confidential information, the decision must contain only a reference to the evidence on which it is based and the degree of confidentiality. The reasoning adopted by the Authority in support of its assessment and the reasons for adopting the decision must only be referred to in so far as they do not constitute confidential information.
Under section 133(1), the decision of the director of the Authority may be challenged by bringing an action before a court.
Section 133(2) provides that on a judicial review the court will take the evidence in such a way as to comply with the duty to protect the confidentiality of the information yielded as a result of the investigation or contained in the records of the intelligence services or the police. The information in question cannot be examined at a hearing unless the person bound by the duty of confidentiality is exempted from that duty. An exemption cannot be granted where this may endanger or seriously compromise the activity of the intelligence services or the police. This also applies to evidence yielded other than at a hearing.
In accordance with section 133(3), the Authority specifies the information referred to in sub-section 2 which, in its view, cannot be the subject of an exemption from the duty of confidentiality. Where there is a risk of endangering or seriously compromising the activity of the intelligence services or the police, the President of the Chamber will decide that the parts of the file having a connection with that information shall be kept separately; those parts of the file cannot be consulted by the party to the proceedings or his or her representative.
On 12 July 2001 the Plenum of the Constitutional Court adopted judgment no. Pl. ÚS 11/2000 on a law governing confidential information (no. 148/1998), since largely replaced by the aforementioned Act (Law no. 412/2005), ordering the National Security Authority never to communicate to the person concerned the reasons for not issuing security clearance. The court observed that, in the event of a conflict between the interests of an individual and those of the State, the interests of national security, which were fundamental and justified imposing a certain restriction on an individual’s private sphere, had to be taken into account and respected. In order to protect national security, the State had to have the appropriate tools, including the ability to protect classified information to which only persons meeting the statutory conditions had access. That did not mean, however, that the State could act arbitrarily towards its citizens and restrict their fundamental rights beyond the necessary extent. The Constitutional Court acknowledged that providing detailed reasons for a decision not to issue security clearance could in some cases seriously endanger the interests of the State or third parties. However, in those specific cases, it was not possible to waive the protection of the individual’s fundamental rights. In the Constitutional Court’s view, it was moreover not always necessary to withhold from the person concerned the reasons for which he or she was deemed unfit to have access to confidential information, as it was actually exceptional for such disclosure to really endanger the State’s interests. Otherwise it would be practically impossible for that person to eliminate the reasons for which they were refused security clearance, even in cases where he or she was in a position to do so and where their disclosure would not compromise the interests of the State or of third parties. It was clear, however, that a decision not to issue security clearance had considerable repercussions for the personal sphere of the person concerned, whether legally (professional disqualification, grounds for dismissal) or factually (negative reactions from colleagues and family). Whilst the law could stipulate the conditions for, and restrictions on, holding certain posts or carrying out certain activities, those conditions had to be transparent and foreseeable and the person whose rights were at stake had to be able to duly defend him or herself against interference.
Where the Authority had a statutory obligation never to communicate the reasons for not issuing security clearance, the person concerned may not know, or even suspect, that he or she was deemed unfit to have access to confidential information and be unaware of the reasons for the decision. Accordingly, a blanket prohibition on communicating the reasons for not issuing security clearance was unacceptable. On the other hand there was a duty to comply with the legitimate public interest in protecting confidential information and not communicate reasons whose disclosure would endanger that interest or affect the legitimate interests of third parties. It was incumbent on the legislature to enact new legislation providing an appropriate means of reflecting and reconciling private and public interests.
It was also noted that Law no. 148/1998 set up special regulations for an administrative procedure that was distinct from the one provided for in the Administrative Code. However, merely excluding that type of administrative procedure from the general rules in the Administrative Code was not contrary to constitutional principles since the only decisive question was whether or not the special procedure protected the constitutional rights of the persons concerned. In the present case the issue was whether the decision (not) to issue security clearance concerned fundamental rights and freedoms, in which case it would be unconstitutional to bring it outside the realm of a judicial review. The fact that a decision not to issue security clearance could lead to the loss of a particular job was a consequence of the provisions of Law no. 148/1998 according to which the ability to hold a post requiring knowledge of confidential information was subject to obtaining security clearance. If the person concerned did not obtain security clearance, he or she could no longer carry on his or her initial profession and could be transferred to another post (where possible), dismissed from his or her post, or even dismissed from the public service. A decision not to issue security clearance therefore represented a substantial interference with the working (or public-service) relationship and, accordingly, with the fundamental right to freely choose one’s profession. Accordingly, the guarantees of the right to a fair trial applied even to this quite specific area.
In judgment no. II. ÚS 377/04 of 6 September 2007 the Constitutional Court ruled as follows on the subject of national security clearance, a prerequisite in accordance with Law no. 148/1998 to performing sensitive activities:
“Issuing national security clearance amounts to conferring an extraordinary privilege and the administrative authority alone has the task of deciding, on the basis of and within the limits of its statutory powers and in accordance with its discretion, whether or not to grant that privilege to the person concerned. In each individual case the administrative authority must describe in comprehensible terms how it has assessed the facts established; the conclusions it has reached; the factors to which it has had regard; and what it has deemed to be irrelevant. The discretionary power of the authorities must be amenable to review. ... regard must be had to the fact that, given the special features and the importance of decisions in the area of confidential information – where the State’s security interest is very marked – it is not always possible to comply with all the normal procedural guarantees of a fair trial (for ex. a public hearing). However, it has already been pointed out that even in this type of proceedings there is a duty on the legislature to provide for the appropriate guarantees relating to the protection of a court ..., be this – according to the nature of the case and of the function – special and differentiated protection. ... It is certainly not possible to oblige the Authority, on the pretext of fully respecting the procedural rights of a party to the proceedings, to refer in its decisions to facts which could endanger the State’s interests, the effectiveness of the work of the intelligence services or the police, or the security of their staff or third parties. Extra special care should be taken to ensure that these aims are not pursued to the detriment of the principles of the rule of law or of the individual’s fundamental rights. It can be seen from the Constitutional Court’s case-law that ... on a review of a decision having the direct consequence of limiting the possibility of occupying a particular post, the public interest in confidentiality cannot justify excluding that decision from the scope of ... Article 6 § 1 of the Convention guaranteeing the right to judicial protection.”
In judgment no. I. ÚS 828/09 the Constitutional Court held that the right to freely choose one’s profession, guaranteed by Article 26 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms, could not be interpreted as stipulating that everyone had a right to a specific profession but rather as allowing every individual the right to choose his or her profession. In order to enter into a specific working relationship or to carry on a specific independent activity he or she must nonetheless satisfy the statutory conditions pertaining to that profession or activity. Nor was it possible to infer from the right to freely choose one’s profession the right to obtain security clearance, which was neither guaranteed by the Charter nor by instruments of infra-constitutional rank.
In judgment no. 6 As 14/2006 of 31 January 2007 the Supreme Administrative Court observed that issuing security clearance to a particular individual amounted to granting an extraordinary privilege and that the administrative authority alone had the task of deciding, on the basis of and within the limits of its statutory powers and in accordance with its discretion, whether or not to grant that privilege to the person concerned.
In judgment no. 5 As 44/2006 of 30 January 2009 the Supreme Administrative Court held that, in interpreting the expression “risk for national security”, the evidence gathered had to be examined in the light of the possibility of a risk for security. Thus, a mere suspicion of a risk for national security sufficed to conclude that the person was not trustworthy from the point of view of national security.
In judgment no. 7 As 5/2008 of 9 April 2009 the Supreme Administrative Court set out the requirements that had to be met by reports of the intelligence services classified as confidential in order to be the subject of a judicial review. They had to contain specific information or a summary thereof in order for the National Security Authority and, where applicable, the court to be able to actually verify the relevance of facts established by the intelligence services, that is, the credibility of the information established by them, the weight attached thereto and their connection with decisive questions for the security procedure. This was how it was possible to prevent arbitrariness from arising were the Authority, and potentially the court, to merely “believe” the intelligence services without being able to actually have sight of their information.
In judgment no. 7 As 31/2011 of 25 November 2011 the Supreme Administrative Court noted that, in order to achieve a balance between the interest in guaranteeing that the person concerned had the benefit of fair proceedings and the interest in safeguarding the confidentiality of the information necessary for the protection of the public interest, the court carrying out the review must have access to all the information on which the decision in question was based. More than in “classic” proceedings, where the parties had the same information as the court, the latter was here the guarantor of the right to a fair hearing, which required increased vigilance on the part of the court vis-à-vis the public administration. This, moreover, was why the courts had access, throughout the exercise of their functions, to all categories of secret information, without clearance. Thus, a judicial review, which must extend to the information relevant for the outcome of the administrative proceedings, could provide adequate protection against arbitrariness, while protecting to the extent necessary the confidentiality of the information. The court also observed that the facts established must, overall, constitute a convincing basis for concluding that, in a specific case, the facts actually indicated a risk for national security. What was important was the informative value of the facts established, the credibility of which must be assessed and regard had to whether they had been interpreted correctly and did not in reality have a different significance from that which appeared at first sight.
In judgment no. 7 As 117/2012 of 21 December 2012 the Supreme Administrative Court ruled as follows:
“It is the court which guarantees that the reasons for the decision will be duly and fully re-examined. Given that the complainant is limited by his or her ignorance of the reasons for a negative decision, or prevented from submitting effective arguments, the court must examine the proceedings and the reasons for the decision in their entirety, even beyond the points raised by the complainant. ...
The court must also examine whether it is justified to keep the confidential information secret. If it is not, the court will probably be obliged to produce the evidence and to provide an explicit assessment of it in the judgment. ...
If the administrative court were to believe the intelligence services without being able to check that their allegations were based on genuine and apparently truthful information, it would be renouncing its duty of scrutiny of the public administration. ...”
In judgment no. 3 As 63/2012 of 19 June 2013 the Supreme Administrative Court observed that section 133(2) of Law no. 412/2005 was a lex specialis with regard to the general rules in the Code of Administrative Justice relating to consultation of the file, which were therefore inapplicable in this area. It could be seen from the case-law that where the procedural rights of a party to the proceedings were restricted due reasons must be given for not disclosing confidential information to that party and his or her procedural rights must not be restricted to a greater degree than that required by the protection of public interests. Only exceptionally should the parties be deprived of the said procedural rights and of knowledge of the content of the confidential information.