The case originated in an application (no. 6134/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mirosław Gospodarczyk (“the applicant”), on 12 February 2003.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr S. Kwietniowski, a lawyer practising in Zielona Góra. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged in particular that he had been deprived of his right of access to a court, contrary to Article 6 of the Convention.
On 7 July 2006 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in .
On 26 October 1998 the applicant purchased a house and a plot of land located in Niedoradz in the Otyń municipality, for which he paid 28,684 Polish zlotys (PLN).
In December 1999 the applicant discovered that the plot in question was 36 sq. m smaller than the size specified in the contract.
On an unspecified date in 2002 the applicant lodged a claim against the municipality with the , seeking PLN 412,666 in compensation for the alleged difference between the actual size of the property and the one declared in the notarial deed. He claimed that due to the fact that the plot was in fact smaller he could not construct a special sanitary tank there and consequently could not open a bakery, which he had originally planned to do. He also sought exemption from the entire amount of court fees which were set at PLN 22,233.30. The applicant claimed that his monthly income was only an invalidity pension of PLN 449.51. He submitted that after paying rent for his cooperative flat, his net income amounted to PLN 200.
The  requested the applicant to supplement his declaration of means. Subsequently, the applicant submitted that he owned a house in Niedoradz which according to him had a value of PLN 120,000, and that he had a cooperative flat in Zielona Góra, a plot of land (570 sq. m), a small retail outlet and a van (valued at PLN 10,000) used for temporary work. He claimed that he had purchased the Niedoradz property using his savings and family loans, and that he intended to use it to create employment for him and his family. He also informed the court that he had invested PLN 92,000 of his own money in the house.
On 22 July 2002 the  refused his application for exemption from court fees. It held, in so far as relevant:
“Pursuant to Article 113 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure exemption from court fees may be sought by a party who is unable to bear them without entailing a substantial reduction in his or her standard of living. The plaintiff does not satisfy this requirement. It is evident to the court that the plaintiff has a substantially higher income than the declared pension which he knowingly does not disclose, in that his retail outlet and his van must generate profits. These profits must be substantial because otherwise he could not have a cooperative flat and three other properties and could not invest nearly PLN 100,000 in other business projects and maintain them. The plaintiff continuously conceals his real profits and they are substantial, because nobody could believe that he lives on PLN 200 per month.
Exemption from court fees is a privilege serving to legally protect the indigent, and the plaintiff is a very affluent person in Polish terms”.
The applicant appealed against that decision and pleaded that he was in an exceptional situation. He submitted that he had acquired the Niedoradz property, which was the subject of his dispute with the municipality, and had invested PLN 92,000 in it with a view to conducting business activity there. However, he could not execute his business plans since the property did not conform to certain unspecified requirements and as a result his financial situation had worsened. He further submitted that he had to pay back a loan of PLN 40,000 obtained from his brother for renovation of the house. He produced a statement signed by his brother which attested that the applicant had received the loan and had not paid it back as of 1 August 2002.
The applicant further submitted that he had a cooperative flat, but that he was in arrears of rent in the amount of PLN 3,532.35. In addition, he maintained that his and his wife’s retail outlet was making losses. He produced their joint tax return which attested that in the 2001 tax year he had sustained a loss of PLN 14,628.23. Furthermore, the applicant claimed that he was financially supported by his family, in particular his mother who provided him with PLN 600 each month. He produced a statement from his mother to that effect.
On 14 August 2002 the Poznań Court of Appeal upheld the contested decision. It held, in so far as relevant:
“The appeal should be considered unfounded. In particular, the first-instance court was right when holding that the applicant’s declaration of means was unreliable. In that declaration of means the applicant did not state, inter alia, that he was conducting a business activity, and he explained that circumstance only in the appeal proceedings. It is also not difficult to notice the differences between the applicant’s declared income and the value of his assets. It is a well-established principle in the case-law that being an owner of a[n immovable] property excludes the possibility of granting exemption from court fees (judgments of the Supreme Court of 23 October 1934, no. C II 1441/34 and of 1 February 1937, no. C II 2379/36).
The applicant can pay the court fees for his action since he has considerable assets and given that he has recently, as he claims, invested PLN 124,000 in one of his properties. What is more, the fact at the origin of the dispute, namely that the property acquired by the applicant from the municipality is in fact smaller than declared in a notarial deed, has been known to the applicant since 1999. Thus, he could have made savings with a view to funding his litigation.”
Consequently, the applicant was summoned to pay the court fees for proceeding with his claim against the municipality. On 21 October 2002 the  returned the applicant’s statement of claim since he had not paid the fees in question. The applicant appealed against that decision. However, he was informed that his appeal would not be considered until he had paid PLN 4,446.70 in court fees.
The legal provisions applicable at the material time and questions of practice are set out in paragraphs 23-33 of the judgment delivered by the Court on 19 June 2001 in the case of Kreuz v. Poland (no. 28249/95, ECHR 2001-VI; see also Jedamski and Jedamska v. Poland, no. 73547/01, §§ 2939).