The present case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission"). The case originated in an application (no. 7984/77) against the Italian Republic lodged with the Commission in 1977 under Article 25 (art. 25) of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("the Convention") by six Italian citizens, namely Mr. Rodolfo Pretto, his wife Cesira Possia, his son Palmerino Pretto, his daughter-in-law Rita Zordan and his grandsons Andrea and Rodolfo Pretto.
The Commission’s request was lodged with the registry of the Court on 17 May 1982, within the period of three months laid down by Articles 32 § 1 and 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47). It referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby the  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The request sought a decision from the Court as to the existence of violations of Article 6 § 1 (art. 6-1).
The Chamber of seven judges to be constituted included, as ex officio members, Mr. C. Russo, the elected judge of Italian nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr. G. Wiarda, the President of the Court (Rule 21 § 3 (b) of the Rules of Court). On 28 May 1982, the President drew by lot, in the presence of the Registrar, the names of the five other members, namely Mr. J. Cremona, Mrs. D. Bindschedler-Robert, Mr. F. Matscher, Mr. R. Macdonald and Mr. R. Bernhardt (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 4) (art. 43).
Mr. Wiarda, who had assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 5), ascertained, through the Registrar, the views of the Agent of the Government of the Italian Republic ("the Government") and the Delegates of the Commission regarding the procedure to be followed. On 9 June, he decided that the Agent should have until 30 September 1982 to file a memorial and that the Delegates should be entitled to reply in writing within two months from the date of the transmission of the Government’s memorial to them by the Registrar.
On 29 June 1982, the Chamber decided under Rule 48 to relinquish jurisdiction forthwith in favour of the plenary Court.
By telex received on 4 October 1982, the Government informed the Registrar that they had decided not to file a memorial but to refer to the arguments previously set out in their observations to the Commission. On 9 November 1982, the Registrar, acting on the President’s instructions, requested the Commission to produce a copy of those observations; its Secretary supplied this copy on 15 November.
After consulting, through the Registrar, the Agent of the Government and the Delegates of the Commission, the President directed on 1 December 1982 that the oral proceedings should open on 22 March 1983.
The hearings were held in public at the , , on the said day. Immediately before they opened, the Court had held a preparatory meeting; it had authorised the Agent of the Government to use the Italian language (Rule 27 § 2).
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government:
- for the Commission:
The Court heard addresses by Mr. Squillante for the Government and by Mr. Trechsel and Mr. Weitzel for the Commission, as well as their replies to its questions. However, the Agent of the Government was not in a position to supply on the spot one of the items of information requested (see paragraph 13 below); he was also unable to do so subsequently, as he informed the Registrar by letters of 29 April and 15 July 1983.
Mr. Rodolfo Pretto, an Italian citizen, for more than forty years farmed, with the help of members of his family, land at Villaganzerla Castegnero (Vicenza) of which he was the tenant.
In 1971, the owner entered into a preliminary contract with a certain Mr. S. for the sale of the property at a price of 27 million Lire. In accordance with section 8 of the Agricultural Land Development Act (Act no. 590 of 26 May 1965 - "Disposizioni per lo sviluppo della proprietà coltivatrice"), he informed Mr. Pretto of the conclusion of this contract.
Pretto gave notice of his intention to exercise the right of pre-emption ("diritto di prelazione") conferred on him by the same Act. Nevertheless, by deed dated 9 June 1971, the owner sold the land to the brother-in-law of Mr. S. for the price that had been agreed with the latter.
On 24 September 1971, Mr. Pretto brought an action before the  seeking the re-sale of the land to him by the new owner (azione di riscatto). He complained of the failure to respect his right of pre-emption and alleged that the price indicated in the contract was fictitious: according to the Agricultural Inspector’s valuation, the land was in fact only worth about 12 million Lire. The applicant stated that he was willing to offer the new owner the price actually paid or, alternatively, the price shown in the sale contract or, in the further alternative, such price as the  might determine.
The defendant pleaded that the action was inadmissible since Mr. Pretto had not made an unconditional offer of the price mentioned in the contract. He also claimed that the plaintiff could in any event no longer avail himself of his right of pre-emption as he had not paid the said amount within the three-month period laid down by section 8 of Act no. 590.
The Regional Court gave judgment on 21 March 1973. It held that Mr. Pretto was entitled to have the land re-sold to him at the price specified in the contract, such price to be paid not later than one month and twenty-one days from the date on which the judgment became final.
On 7 July 1973, the new owner appealed to the Venice Court of Appeal which, after postponing the hearings three times at the request of both parties, reversed the ’s decision by a judgment of 8 October 1974, which was deposited in the Court of Appeal’s registry on 12 December. The  found that although Mr. Pretto’s action had been admissible, he was estopped from availing himself of his right to obtain a re-sale since he had not paid the price stated in the sale contract within three months of the commencement of the proceedings at first instance. It held that this time-limit had to apply, by analogy with the rules on the exercise of the right of pre-emption (section 8 of Act no. 590).
On 12 February 1975, Mr. Pretto appealed on points of law to the Court of Cassation. The respondent lodged a cross-appeal (ricorso incidentale) on 26 March 1975 and the applicant filed a reply thereto (controricorso al ricorso incidentale) on 3 May 1975.
On a date which it has not been possible to trace (see paragraph 8 in fine above), the President of the 3rd Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation directed that the hearings be held on 18 February 1976. The applicants claimed that previously Mr. Pretto had twice asked for the case to be dealt with, but that for reasons beyond their control they were unable to prove this.
On 12 February, Mr. Pretto filed a supplementary memorial; under Article 378 of the Code of Civil Procedure, he was permitted to do so up to the fifth day before the hearings.
On 18 February, the 3rd Civil Chamber postponed the hearings: as section 8 of Act no. 590 had given rise to conflicting judicial decisions, it considered it preferable to await the ruling of the plenary Court of Cassation on other appeals bearing on the same point.
The plenary Court was to have sat on the following day, but in fact did not give judgment until 10 June 1976. On 19 October, the 3rd Civil Chamber applied that decision and dismissed Mr. Pretto’s appeal; it confirmed the Venice Court of Appeal’s interpretation of section 8 of Act no. 590. The full text of the judgment was made public by being deposited in the Court of Cassation’s registry on 5 February 1977. Article 133 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which save for some rare exceptions applies to all civil court judgments, whether rendered at first instance, on appeal or on cassation, in fact provides (translation from the Italian):
"The judgment (sentenza) shall be made public by being deposited in the registry of the court which delivered it. The Registrar shall record at the bottom of the judgment that it has been deposited, adding the date and his signature; within the next five days, he shall advise the parties (parti che si sono costituite) of the deposit by means of a written notice which shall contain the operative provisions of the judgment."
Under Article 120 of Royal Decree no. 1368 of 18 December 1941 (rules on the application of the Code of Civil Procedure and transitional provisions), the deposit has to be effected within thirty days of the examination of the case.
On 24 June 1977, the judgment was served on Mr. Pretto by the respondent and thereupon became enforceable.
Anyone can consult or obtain copies of the judgments of the Court of Cassation on application to its registry. If judgments contain features that are novel from the point of view of interpretation of the law, they may be published.
In their application lodged with the Commission on 27 July 1977 (no. 7984/77), Mr. Pretto and the other members of his family relied on Article 6 § 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention and made the following complaints:
(a) In the present case the 3rd Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation had not constituted an independent and impartial tribunal since it had followed an opinion expressed by the plenary Court of Cassation in a judgment which was in the process of being published; moreover, the very existence of the plenary Court was contrary to this provision of the Convention.
(b) The said Chamber had violated the rights of the defence by basing its decision on a judgment which had not yet been published and could not have been known to the applicant’s lawyer.
(c) The principle of equality of arms had been infringed, since the public prosecutor’s office attached to the Court of Cassation had assisted that Court in its private deliberations (Article 380 of the Code of Civil Procedure, as in force at the time).
(d) The Court of Appeal had violated the right to a fair trial by denying Mr. Pretto the right to seek a judicial determination of the exact price he had to pay in order to exercise validly his right to obtain a re-sale.
(e) By not pronouncing their judgments publicly, the Court of Appeal and the Court of Cassation had failed to satisfy a further requirement of Article 6 § 1 (art. 6-1).
(f) Finally, the length of the proceedings had exceeded a "reasonable time".
On 11 July 1979, the Commission declared the application admissible as regards the final complaint and also part of the penultimate complaint (proceedings before the Court of Cassation only). It declared the remainder of the application inadmissible; in particular, in so far as Mr. Pretto complained of the lack of public pronouncement of the Venice Court of Appeal’s judgment, it found that he had failed to exhaust domestic remedies.
In its report of 14 December 1981 (Article 31 of the Convention) (art. 31), the Commission expressed the opinion:
- by eight votes to seven, that the length of the proceedings in question had not exceeded a "reasonable time";
- by twelve votes to three, that there had also been no breach of Article 6 § 1 (art. 6-1) as regards the requirement that judgment be pronounced publicly.
At the hearings on 22 March 1983, the Government requested the Court "to conclude that  has not violated Article 6 § 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention in the present case".