The case originated in an application (no. 56280/07) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Ioan Tău (“the applicant”), on 12 December 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr R.L. Chiriţă, a lawyer practising in Cluj-Napoca. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained that the criminal proceedings conducted against him on charges of drug-trafficking had violated his right to a fair trial under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) and (d) of the Convention. Relying on Article 5 § 1 of the Convention he also complained that he had been unlawfully detained for the period between 3 and 10 July 2007 despite his release being ordered by the Bucharest District Court on 3 July 2007.
On 25 October 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1944 and lives in Cluj-Napoca.
The applicant was arrested and investigated in criminal proceedings concerning five international drug-trafficking networks. The proceedings were widely reported in the media, as they concerned one of the biggest drug-trafficking cases investigated by the Romanian authorities at the time.
On 7 July 2003, F.D. and P.A. were questioned by the police and the public prosecutor. They both stated that the applicant was involved in the drug-trafficking.
According to the applicant, the prosecuting authorities explored the possibilities of reaching an agreement whereby the accused would give statements about others involved in drug-trafficking in exchange for a reduced sentence. He suggested that such an agreement had been reached with F.D. and P.M. (the ex-wife of accused P.A.) who had not been indicted although they had recognized that they had transported drugs on several occasions.
On 14 July 2003, at about 00.30 p.m., two police officers took the applicant into custody and transported him to the prosecutor’s office attached to the High Court of Cassation and Justice located in Bucharest.
According to the applicant, the prosecutor took his first statement in the presence of an officially appointed lawyer, G.S.C., who had also been assisting two other co-accused, P.A. and F.D. The applicant denied any involvement in drug-trafficking. The applicant maintained the same attitude of denial of the charges throughout the proceedings.
At about 1.30 a.m. the prosecutor issued an arrest warrant for a period of three days in the applicant’s name.
The next day the applicant was brought before the High Court of Cassation and Justice for the examination of the prosecutor’s request concerning his pre-trial detention. He alleges that he was assisted by the same officially appointed lawyer despite the fact that he insisted to be assisted by a lawyer of his own choosing.
The applicant affirmed that he had complained to the prosecutor and then to the judges that he could not be assisted by a lawyer of his choice and that instead he had been assisted by an officially appointed lawyer who also had assisted his co-defendants, P.A. and F.D. However, the criminal case file contains no written trace of any such complaints.
According to the documents submitted by the applicant, he engaged a lawyer practicing in Cluj-Napoca on 15 July 2003.
On 29 July 2003 the applicant, in the presence of his lawyer, was confronted with F.D. According to the record, the latter stated that he had heard about the applicant’s involvement in packing and dissimulating drugs from P.A., but that he had never seen him performing these kinds of activities.
The applicant’s pre-trial detention was repeatedly extended by the Bucharest County Court by interlocutory decisions. The applicant, assisted by his lawyer, attended the hearings.
On 25 September 2003 the prosecutor issued an indictment concerning twenty-six accused persons, including the applicant, and the next day the case was registered with the Bucharest County Court. F.D. and P.M. had not been indicted although they had recognized their involvement in drug-trafficking.
The applicant’s co-accused, P.A., was heard on 7 February 2005 by the court of first instance. He stated among other things that the applicant had helped him in packing drugs. He also stated that the applicant had been his friend since 1994 and that he had provided services for his pharmaceutical company between 1999 and 2001 on the basis of a contract.
On 9 September 2005, I.I., an under-cover agent, gave a statement before the court. She was asked to mention the members of the
On 29 September 2005 the judicial investigation was closed and the lawyers of the accused and the accused themselves submitted their arguments on the merits of the case; the delivery of the first-instance judgment was postponed to 4 October 2005.
By a first-instance judgment of 4 October 2005 the Bucharest County Court found the applicant guilty and convicted him to sixteen years’ imprisonment. He was found guilty of taking part in international drug trafficking by facilitating the transport of drugs.
His conviction was based on statements given by undercover agent I.I., co-accused P.A. and witness F.D. The latter did not give any evidence before the court. Therefore, the court relied on his witness’ pre-trial statements accusing the applicant.
The relevant part of the judgment stated as follows:
“The drugs transported by P.A., P.M. and F.D. had been packed at T.I.’s (the applicant) home. This aspect was revealed by defendant P.A. and witness F.D. The latter stated during the confrontation with defendant T.I. that he had been sent by P.A. to T.I.’s home to have returned special material used for packing the drugs as well as a device used to glue plastic foil; both had been handed to him by defendant T.I.
The involvement of defendant T.I. in the packing and marking of the drugs throughout the year 2002 is confirmed by co-defendant P.A., witness F.D. and undercover agent I.I.”
The applicant appealed against the conviction. He disputed his involvement in the criminal offence and disagreed with the way the trial court had established the relevant facts. He submitted in particular that the trial court had mainly based its decision on statements made by the coaccused before the prosecutor. He pointed out that I.I. had changed her statement before the court and that he could not confront F.D. in open court despite his repeated requests.
On 7 June 2006 the Bucharest Court of Appeal reversed the judgment in respect of the applicant and his sentence was reduced to eight years’ imprisonment on the grounds that he was an accomplice, had no criminal record and he was more than sixty years old. The Appeal Court held that the applicant had just supported the activities of the gang by providing help with the packing of the drugs which were to be transported, by storing them on the premises of his home and then allowing them to be collected by other members of the network. The court made no reference to the applicant’s complaints that he could not confront in open court F.D.
On 14 June 2007, the High Court of Cassation and Justice dismissed an appeal on points of law by the applicant. It upheld the decision of 7 June 2006 endorsing the Bucharest Court of Appeal’s reasoning. It concluded by stating that the applicant’s allegations that he had not committed any offence related to drug-trafficking had been contradicted by the statements of witness F.D., co-accused P.A. and undercover agent I.I.
By an interlocutory judgment of 3 July 2007, the Bucharest District Court ordered the release of the applicant under probation. He was released from prison on 10 July 2007.
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning unlawful detention are set out in Dragomir v. Romania (dec.), no. 59064/11, §§ 9-14, 3 June 2014.
Excerpts from the relevant provisions concerning the hearing of witnesses are described in Bobeş v. Romania, no. 29752/05, §§ 22-24, 9 July 2013.