The case originated in an application (no. 14450/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Maciej Maksym (“the applicant”), on 25 April 2000.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 9 May 2006 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate ex officio the issue of the possible monitoring of the applicant's correspondence to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in .
The aplicant was the owner of a company in Gdańsk (Agencja Rozwoju Przedsiębiorczości i Inwestycji w Gdańsku). On 8 April 1999 he was arrested on suspicion of fraud. On 10 April 1999 the Gdańsk District Court (Sąd Rejonowy) ordered his detention on remand.
On 21 May 1999 the aplicant began serving a 3 years and 10 months' prison sentence, which resulted from another conviction.
On 9 January 2000 the Gdańsk District Court convicted the aplicant as charged and sentenced him to 3 years and 6 months' imprisonment.
On 18 October 2001 the  upheld the applicant's conviction.
On 9 May 2002 the aplicant was again arrested on suspicion of fraud. On 10 May 2002 the Olsztyn District Court ordered his detention on remand. On 16 September 2002 the Olsztyn District Court convicted the aplicant as charged and sentenced him to 3 years' imprisonment.
Upon the aplicant's apeal, the  amended the firstinstance judgment on 30 January 2003. The aplicant filed a cassation apeal. On 1 March 2004 the Supreme Court dismissed the aplicant's cassation apeal as manifestly illfounded.
At the time of lodging his aplication with the Court the aplicant had been detained on remand in the course of criminal proceedings against him. At the same time, as of 21 May 1999 he was serving a prison sentence imposed in the course of another set of criminal proceedings against him.
On 6 June 2000, the Registry of the Court received the aplicant's letter dated 12 A. Both the letter and the envelope bear a stamp “Censored on... judge” and no signature (Cenzurowano dn... sędzia.). The envelope had been opened and then sealed with adhesive tape.
On 13 February 2001, the Registry of the Court received another letter from the aplicant (dated 29 December 2000). It was delivered in an envelope bearing a stamp “Censored on ... judge” and no signature (Cenzurowano dn... sędzia.). It also bears a red stamp “Remand Centre in ” (Areszt Śledczy w Gdańsku).
On 25 June 2001, the Registry of the Court received another letter from the aplicant, dated 24 July 2000 (sent on 13 June 2001). It was delivered in an envelope bearing a stamp “Censored on... judge” and no signature (Cenzurowano dn... sędzia.). The envelope had been sealed with adhesive tape. It also bears a handwritten note: “letter admitted to transport sealed with adhesive tape” (list przyjęty do przewozu oklejony taśmą).
Rules relating to means of controlling correspondence of persons involved in criminal proceedings are set out in the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences (Kodeks karny wykonawczy) which entered into force on 1 September 1998.
The relevant part of Article 103 § 1 of the Code provides as follows:
“Convicted persons ... have a right to lodge complaints with institutions established by international treaties ratified by the  concerning the protection of human rights. Correspondence in those cases ... shall be sent to the addressee without delay and shall not be censored.”
Article 214 § 1 reads as follows:
“Unless exceptions are provided for in the present Chapter, a detainee shall enjoy at least the same rights as are secured to a convicted person serving a sentence of imprisonment under the ordinary regime in a closed prison. No restrictions shall be applied to him except such as are necessary to secure the proper conduct of criminal proceedings, to maintain order and security in a remand centre and to prevent demoralisation of detainees.”
Article 217 § 1 reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“... detainee's correspondence shall be censored by [the authority at whose disposal he remains], unless the authority decides otherwise.”
Article 242 § 5 reads as follows:
“The prohibition of censorship shall also mean the prohibition of acquainting oneself with the content of the letter.”
On 1 September 1998 the Rules of Detention on Remand (Rozporządzenie Ministra Sprawiedliwości w sprawie regulaminu wykonywania tymczasowego aresztowania) entered into force.
§ 36 of the Rules provides:
“The detainee's correspondence, including the correspondence with the international institutions for the protection of human rights, which act on the basis of international agreements ratified by the , with the Ombudsman and public and local government institutions, is mailed through the intermediary of the organ at whose disposal he remains.”
§ 38 provides:
“2.  Censorship shall mean deleting a part of text or making it illegible, whereas seizing correspondence shall mean not transmitting it to a detainee and placing it in his file”