The case originated in an application (no. 11788/16) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Oksana Vyacheslavovna Semenova (“the applicant”), on 2 March 2016. After her death, her daughter, Ms Anna Kirillovna Semenova, expressed the wish on 9 September 2016 to pursue the application.
The applicant and her daughter were represented by Mr S. Petryakov, a lawyer practising in Kazan. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
.  The applicant alleged that she had not received appropriate medical care in detention.
.  On 2 March 2016 the Court decided at the request of the applicant to apply Rules 39 and 41 of the Rules of Court (see paragraph 28 below).
On 6 September 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 23 November 2016, after being informed of the applicant’s death, the Court lifted the interim measure indicated on 2 March 2016 and discontinued the application of Rule 41.
The applicant was born in 1980 and lived in St Petersburg until her arrest.
On 6 February 2013 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of drug trafficking. She remained in detention throughout the ensuing investigation and trial.
.  On 28 March 2013 the Krasnogvardeiyskiy District Court of St Petersburg found her guilty and sentenced her to one year in prison. Regard being had to her previous convictions for similar offences, the applicant was ordered to spend four years and one month in a correctional colony.
At the time of her arrest the applicant suffered from HIV and chronic hepatitis C.
.  She underwent a routine medical examination by a general practitioner on admission to her remand prison. Several days later, on 18 February 2013, she was examined by a gynaecologist, who diagnosed cervical erosion and carried out basic tests.
.  In late April 2013 the applicant was sent to correctional colony no. 2 in St Petersburg.
.  She had the necessary treatment for HIV and other illnesses in the correctional colony. She was examined by various doctors, including a gynaecologist. She consulted the latter on 6 and 22 May 2013 on account of a vaginal infection.
.  On 9 June 2015 the applicant complained of intense pain in the lower abdomen, which she had been experiencing for four months. A gynaecologist tested her for sexually transmitted diseases and prescribed treatment with hormones and painkillers.
.  Six days later the doctor examined her again and suggested that she might have developed cervical cancer and needed to go to hospital for an indepth examination.
On 17 June 2015 the applicant, referring to “personal circumstances”, asked for the admission to hospital to be suspended. The doctor talked to her, insisting that she urgently needed to be admitted to hospital, but she refused.
A cervical smear test was carried out next day. It revealed cell pathology which resembled cervical cancer, requiring a histological examination to confirm the diagnosis.
On 21 July 2015 the applicant was admitted to Gaaza Prison Hospital in St Petersburg (“the prison hospital”). It appears that it was not licensed to provide healthcare services, although certain services for cancer patients were provided by St Petersburg City Cancer Hospital under a special agreement (see paragraph 42 below).
The applicant had a histological examination two days later, which confirmed cervical cancer. Local chemotherapy was prescribed.
On 22 September 2015 the custodial authorities asked a gynaecological cancer specialist to examine the applicant. The doctor noted that her cancer had progressed to such an advanced stage that it could not be cured by surgery. Radiotherapy was prescribed.
The applicant suffered from “unbearable pain” which ordinary painkillers could not alleviate. On 30 October 2015 the prison hospital’s medical board therefore authorised the use of narcotic pain relief.
In November 2015 the head of the prison hospital applied for the applicant’s early release on medical grounds.
At a hearing on 25 November 2015 before the Smolninskiy District Court of St Petersburg, the applicant’s doctor supported the application, stating that she was very ill, was in constant, severe pain, and that the prison hospital had no drugs to treat her. The drugs accessible in detention were unable to relieve the pain. He argued that if released the applicant would benefit from the wider range of painkillers available in civilian hospitals.
A representative of the detention authorities left the issue to the court’s discretion, only making positive comments about the applicant’s work while in detention and about her character.
The prosecutor in the case objected to the applicant’s release, stating that the detention facility could provide her with the requisite treatment.
The court dismissed the application, finding that the treatment she would receive in the prison hospital was similar to what she would get in a civilian one.
On 1 March 2016 the St Petersburg City Court quashed the decision of 25 November 2015 on appeal and remitted the case for fresh examination. No hearings were held.
By a letter delivered to the Court on 2 March 2016 the applicant asked to apply interim measures under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. She complained of a lack of medical care in detention, including an absence of effective painkillers. On the same day the Court indicated to the Government, under Rule 39, that the applicant should immediately be given access to the entire range of medication available for cancer patients in accordance with Russian laws, including appropriate pain relief drugs. It noted that if such drugs were not available in prison medical institutions, the applicant should be transferred to a civilian hospital.
.  Following the Court’s decision on interim measures the authorities continued treating the applicant in the prison hospital, which mostly consisted of treating her symptoms.
.  The applicant’s condition deteriorated rapidly. She complained of constant pain and asked to consult a psychiatrist. She was afraid that she would have no chance to say farewell to her mother, who was dying of cervical cancer in a hospital. On 16 March 2016 the prison psychiatrist prescribed her sedatives.
.  On 25 March 2016 the applicant was examined by a cancer specialist. He recorded that “additional prescriptions” were necessary to address the applicant’s severe and increasing pain. It does not appear that any changes in the pain relief therapy were made.
.  The applicant died on 9 April 2016.
The relevant provisions of Russian and international law on the medical care of detainees are set out in the following judgments: Ivko v. Russia (no. 30575/08, §§ 5563, 15 December 2015); Amirov v. Russia (no. 51857/13, §§ 50-57, 27 November 2014); Pakhomov v. Russia (no. 44917/08, 30 September 2011); and Yevgeniy Alekseyenko v. Russia (no. 41833/04, 27 January 2011).
Joint orders nos. 190 and 640 from the Russian Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Healthcare and Social Development respectively, both dated 17 October 2005, regulate the provision of medical care to detainees. They state that all convicted female detainees should have an annual gynaecological examination. It should include cytological testing with vaginal and urethral smears.
According to the “Standard for primary medical care for malignant cervical tumours at stage 0-IV”, approved by order no. 1193н of the Ministry of Healthcare on 20 December 2012, every case of cervical cancer requires a consultation with a specialist in radiotherapy, cytological testing, and a colposcopy.
The “Standard of special medical care for malignant cervical tumours at stage IV with paraaortic lymph node metastasis (palliative combined radiotherapy)” approved by order no. 620н of the Ministry of Healthcare on 7 November 2012, provides that a patient suffering from advanced cervical cancer should receive blockers of serotonin receptors, glucocorticoids, pyrazolone, and other medication. The use of those drugs is also set down in the “Standard for special medical care for malignant cervical tumour at stages IIB, III-IV (chemotherapy)” approved by order no. 740н of the same ministry on 9 November 2012.