The case concerns, in substance, the alleged inadequacy of reasons provided in the judgments convicting the applicant, and the alleged interference by the State with the effective exercise of the applicant’s right of application by means of, among other things, compromising his ability to communicate in full confidence with his lawyers.
The applicant was born in 1977 and lives in Gori. He was represented by Ms L. Mukhashavria, Mr N. Kvaratskhelia and Mr G. Mariamidze, lawyers practising in Georgia.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr B. Dzamashvili, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 6 December 2006 Ms J.I. (“the victim”), a national of Kyrgyzstan, notified the police that she had been a victim of human trafficking. She implicated the applicant and a certain Ms A.M. According to the victim, she had been A.M.’s guest, together with two other women, also nationals of Kyrgyzstan, and A.M. and the applicant had forced her into prostitution.
On 7 December 2006 Ms N.E. and Ms N.U., nationals of Kyrgyzstan who had been staying at A.M.’s home, confirmed the victim’s account of events. They stated, among other things, that the victim had been forced by the applicant and A.M. to engage in sexual activities with men in exchange for money. That money would subsequently be split between the applicant and A.M.
On 7 December 2006 the applicant was arrested. During his questioning on the same date, the applicant noted that he had met three women at A.M.’s place. He had not inquired about their identity or where they were from. According to the applicant, they all went to a restaurant, but he never assaulted any of the three women.
On 7 December 2006 R.Ts. was questioned. He stated that he had come to know the three women staying at A.M.’s place through the applicant who had brought them to a restaurant on one occasion. According to R.Ts., he became friends with one of the three women. She told him that the victim wanted to escape, fearing physical retribution from the applicant for having lost his phone, and R.Ts. helped her to leave the city.
On 8 December 2006 the applicant was charged, together with A.M., with human trafficking. According to the charges, the victim was staying at A.M.’s home at the latter’s invitation and the applicant used physical force and threats thereof to compel the victim to engage in sexual activities with men in exchange for money. The money would subsequently be split between him and A.M.
On 21 December 2006 Mr V.G. gave a statement to the investigating authorities. He noted that A.M. had been his next-door neighbour and the two had been on friendly terms. According to V.G., in October 2006 A.M. had three female guests: J.I. (the victim), N.E., and N.U., all Kyrgyzstani nationals. One evening V.G. suggested that they all go to a restaurant. The applicant joined them, presenting himself as A.M.’s friend. Towards the end of that evening V.G. asked A.M. to translate to the victim that he would like to spend the night with her. Subsequently V.G. took the victim to A.M.’s home and had sexual intercourse with her. V.G. explained that he had not paid, as A.M. would not have asked him to pay given their friendship. After about a month he learned from one of the two Kyrgyzstani women also staying at A.M.’s place that A.M. and the applicant had been forcing the victim to engage in sexual encounters with men in exchange for money.
During the court hearing of 21 March 2007 the victim confirmed her pre-trial statement, noting that she had been forced into prostitution by the applicant and A.M. On 28 March 2007 N.E. and N.U. changed their statements alleging police pressure at the investigation stage; they now stated that instead of being forced, the victim had actively sought men for sexual encounters in exchange for money.
During the court hearing of 4 April 2007 V.G. retracted his earlier statement stating that he had been drunk at the time of giving the statement and had been misled by the investigator. Subsequently, on 17 April 2007, he submitted a written statement to the Gori City Court, according to which he maintained his pre-trial statement and requested the court to rely on its content. He explained that the retraction had been caused by his pity for A.M., the latter being his next-door neighbour.
On 22 May 2007 the Gori Regional Court found the applicant guilty as charged (see paragraph 9 above), and sentenced him to twelve years’ imprisonment. A ban of three years on his holding a public office or carrying out professional activities was imposed as an additional sentence. A.M. was also found guilty.
The Gori City Court based the applicant’s conviction on various items of evidence, including the search and seizure reports, the victim’s account and the witness testimony. Among other evidence, the court relied on the pre-trial statement given by V.G. (see paragraph 10 above). The Gori City Court noted that the parties had neither contested V.G.’s submissions explaining the retraction (see paragraph 12 above), nor requested that he be recalled as a witness.
As regards the retraction of statements by N.E. and N.U. (compare paragraphs 6 and 11 above), the court did not consider their submissions trustworthy. It noted in this respect that three investigators and one interpreter had stated that no pressure had been exerted on these witnesses, the latter having voluntarily cooperated with the investigation.
The court also took into account the statement given by R.Ts. – the man who helped the victim to escape (see paragraph 8 above). However, it noted that R.Ts. had partly changed his pre-trial statement to suggest that, even if he helped the victim escape, it had been the victim who had proactively sought sexual encounters. The court considered that R.Ts. had altered his initial statement in order to support N.E.’s version of the events as the latter had become his close friend.
The Gori City Court rejected the respective witness statements given by A.M.’s mother and son who had suggested, among other things, that the victim had been seeking sexual encounters voluntarily and to A.M.’s dismay. The Court considered that these statements aimed at shielding A.M. from criminal responsibility. The court further noted that A.M.’s mother had in fact admitted having heard the victim screaming on one occasion and A.M.’s son admitted, contrary to the defendants’ submissions, having witnessed the victim being driven by various men away from their house, where she had been living temporarily.
The applicant appealed on 20 June 2007 arguing that he had not subjected the victim to conditions akin to slavery and that the domestic court had erred in its application of the law and the assessment of the evidence in that regard. He further stated, among other things, that the first-instance court had unfairly rejected witness statements given by A.M.’s mother and son, and had not given due consideration to the witness statements given by N.E. and N.U. It does not appear that the applicant requested that any witnesses be questioned again.
During the appellate proceedings before the Tbilisi Court of Appeal the applicant requested that the victim be questioned again in relation to allegedly having lied about having been pregnant and having stayed at a hotel. The request was dismissed on the grounds that the circumstances referred to by the applicant had not been newly discovered and, according to the established procedure, should have been raised before the lower court.
In his testimony before the appellate court the applicant suggested that his prosecution had been fabricated by the law-enforcement authorities as a punishment for his alleged refusal to offer a bribe to a judge of the Gori City Court who they had allegedly wanted to arrest. The applicant stated that he had not mentioned this fact before the lower court as he had worked as a bailiff at the same court before having been arrested.
On 29 January 2008 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal upheld the applicant’s conviction (see paragraphs 13-14 above). The appellate court concluded that the lower court had (i) adequately reasoned its judgment; (ii) duly addressed the submissions made by the applicant; (iii) established all the relevant facts by means of a correct analysis of the case-file material; and (iv) had given correct legal analysis of those facts. In support of its position, the appellate court reproduced in its judgment the relevant findings of the lower court (see paragraphs 13-17 above). The Court of Appeal also clarified – in response to the applicant’s argument about the application of the relevant provision of the Criminal Code – that the crime of human trafficking, as defined by law, had multiple independent elements and that if one was proved, the absence of another did not absolve a defendant of criminal responsibility. The applicant appealed on 28 February 2008.
On 15 September 2008 the Supreme Court of Georgia declared the applicant’s appeal on points of law inadmissible. Quoting the relevant provision of the Criminal Procedure Code, the court held that “the case [was] not important for the development of the law and coherent judicial practice, the [contested] judgment [did] not differ from the Supreme Court’s existing practice in such matters, and the appellate court [had] not committed any major procedural flaws during its examination which could have significantly affected its outcome.”
On 13 January 2009 the applicant and his lawyers started preparing the application to the Court. The applicant met his representatives on 13 January, 6 February, and 4 March 2009. All three meetings were held in the meeting room of Tbilisi Prison No. 1 (“the meeting room”).
The meeting room measured about 20 square metres and was divided into four parts by thin boards of approximately 2 metres in height. Each partition was equipped with a door but had no ceiling or sound insulation. The largest part was occupied by the representative of the prison administration, while the remaining three sections of approximately 3 square metres each were designated for the use of prisoners.
The door was kept open during meetings between the applicant and his representatives at the request of the representative of the prison administration. The latter allegedly requested the applicant to sit onto the right side of the table in order that the representative could observe him from a distance of 2 metres. The meeting rooms were also equipped with video cameras.
On 16 February 2009 one of the applicant’s representatives lodged an application with the head of the Prisons Department, asking him to explain the legal basis for the way in which the meeting room in the prison had been arranged and how long it would take to improve those arrangements (see paragraphs 24-25 above), which rendered the applicant’s right to defence difficult to exercise. A similar request was addressed to the Minister of Prisons, Probation, and Legal Assistance on 19 February 2009 (“the Minister of Prisons”). No response appears to have been received from either of the authorities.
On 25 February 2009 one of the applicant’s representatives was allegedly refused a meeting with the applicant by the prison authorities without being given any reason. The applicant’s representative wrote separate applications to three different authorities: the prison director, the director of the Prison Department and the Minister of Prisons. In all three applications an explanation for the refusal and its legal grounds was requested. It was also noted, in the context of the ease of access to the applicant, that the representatives had managed to meet him on previous occasions “without any problems”. Unlike the applications addressed to the prison director and the director of the Prison Department, the one addressed to the Minister of Prisons contained an apparent typing error, indicating 25 February 2006 instead of 25 February 2009 as the date of the incident.
On 4 March 2009 the applicant met with his representative. The latter provided the applicant with the application form and case material, which were allegedly confiscated immediately after the representative had left the prison. On 9 March 2009 the applicant’s representative informed the head of the Prisons Department, the director of Tbilisi Prison No. 1 and the Minister of Prisons of the alleged confiscation of the relevant materials.
The application and its supporting documentation were submitted to the Court on 13 March 2009.
On 26 March 2009 the applicant received a response from the Deputy Minister of Prisons in respect of his applications concerning the alleged refusal to allow a meeting with his representatives and the alleged confiscation of materials (see paragraphs 27-28 above). The reply was based on the explanations given by the prison director that (i) the latter had not been employed in the prison concerned on 25 February 2006 and could not have refused to allow the meeting between the applicant and his representatives on that date, and (ii) the allegation as to the confiscation of case-file materials was untrue as the prison official merely visually inspected the applicant without confiscating the materials from him.
On 5 February 2013 Gori City Court applied the Amnesty Act of 2012 to the applicant’s conviction and reduced the sentence to nine years’ imprisonment.
On 30 September 2013 the applicant’s remaining time in prison (two years, two months and seven days) was suspended on probation, and he was granted early release.
The Criminal Code (1999), as it was worded at the material time, defined the crime of human trafficking as follows:
Article 143(1) [Human trafficking]:
“1.  The purchase or sale of human beings, or any unlawful transactions in relation to them, as well as the recruitment, carriage, concealment, hiring, transportation, handing-over, harbouring or receiving of human beings carried out by means of threats, the use of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, blackmail, fraud, deception, by abuse of a position of vulnerability or power or by means of giving or receiving payment or benefits to achieve the consent of one person [to being under the] control [of] another person, for the purpose of exploitation shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of seven to twelve years, with deprivation of the right to hold an official position or to carry out a particular activity for one year.
The same action committed:
a)  knowingly against a pregnant woman;
b)  knowingly against a helpless person or a person who financially or otherwise depends on the offender;
c)  by abusing an official position;
shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of nine to twelve years, with deprivation of the right to hold an official position or to carry out a particular activity for two years.
The same action committed:
a)  repeatedly;
b)  against two or more persons;
c)  by taking the victim abroad;
d)  using violence dangerous to life or health (or the threat thereof);
shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of twelve to fifteen years, with deprivation of the right to hold an official position or to carry out a particular activity for three years. ...
NB:
For the purposes of the present [Article] and Article 143(2), exploitation is [considered to mean] the use of human beings for their involvement in forced labour or services, criminal or other antisocial activities or prostitution, their sexual exploitation or the provision of other types of services, and placing them in situations similar to slavery or modern-day forms of slavery, as well as forcing the removal, transplantation or other use of an organ, part of an organ or tissue of a human body. Subjecting a human being to modern-day slavery shall mean the confiscation of his or her personal identification documents; [imposing] a limitation on freedom of movement; a prohibition on the maintenance of contacts with family (including written and telephone communication); cultural isolation; keeping a person in degrading conditions; or forcing the person to perform work without payment or with inadequate payment. A person’s consent to his or her premeditated exploitation is irrelevant [for the purposes of the present provision]. ...”