The case originated in two applications (nos. 17674/02 and 39081/02) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by 13 Ukrainian nationals, who were serving their sentences at Zamkova Correctional Colony no. 58 (hereafter “Zamkova Prison”; Замкова виправна колонія № 58), situated in Iziaslav of the Khmelnytsky Region, at the time of the events. The applicants are:
–  Mr Sergiy Viktorovych Davydov, the first applicant, born in 1963, previously convicted on four occasions and currently serving his sentence in Lychakivska Prison no. 30;
–  Mr Vitaliy Volodymyrovych Ilchenko, the second applicant, born in 1975, convicted on two occasions for murder and hooliganism and serving a fifteen year sentence in Yenakiyevo Prison no. 52;
–  Mr Sergiy Yakovych Gomenyuk, the third applicant, born in 1967 and released from serving a twelve year sentence that was imposed on him for committing various criminal acts;
–  Mr Gennadiy Yuriyovych Druzenko, the fourth applicant, born in 1962 and released from serving his sentence in Zamkova Prison in November 2003;
–  Mr N.N. Martov, the fifth applicant, born in 1949, released from serving his sentence in 2004;
–  Mr Salov, the sixth applicant, born in 1940, released from serving his sentence in December 2001 and deceased in 2004;
–  Mr Litvinov, the seventh applicant, born in 1962, serving a twenty year sentence in Zamkova Prison;
–  Mr A.I. Mironov, the eighth applicant, born in 1962, serving a seven year sentence in Zamkova Prison;
–  Mr V.V. Kulik, the ninth applicant, born in 1968, serving a ten year sentence in Zamkova Prison;
–  Mr V.N. Kuzmenko, the tenth applicant, detained pending pre-trial investigation at the SIZO of Lugansk;
–  Mr O.A. Kiselev, the eleventh applicant, serving his sentence in Berdychiv Prison no. 70;
–  Mr Oleg Didenko, the twelfth applicant, serving his sentence in Zamkova Prison;
–  Mr Leonid Shvets, the thirteenth applicant, serving his sentence in Zamkova Prison.
The first and the second applicants lodged their applications on 27 June 2001. The third and the fourth applicants lodged their applications on 24 March 2002. The remaining nine applicants lodged their applications on various dates from 27 June 2001 to 24 March 2002.
All of the applicants were initially represented before the Court by Mr Gennadiy Zherdev, a human rights activist from Kyiv. By their letters of authority of 17 January 2006 the first, the second and third applicants, who were granted legal aid, authorised Mr Arkadiy Bushchenko, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv, to represent them before the Court.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Yuri Zaytsev.
The applicants alleged, under Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention, that they had been ill-treated by the “Berkut” special police force while they were serving their respective sentences and that no effective investigation had been conducted into these allegations. They further complained that, throughout their detention, they had not been allowed to receive food parcels from their relatives or necessary medical treatment and assistance. Their cells had no heating, as coal was not supplied to Zamkova Prison. The food provided to the applicants and sold in the prison shops was of the lowest quality and was not suitable for consumption because it had been produced in the 1980s and 1990s. The penitentiary officers enjoyed considerable discretion in applying disciplinary sanctions to the prisoners, in particular with regard to placing them in solitary confinement or punishment cells. The applicants further complained that some of them were placed in punishment cells in order to prevent them from complaining to various national and international bodies about their torture and ill-treatment by the “Berkut” special police forces. They also alleged that they had no effective and accessible recourse against decisions to place them in solitary punishment cells. The applicants also complained of an interference with their correspondence and an unlawful infringement of their right of individual application. In this connection they referred to Articles 8 and 34 of the Convention respectively.
On 15 January 2007 the Court adopted a final admissibility decision in the case and declared the applicants' complaints under Articles 3, 8, 13 and 34 admissible, under the name of Druzenko and Others v. Ukraine ((dec.), nos. 17674/02 and 39081/02, 15 January 2007). It also ordered the joinder of the applications nos. 17674/02 and 39081/02 (Rule 42 § 1). The Court also decided to join to the merits the Government's request to strike the complaints lodged by ten of the applicants out of the Court's list of cases and their objection as to the exhaustion of domestic remedies.
Given the factual dispute between the parties over the circumstances surrounding the training of special police forces in Zamkova Prison and complaints about the ill-treatment of prisoners during that training, the Court conducted an investigation pursuant to Article 38 § 1 (a) of the Convention. The Court appointed three of its Judges as Delegates, Mr Rait Maruste, Ms Renate Jaeger and Mr Volodymyr Butkevych, to take evidence from witnesses at hearings conducted in the premises of the Khmelnytsky Regional Court of Appeal, Khmelnytsky, between 25 and 27 June 2007 and to visit Zamkova Prison situated in Iziaslav on 27 June 2007.
The Delegates took evidence from three applicants and fifteen witnesses called by the parties and the Court. A verbatim record of the witnesses' statements to the Delegates was produced by the Registry and is included in the case file. The Delegates also visited Zamkova Prison and inspected the site and relevant documentary evidence.
In the course of taking of evidence at the Khmelnytsky Regional Court of Appeal, Mr Zaytsev was assisted by Mr Oleksiy Gotsul, Mr Nazar Kulchytsky and Ms Lyudmyla Shevchuk of the Secretariat of the Agent, all from the Ministry of Justice, Mr Oleksandr Kyslov and Mr Oleksiy Dvoynos from the State Department for the Enforcement of Sentences (hereafter - the “Prison Department”) and Mr Ruslan Pysarenko from the Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor's Office.
The applicant's representative Mr Bushchenko, in the course of the taking of evidence, was assisted by Mrs Aigul Mukanova, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine). The parties replied in writing to each other's observations and made comments on the verbatim record produced by the Registry. The applicants lodged claims for just satisfaction and the respondent Government commented on them (Rule 60 §§ 1 and 4).
The majority of the applicants were detained in Zamkova Prison, during the events the applicants complained of (see paragraph 4 above).
The facts surrounding the applicants' alleged ill-treatment by the special forces in the course of training exercises conducted by the latter on two occasions, namely 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002, while the applicants were held in Zamkova Prison in Iziaslav of the Khmelnytsky region, the manner in which these training exercises were conducted and the investigation into the circumstances of these events are disputed by the parties.
The developments in the presentation of facts of the present case may be summarised as follows.
The applicants' allegations of the conduct of the special forces' training were denied by the Government, who in their submissions as to admissibility of applications lodged on 28 March 2006 relied on the summary presentation of the facts made by the Registry of the Court. Simultaneously they stated that special tactical trainings in Zamkova Prison on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002 were organised without involvement of the prisoners and did not involve the applicants (see paragraph 17 below). They further stated that there was no evidence of the applicants' illtreatment. Presentation of facts, based on the applicants' allegations and Government's reliance on these alleged facts, appeared in the admissibility decision of 15 January 2007.
Before the hearing of witnesses in the case, the Government witnesses made written statements in which most of them admitted that regular searches and training were organised in Zamkova Prison on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002. However, they categorically denied participation of special forces in searches of the residential premises of Zamkova Prison, which were conducted with involvement of Zamkova Prison staff only. The Government witnesses mainly underlined that tactical training sessions in Zamkova Prison did not involve the prisoners and were organised as strictly internal training exercises for the Prison Department staff and involved staff only.
Additional facts were established by the Delegates in the course of the oral hearing before them, in the light of the oral statements made by the applicants and witnesses who appeared at the hearing. In particular, it was established that several rapid reaction units, among them Zhytomyr special rapid reaction unit of the Prison Department (hereafter – Zhytomyr special unit), were involved in the trainings organised on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002. Complementary factual and legal elements to the cases also came into view after the visit to Zamkova Prison on 27 June 2007 and from the post-hearing submissions made by the parties.
Following the oral hearing, the Government again maintained that, based on the evidence heard, special forces did not participate in the training exercise as it was prohibited for police forces to participate in such exercises involving Prison Department and for Prison Department to use such police forces. They further maintained that no special forces ever entered the residential zone of Zamkova Prison. The applicants maintained their position as to the facts.
Based on the above, the Court is confronted with several different versions of the facts. In particular, additional factual elements were discovered in the course of examination of the present applications and the fact-finding mission organised in the instant case. The Court will therefore describe these factual statements briefly, assess evidence gathered at each stage of the proceedings and reach its own final conclusion as to the factual circumstances of the cases.
The facts, as initially presented by the applicants and not contested by the Government and thus described in the admissibility decision in the case, are referred to in Section B, subsection 1 below (see paragraphs 21-25 below).
A short summary of the facts as presented by the Government is contained in Section B, subsection 2 (see paragraphs 26-31 below).
The witness oral evidence taken by the Court's Delegates at hearings conducted in Khmelnytsky is summarised in Annex to the judgment (see attached below), which is also referred to in Section C, subsection 1 (see paragraphs 32-33 below). Parties' comments as to the absence of particular witnesses and on the oral evidence are summarised in Section C, subsections 2 and 3 (see paragraphs 34-37 and 38-42, respectively, below), respectively.
A description of Zamkova Prison and summary of the parties' submissions as to the conditions of detention can be found in Section D, subsections 1 and 2-3, respectively (see paragraphs 43-50 below).
A summary of the documents submitted by the parties before the oral hearing (see paragraphs 52-64 below), the list of documents requested by the Court as a follow up to the oral hearing (see paragraph 65 below) and material and documentary evidence provided as a follow-up to the hearing of oral evidence (see paragraphs 66-80 and 81-83 below) are to be found in Section E, subsections 1, 2 and 3-4, respectively.
The summaries of investigations carried out by the General Prosecutor's Office (paragraphs 84-97 below), of the documentary evidence concerning the investigation by the Prison Department (see paragraph 98 below) and of the review of the complaints lodged by Mr Zherdev (see paragraphs 99-100 below) are contained in Section E, subsections 5, 6 and 7, respectively.
The relevant extracts from the facts of the case as alleged by the applicants and as set out in the admissibility decision (see Druzenko and Others v. Ukraine, nos. 17674/02 and 39081/02, 15 January 2007) are as follows.
The first training exercise began at about 10 a.m. on 30 May 2001. The cells of Zamkova Prison were attacked by the “Berkut” special police force that ill-treated the applicants. These forces were supervised by the Governor of Zamkova Prison Mr Snegir and prison officers Mr Mazurenko and Mr Mazepa. They attacked about 120 prisoners and searched them. At the end of this procedure the prisoners were asked whether they had any particular complaints about the police training. In the presence of the special forces nobody was willing to complain about these actions to the Governor of Zamkova Prison.
Following the training exercise of 30 May 2001 several applicants sent unsuccessful complaints to the Supreme Court, the General Prosecutor's Office (the “GPO”), the Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor's Offices and the Prison Department about the aforementioned actions of the special forces and their alleged ill-treatment. They also raised various complaints about the conditions of their detention.
As to the second training exercise, the admissibility decision mentioned that it began at 11 p.m. on 28 January 2002, when fourteen cells of Zamkova Prison (cells 1-12, 19 and 29), with approximately 100 prisoners, had been attacked by the “Berkut” special police force.
Following this training, some of the applicants sent several unsuccessful complaints to various State authorities. In their further complaints to various authorities the applicants mentioned that heavy bodily injuries had been inflicted on them. They also complained that medical assistance had never been given to those injured, including the applicants, and that as a result of this attack the applicants Mr Litvinov, Mr Mironov, Mr Salov and Mr Kuzmenko had received injuries. The attack was supervised by a local prosecutor Mr Volkov, his assistant Mr Stasiuk and an unidentified person. In one of the replies sent to the applicants they were informed by the GPO that the Prison Department conducted a training on 29 January 2002, which was aimed at further training of staff and search for and seizure of prohibited items, such as weapons, drugs, finding escape routes, checking water, electricity and other engineering communications. The GPO stated that the applicants' complaints about their ill-treatment by “Berkut” were wholly unfounded.
The Government's submissions as to the facts
In their observations of 28 March 2006 on the admissibility of the case and before the decision as to the admissibility of the case (see paragraph 14 above), the Government stated that they had relied on the facts as summarised by the Registry of the Court. However, they disputed a number of factual points referred to by the applicants. In particular, they contested the description of the manner in which the training exercise was organised and submitted that none of the training sessions involved the participation of prisoners and that both training exercises were conducted outside the residential zone of Zamkova Prison.
The Government maintained that force had never been used against prisoners and specifically against the applicants. Moreover, they insisted that none of the applicants detained in Zamkova Prison during the training exercises and the subsequent searches on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002 had been injured, and that none of them had requested medical assistance or treatment.
The Government stated that the applicants Mr Davydov, Mr Ilchenko and Mr Gomenyuk had received relevant and timely medical treatment for their medical conditions.
The Government further maintained that the training exercises had been organised as part of the State's action plan to secure the effective operation of the penitentiary system, to prevent escapes from prisons, riots, the commission of criminal acts against the administration or other prisoners, etc. Such training exercises were lawful and the plans for them were approved in advance by the prosecution authorities responsible for supervising the lawfulness of the enforcement of sentences. They further upheld that a prosecutor had attended both training exercises in order to prevent possible violations of the law and to review possible complaints on the spot. He had found no violations of the law in the course of the training exercises organised on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002.
The Government stated that the applicants' complaints about inhuman conditions of detention and the use of force by a special police force, allegedly the “Berkut” unit, were duly examined by the prosecutor supervising the lawfulness of the enforcement of sentences. In particular, they stated that in 2001 there were 27 inspections conducted in Zamkova Prison, as a result of which 29 officials were subjected to different sanctions, in 2002 there were 29 inspections and 44 officials subjected to various sanctions. For instance on 13 March 2001 the Shepetivka prosecutor ordered the Governor of Zamkova Prison to review the nutritional, hygienic and other arrangements in prison as they did not comply with the domestic law. Thus, lodging a complaint with the prosecutor's office, notwithstanding the refusals to institute criminal proceedings upon the applicants' allegations of ill-treatment, had been an effective remedy. As to the complaints raised, the Government stated that the second applicant unsuccessfully raised his complaints before the General Prosecutor's Service only on two occasions – on 10 July and 14 October 2001. As to the third applicant, he complained only to the regional prosecutor's office, but not the General Prosecutor's office. Moreover, the results of these investigations and examination of the applicants' complaints led to a finding that they were unsubstantiated. The Government further maintained that all their complaints had been adequately examined by the domestic authorities, who sent the applicants and their representative Mr Zherdev prompt and relevant replies.
The Government insisted that, of the first three applicants, only Mr Davydov had been placed in disciplinary detention. He was placed in disciplinary detention on 14 July 2001, and the form of punishment was solitary confinement in a SHIZO punishment cell for 15 days. They maintained that the disciplinary measures (change of severity in his regime of serving sentence to a more severe one) were imposed on the applicant twice on 29 July 2001 and 30 January 2002 on account of his refusal to reside with other prisoners and his threats to commit criminal offences.
Since the facts of the case were disputed by the parties, the Court conducted an on-the-spot investigation with the assistance of the parties. In this respect, three Delegates from the Court took oral evidence between 25 and 27 June 2007 from twenty-two witnesses on the following issues:
(a)  the circumstances of the applicants' ill-treatment by the special forces of the Prison Department and operation of the special forces - the applicants, witnesses proposed by the applicants (Mr V. Didenko, Mr Mikhaylenko, Mr Tishalkov, Mr Getmansky), the witness proposed by the Government (Mr Shedko), Mr Leventsov (former First Deputy Head of the Regional Prison Department), Mr Snegir (former Governor of Zamkova Prison) and Mr Iltiay (First Deputy Head of the Prison Department);
(b)  the investigation into the applicants' allegations of ill-treatment and disciplinary sanctions applied to them - the applicants, Mr Bukher (regional prosecutor), Mr Volkov (local prosecutor) and Mr V. Didenko;
(c)  medical treatment and assistance provided to the applicants - the applicants, Mr V. Didenko, Mr Mikhaylenko, Mr Tishalkov, Mr Shedko, Mr Getmansky and Mr Bondar (a head of Zamkova's Prison medical unit);
(d)  the conditions of detention in Zamkova Prison – Mr Klipatsky, Mr Shatskiy, Mr Zlotenko, Mr Zaremskiy (employees of Zamkova Prison at the time of the events), the applicants, Mr V. Didenko, Mr Mikhaylenko, Mr Tishalkov, Mr Shedko and Mr Getmansky.
A further six witnesses had been summoned but did not appear (see paragraphs 34-37 below). Four of these witnesses had previously been employed by the Prison Department. In respect of their absence the Government submitted, in the course of the hearing, that since these absent witnesses had retired and were no longer employed by the State, the Government were unable to identify their whereabouts. All of the witnesses questioned by the Delegates gave preliminary written witness statements, either personally or through their representatives, and these statements were admitted to the case file. A summary of evidence given by the witnesses can be found in the Annex to the judgment.
Absent witnesses
The Government stated that they had sent the summons to the address mentioned, which had been the address of the applicants' representative, Mr Bushchenko. According to the information initially supplied by Mr Bushchenko this applicant was under Government control as he was held in SIZO no. 21 of . Mr Bushchenko stated that he had the last contacts with the applicant via the address of that detention facility. He had had no further contacts with the applicant and stated that he did not know the exact address of the applicant and had unsuccessfully tried to contact him by phone and by mail. The Government provided no information as to where the applicant was after his last contacts with Mr Bushchenko via SIZO no. 21, neither did they indicate any measures undertaken by them in order to establish his whereabouts.
Mr Kyslov, Major from the Prison Department, assisting to the Government's Agent in the course of the hearing, stated that Mr Gaydamaka's and Mr Mazurenko's whereabouts were unknown. Mr Kyslov also mentioned that these witnesses were former employees of the Prison Department and had all retired. He mentioned that he had spoken to Mr Gaydamaka and Mr Mazurenko in person before the hearing. They had received the summons to appear and had signed these summons. One of them was somewhere in the Crimea. Mr Pylypenko's and Mr Mazepa's whereabouts were not known to the Government; they were both resident somewhere in Kyiv. Mr Pylypenko was privately employed somewhere in Kyiv. They also sent the summons to him. As to Mr Zakharov, Mr Kyslov mentioned that he could not be found.
Major Kyslov initially stated that the authorities could not find one of the former prisoners of Zamkova Prison, Mr Getmansky, as his whereabouts were unknown to the Government. Mr Getmansky, after additional information had been provided by Mr Bushchenko to the Government, subsequently appeared before the Delegates.
Mr Bushchenko, the applicants' representative, stated that a copy of the summons had been sent to this witness, who was a former prisoner of Zamkova Prison, but the lawyer could not contact him, although he had previously confirmed that he would appear before the Delegates.
Parties' comments on the oral evidence
The Government considered that due to a number of contradictions and inconsistencies (both in principle and in detail) in the testimonies, given during the interrogation by five former Zamkova Prison prisoners and by three applicants, the applicants failed to establish that they had been beaten in the Prison on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002. Accordingly, the applicants could not claim to be victims in respect of any ill-treatment.
In particular, in relation to the events of 30 May 2001, the Government maintained that:
–  the first applicant's statements were inconsistent and false;
–  the statements concerning the description of the uniform of the socalled special forces that conducted the search given by the first and second applicant, Mr Didenko, Mr Mikhaylenko, Mr Tishalkov and Mr Getmansky were also false and had numerous discrepancies;
–  the first and the second applicants' statements that the so-called “special forces” that held the search in the residential premises of Zamkova Prison had automatic guns, contradicted the statements given by Mr Mikhaylenko and Mr Tishalkov, who remembered that the soldiers were unarmed;
–  Mr Getmansky's statements as to blank shots fired from automatic gun were also untrue as well as to other details of the trainings held;
–  Mr Getmansky's statements as to the third applicant's injuries were untrue and self-contradictory;
–  Mr Mikhaylenko statements about ill-treatment of prisoners in the course of the training were untrue as he could not physically see anything as well as the corridor from behind the closed door to the cell;
–  the contradictions in statements given by the second applicant, Mr V. Didenko and Mr Getmansky in that they knew about the training in advance against the statements given by the first applicant and Mr Tishalkov that they knew nothing about the training.
In relation to the witness statements given as to the events of the training held on 29 January 2002, the Government insisted that:
–  the first applicant's statements as to the blank shots from automatic guns were false;
–  the investigation into the applicants' complaints was conducted in compliance with the requirements of Article 3 of the Convention;
–  the statements of Mr Didenko, Mr Getmansky, the first and the second applicants as to whether there were any prisoners who received injuries and their number as well as to whether medical aid was provided were also false, especially in view of the lack of medical evidence, including registers containing medical records, and witness statements given by Mr Bondar.
The Government concluded that the inconsistent statements as to the presence of the special forces within the residential area, ill-treatment of the prisoners by these so-called special forces and their beatings by these forces and lack of medical treatment and assistance provided to the applicants and other prisoners, clearly showed that all of these statements were false. In their view the only statements that were true, consistent and logical and therefore credible were those given by Mr Shedko, a witness proposed by the Government and a former prisoner of Zamkova Prison. They concluded that there was no evidence established in the case that would prove that there had been any violation of the provisions of the Convention.
The applicants disagreed with the Government's comments and noted that the discrepancies, if there were any, in the statements given by the applicants and the witnesses-prisoners related only to minor details of the events and did not undermine the overall credibility of the applicants' and their witnesses' statements during the fact-finding mission of the Court in June 2007.
Zamkova Prison, where the applicants were held, is a high security prison (максимального рівня безпеки) mainly holding male prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment or long term sentences for grave criminal acts. It comprised two main separated from one another guarded areas – residential area and the industrial area. Residential area included inter alia the following main buildings:
–  administrative area, including headquarters, medical and security units and laundry;
–  high security sector, containing prison for prisoners sentenced to life and walking yards for those prisoners;
–  prison shop, canteen, boiler, mini-bakery and the recreation club for the prisoners;
–  historical building of former Bernardine monastery built in 1610 (former church of the Roman Catholic order), called by the prisoners the Monastyr (Монастир) or the Cloister, comprising high level security wing and security, re-socialisation, quarantine, diagnosis and allocation cells;
–  disciplinary premises building, containing isolation wards of different regimes of detention (which included isolation ward cells (карцери), DIZO (ДІЗО) or disciplinary cells and punishment cells or SHIZO (ШІЗО)), and solitary confinement cells (OK (одиночні камери) or PKT (приміщення камерного типу) cells, so-called separated solitary confinement cells or cell-type premises).
Industrial area included inter alia the following main sites:
–  checkpoint (KPP; КПП або контрольно-пропускний пункт) and auto transport gates;
–  four construction areas, carbon-dioxide station and industrial departments nos. 1 and 2;
–  local household department and greenhouse;
–  wood and joinery workshops in workshop no. 1.
According to the Government's submissions, in 2001-2002 there were 600 prisoners in Zamkova Prison, for a total area of 1,845.7 m2 of cell space (residential space, excluding prisoners' communal areas). Thus, the normal cell space per prisoner was 3.07 m2, which was not less than the 2.5 m2 per prisoner provided for by law at the material time.
In particular, there were 230 prisoners held in the severe prison detention regime (TU unit of the Prison; режим тюремного ув'язнення), which had 684.5 m2 of cell space, thus 2.97 m2 per prisoner.
About 130 prisoners were held in cell-type unit of the Prison (KU unit or cell-type prison premises for multiple prisoners; режим камерного утримання), having 434.1 m2 of cell space, thus 3.3 m2 per person.
There were also 240 persons held in prison dormitories, with a total space of 727.1 m2 and thus 3.02 m2 per prisoner.
As to disciplinary and punishment cells, Zamkova Prison also had 12 SHIZO or punishment cells (having 55.2 m2 of cell space for 12 prisoners), OK cells or separated single occupancy cells and PKT (having 285.7 m2 of cell space for a total of 58 prisoners).
The applicants maintained that they were held in overcrowded cells, with approximately 3 m2 of space per prisoner. According to the applicants, their places of detention had no heating on account of shortage of coal, which was allegedly not delivered to Zamkova Prison. The food provided to the applicants and sold in the shops was of the lowest quality and was no longer consumable, as it had been produced in the 1980s and 1990s.
The applicants complained that throughout their detention they were not allowed to receive food parcels from their relatives or obtain medical treatment. The penitentiary officers enjoyed wide discretion in applying disciplinary sanctions to prisoners, in particular with regard to placing them in solitary confinement.
The parties submitted various documents concerning the training exercises conducted on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002. The documents, regulations and extracts from them, submitted by the parties before and after the hearing, which are relevant to the case, are briefly summarised below.
The Training Plans Approved by the Regional Prison Department and by the Governor of Zamkova Prison
The Training Plan “On the actions of Penitentiaries' administrations, in cooperation with the special forces of the Prison Department and rapid reaction units from the regional penitentiary institutions, for the purpose of neutralising a situation in which criminals had taken hostages and conducting a general search of the premises occupied by the prisoners in the residential zone” (hereafter – “Plan no. 1”), related to the first training exercise held on 30 May 2001 in Zamkova Prison, had been approved on 25 May 2001 by the Head of the Khmelnytsky Regional Prison Department and the Prosecutor in Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor's Office responsible for supervising the lawfulness of the enforcement of sentences.
The following units were included in the general training exercise: personnel from Zamkova Prison, the Zhytomyr special unit and the rapid reaction units of Penitentiaries nos. 31, 58 and 98. One of the aims of the training exercise, as set out in the plan, was to train the personnel of Zamkova Prison and the rapid reaction units to conduct searches in the premises occupied by the prisoners and to search the prisoners.
The special equipment to be used included: weapons (зброя), special restraining equipment (спеціальні засоби), personal protection equipment (засоби індивідуального захисту), service dogs (службові собаки), motor transport, action plans for extraordinary circumstances and layout diagrams.
Plan no. 1 contained information on the operative circumstances (оперативна обстановка) in the Ukrainian penitentiary system as a whole and in the region's penitentiaries; these were considered to be problematic. The information indicated that the penitentiaries in the region were generally overcrowded, which impeded the effective enforcement of sentences. Additionally, it was stated that searches for prohibited items in these penitentiaries had become less effective.
The training was to be conducted in four stages:
–  from 5 a.m. to 8 a.m., a general meeting of the training exercise participants in the Prison staff and prisoners' club;
–  from 8 a.m. to 10 a.m., entry of the joint detachment into the Prison (зона охоронюваного об'єкту), blocking of isolated sections within the Prison and conduct of a selective general search in the isolated departments of the Prison;
–  from 10 a.m. to 11.30 a.m., conduct of an operation to free “hostages”, by the special forces and rapid reaction groups;
–  from 11.30 a.m. to 12.30 a.m., a general meeting of all participants in the Prison staff and prisoners' club, discussion of the training exercise and general conclusions as to its conduct.
According to the Scenario “On the conduct of the practical exercise in Iziaslav Prison no. 31 and Zamkova Prison no. 58” (hereafter “Plan no. 2”), which was adopted on 30 May 2001, the main purpose of the search was to provide the special unit with a practical opportunity to manage the personnel of the penitentiary and the rapid reaction groups in extraordinary circumstances. The training exercise involved participation of groups responsible for blocking, documentation, medical assistance, convoy and searches, and special and reserve groups. The total number of staff involved was 231, including 18 officers from the special unit. There were also officers from the rapid reaction units of Zamkova Prison, Iziaslav Prison no. 31 and Shepetivka Prison no. 98. The special unit used 4 automatic guns, 4 handguns, firecrackers. Their equipment included helmets, flak jackets, rubber truncheons, teargas (черемуха) and handcuffs. The officers from the other units wore helmets (каски з забралом) or motor helmets, flak jackets, and carried shields, rubber truncheons, teargas and handcuffs. The units also had 3 special vehicles, 10 guard dogs and 2 video cameras. After the training exercise on liberating hostages, the special unit was to leave for its usual base.
According to the Plan for the conduct of the general search in Zamkova Prison (hereinafter – “Plan no. 3”), to be held on 30 May 2001, the search was to start at 8 a.m. and finish at 12 noon. A total of 76 members of staff from Zamkova Prison were to be involved in the general search. The personnel involved in the search were divided into nine mixed groups, with different head officers who were conducting a general search in both the residential and industrial zones of Zamkova Prison. The majority of the staff in these groups participated in searching both the residential and industrial zones.
The premises subject to search were the following: workshop no. 1 (group no. 1); departments nos. 1 and 2 (groups nos. 2 and 3); sections nos. 1, 4, 7, Monastyr cells nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 (group no. 4); canteen, medical unit, boiler-house, sanitary section, building premises (group no. 5); cells belonging to the severe regime of detention - SHIZO (punishment cells), OK (separated solitary confinement cells), TU (severe regime of prison detention); prison detention in general detention regime area (group no. 7); departments nos. 2 and 3 (group no. 8) and departments nos. 5, 6 and 8 (group no. 9). The equipment mentioned in Plan no. 3 included 30 immobilising rods, 10 wooden hammers and 2 “Gamma” metal detectors.
The Training Plan “On the conduct of tactical and specialised training with the personnel of Penitentiaries nos. 31 and 58 and rapid reaction groups from the penitentiaries in the region for the simulated purpose of combating group disobedience and mass disturbance” (hereinafter – “Plan no. 4”), relating to the second training exercise in Zamkova Prison on 29 January 2002, was approved on 26 January 2002 by the Head of the Khmelnytsky Regional Prison Department and the prosecutor in Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor's Office supervising the lawfulness of enforcement of sentences.
The following units were involved in this training simulating mass disobedience: personnel from Penitentiaries nos. 31 and 58, rapid reaction units from Penitentiaries nos. 31, 58, 78, 98 and SIZO-29 (all in the Khmelnytsky Region). One of the aims of the training was to train Zamkova Prison's personnel and the rapid reaction units to conduct searches of the premises occupied by prisoners and searching the prisoners themselves. In particular, the search of prisoners and of the residential area was mentioned as one of the major training objectives.
The special equipment to be used included: weapons, special restraining equipment, personal protection equipment and active protection equipment (засоби активної оборони), security dogs, vehicles, plans of action in extraordinary circumstances and layout diagrams. The training plans contained information on the operative circumstances in Zamkova Prison. This information indicated a substantial deterioration in the criminal propensities and socio-demographic composition of the prisoners in Zamkova Prison, which necessitated adequate measures. In particular, the following information on the composition of the prisoners was given to the training participants: many prisoners were convicted for serious crimes, including 65 prisoners who committed crimes while serving their sentences; 15 prisoners were sentenced for banditry; 4 for premeditated murder; 2 persons were likely to attack penitentiary staff; 18 persons were likely to attempt to escape; 12 had been sentenced for drug use, 60 persons were likely to engage in single-sex intercourse and equivalent activities and there were 22 persons with psychological disorders.
The training was to be conducted in four stages:
–  from 6 a.m. to 8.30 a.m., general meeting of the training participants in the Penitentiary club;
–  from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m., training of the joint detachment within the territory of the Prison, for the purpose of terminating group disobedience and mass riots;
–  from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., entry of the joint detachment into the Prison, blocking of isolated sections within the Penitentiary, a general selective search in the isolated sections and cells of Zamkova Prison;
–  from 3 p.m. to 4 p.m., general meeting of the training participants at the Prison staff and prisoners' club, discussion of the training and general conclusions as to its conduct; instructions on further movement of the rapid reaction groups.
According to this Plan (hereinafter, “Plan no. 5”) the training exercise to be held on 29 January 2002 had the general purpose of providing for a general search of the residential and industrial zones and of the prisoners, and applying measures to strengthen law and order in the penitentiary. The training exercise involved participation of groups responsible for blocking, documenting, medical assistance, convoy, search, and the special and reserve groups. The total number of staff involved was 151. There were also officers from the rapid reaction units of Zamkova Prison, Iziaslav Prison no. 31, Shepetivka Prison no. 98, Prison no. 78 and SIZO (pre-trial detention centre) no. 29 of Khmelnytsky Region. The special taskforce unit was to use 3 automatic guns (AK-74), firecrackers, signal rockets. The equipment was to include helmets or motor helmets and shields, flak jackets, teargas (терен-4), rubber truncheons, handcuffs, etc. The units also had 1 special vehicle, 6 guard dogs and 2 photo cameras. The blocking group was equipped with steel helmets and weapons with blank ammunition; the breaking-up group had shields, “Sphere” helmets, rubber truncheons and flak jackets; the protection group had “Sphere” helmets, shields and rubber truncheons; the patrol groups were equipped with weapons without ammunition; the special measures group had rubber truncheons, gas masks and teargas; the extraction group had rubber truncheons, flak jackets and helmets; the convoy group had flak jackets, “Sphere” helmets and rubber truncheons; the documenting group was equipped with photo and video equipment and the reserve group had weapons, gas masks and steel helmets. Each group had specific tasks. All of the groups would participate in the general search in the Prison, and the blocking group was to block the isolated areas of the Prison before the search began.
According to the Plan of conduct of the general search in Zamkova Prison (hereafter – “Plan no. 6”), to be held on 29 January 2002, the search had to start at 9 a.m. and finish at 12 noon. A total of 29 members of staff of Zamkova Prison were to be involved in the general search. The aim of the search was to find prohibited items and to identify preparations for escape, preparatory actions for the commission of criminal offences, etc. The personnel involved in the search were divided into three mixed groups, with different commanding officers who were to conduct a general search in the residential zone of Zamkova Prison.
The premises involved were: the SHIZO, , TU in the severe detention regime area (group no. 1); cells nos. 19 and 29 in departments nos. 5 and 8 (group no. 2); departments nos. 9 and 10 (group no. 3) in the prison section of the general detention regime area. The equipment mentioned in Plan no. 6 included 10 wooden hammers and 2 “Gamma” metal detectors.
On 14 August 2007 the Court requested the Government to provide the following additional documentary evidence:
“... –  copies of the relevant legal regulations (regardless of the issuing authority) governing searches at prison, including rules of conduct for prison staff and documents setting out the rights and duties of the prisoners during searches;
–  regulations concerning the establishment, training and operation of the special forces or so-called “rapid reaction units” of the State Department for Enforcement of Sentences (decree of 27 April 2000), referred to by Mr V.S. Leventsov and Mr M.P. Iltiay in their statements given on 26 and 27 June 2007, respectively;
–  a copy of the decree no. 193дск of the State Department for Enforcement of Sentences dated 30 August 2002 (registered in the Ministry of Justice on 20 September 2002 no. 771/7059) concerning processing of prisoners' correspondence;
–  regulations dealing with the storage, archiving and destruction of registers of medical records, registers of complaints lodged by the prisoners and registers of correspondence;
–  a copy of the report of the internal investigation undertaken by the State Department for Enforcement of Sentences prepared by MM V.S. Leventsov and M.P. Iltiay for examination by the First Deputy Head of the State Department for Enforcement of Sentences Mr O.B. Ptashynsky, referred to on 27 June 2007 by Mr M.P. Iltiay;
–  a copy of the reports as to the “operative situation” in Iziaslav Zamkova Prison from January 2001 to December 2002 (mentioned in their statements on 26 and 27 June 2007, respectively, by MM Leventsov and Snegir) and those reports that were provided to staff of the State Department for Enforcement of Sentences before the searches on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002;
–  a list of the equipment and ammunition provided for use of the staff of the State Department for Enforcement of Sentences in the course of the training exercises on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002, together with copies of any internal decisions relating thereto;
–  the 2003 report of the Human Rights Ombudsman of the Parliament of Ukraine so far as it deals with special training units in prisons;
–  a video-recording of the trainings by the special forces held on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002, mentioned by witnesses Mr O. Tishalkov, Mr V.S. Leventsov and Mr M.P. Iltiay, respectively on 25, 26 and 27 June 2007;
–  copies of Mr Volkov's work records from December 2001 to February 2002, showing dates of and reasons for absence.
Further to the on-site inspection of the prison, your Government are invited to provide written information as to the size of cells visited by the delegation (including a plan), together with copies of the registers showing the prisoners in those cells on 30 May 2001, 29 January 2002 and on 27 June 2007. ...”
On 28 September 2007 the Government replied that it could provide the Court only with the following documents and further evidence, which may be summarised as follows.
The Instruction establishes, inter alia, the procedure for searching prisoners and premises and the territories of residential and industrial zones inside Correctional Labour Colonies (hereafter “CLC”).
According to paragraph 74 of the Instruction, searches of prisoners and premises are to be conducted on the basis of a schedule approved by the Prison Governor. The search is to be conducted with the participation of the personnel of the CLC and, where necessary, the special units for action in extraordinary circumstances, additional forces from other penitentiaries and bodies in the system for the enforcement of sentences. Searches and inspections are to involve technical equipment and, if necessary, specially trained dogs. It is prohibited to damage clothes, property, prison equipment and other objects in the course of the searches or inspections (paragraph 75).
Personal searches of the prisoners may be “full” (that is, with the removal of all clothing) or “partial” (without the removal of clothing). Personal searches are to be conducted by a person of the same sex as the prisoner. The staff members who conduct a search must act conscientiously and reasonably, comply with the security measures and prevent any kind of inhuman treatment of the searched prisoner (paragraph 76 of the Instruction).
According to paragraph 77 of the Instruction, a full search of a prisoner is to be carried out when he or she arrives at the CLC and on his or her departure from it; on placement in a SHIZO, DIZO or PKT/OK, and on leaving these premises. It is also to be conducted after the apprehension of a prisoner for attempted escape or other offences, before a long-term meeting with third parties from outside the penitentiary or after the latter's completion, if necessary. Inmates who are subjected to a full search are asked to hand in any prohibited items for storage, and must then gradually remove their hat, clothes, shoes and undergarments. After these demands are complied with, the separate parts of the prisoner's body and his clothes and shoes are inspected according to the standard procedure. Full searches are to be carried out in specialised premises or rooms near the Prison entry checkpoint (KPP), and also in the SHIZO and PKT/OK separated cells for multiple and single occupancy.
According to paragraph 78, partial searches are to be conducted when prisoners leave for work and return from it, or in other specially designated places.
Under paragraph 79, a prisoner who violates the regime or commits an offence is to raise his hands above his head and stretch out his legs. The person searching him is to stay behind him. In certain instances, where the prisoner is likely to possess weapons, he is to be invited to lean against the wall in front and stretch out his legs. The search is to be conducted by at least two staff members for security reasons.
Paragraph 80 of the Instruction provides that a search of the premises and inspection of the territory of the residential and industrial zones is to be conducted in isolated sectors and workshops, according to the timetable envisaged by the calendar of searches. Every section shall be searched as required, but not less than at least once a month. Searches are to be supervised by the first deputy head of the CLC with responsibility for supervision and security, or by the head of the supervision and security division, on the instructions of the first deputy.
According to paragraph 81 of the Instruction, a general search shall be conducted on the basis of a decision by the Prison Governor and under the latter's supervision, no less than once a month, and also in the event of complications in the “operative situation” in the CLC. During a general search all prisoners and the territory of the residential and industrial zone, and all premises and installations on their territory, are to be inspected. A search is conducted on the basis of the plan prepared jointly by the first deputy Governor with responsibility for supervision and security and the head of the supervision and security division.
In the course of a general search prisoners must be gathered in special separate premises and subjected to an individual search. The residential premises must also be searched, in the usual manner; they are searched with the participation of the head of the social and psychological department. Furniture and items contained in it, sleeping places, including linen, pillows and mattresses, and various personal objects shall also be inspected. The walls, floor, windows and ceiling are to be inspected for secret storage places and manhole hatches. The residential and administrative buildings, their interior and exterior, the cellars and garrets, different communication channels, barriers, toilets, sports grounds, underground tunnels and other places where there could be possible secret storage areas are also to be inspected. Every cell in the premises where the SHIZO and cell-type premises are situated (i.e. PKT, (OK)) shall be inspected meticulously. All walls, ceilings and floors are to be knocked on for the purpose of finding secret storage areas and passages. The grating shall be inspected too, with special attention paid to cuts, score marks and other evidence of deterioration. The operational capacity of the doors, bolts and locks, and the reliability of the fixings of beds, tables and other furniture shall also be checked. Inmates held in those cells shall be subjected to a full personal search and their clothing shall also be inspected. The heads of the search groups are to report to the officer supervising the search, and general statements are to be drawn upon the basis of the search, signed by the supervising officer and the heads of the search groups. This statement is to be forwarded to the supervision and security division.
Addendum no. 9 to the Instruction sets out the Action Plan for the personnel of a penitentiary institution in the event of extraordinary circumstances. In particular, it describes the actions to be taken by the special forces in the event of extraordinary circumstances, such as the taking of hostages or mass disobedience. It further establishes the procedure for acting in such circumstances and provides for the division of the special forces into groups for reinforced supervision and security, blocking groups, extraction groups, documenting groups, a group for the use of the special restraining equipment and a reserve team (in the event of mass disobedience, provision is also made for the participation of a medical assistance group and a patrol group). The addendum also envisaged the procedure for use of the special restraining equipment (for instance, it is prohibited to strike the head or face with a truncheon) and weapons (to be used only in exceptional circumstances, where it is impossible to fulfil the task by other means).
The Order established the special units within the Prison Department. It remained in force until 8 September 2003, when a new Prison Department Order, no. 163, “On the establishment of special units within the system for the enforcement of criminal sentences, approval of their composition and regulations on them” was adopted (it was subsequently annulled on 10 October 2005 by Order no. 167). It envisaged the creation of an inter-regional special unit for action in extraordinary circumstances within the Zhytomyr Regional Department for the Enforcement of Sentences. This unit's scope of territorial jurisdiction extended to Khmelnytsky region and the penitentiaries in this region (paragraph 6 of the Order). The Order also provided for the creation of rapid reaction units, consisting of 10-15 most qualified officers in the penitentiary institutions (paragraph 9 of the Order). The heads of the special units were ordered to cooperate with the rapid reaction units of the penitentiaries within their territorial jurisdiction.
According to the Regulation “On the special units of the system for the enforcement of sentences for action in extraordinary circumstances in the regional departments of the State Department for the Enforcement of Sentences” (Addendum no. 1), the purpose of these units was to react to extraordinary situations in penitentiaries, such as riots and mass disobediences, and to react appropriately to changes in the “operative circumstances” in the jurisdiction to which such units belonged (paragraph 1.1). The personnel of these units were to be selected from persons who possessed the required physical and psychological qualities and were able to act in extreme situations (paragraph 1.9). The special unit had a special uniform and shoes, special restraining equipment and other equipment (paragraph 1.14) for the exercise of their tasks and duties. One of the group's objectives was to take preventive measures in order to counteract mass disobedience and offences in prisons (paragraph 2.5).
According to paragraphs 3.1-3.5 of the Regulation, the heads of the Regional Prison Departments were allowed to make proposals as to the use of these units in the penitentiary institutions (планове відпрацювання установ). In particular, the department head in the region responsible for the unit was to establish the unit's calendar of activities on a six-monthly basis. The unit acts on the basis of specially developed plans approved by the head of the regional department and the respective prosecutor. The Regulation stipulated that the unit officers' actions should comply with the law and should be based on humane treatment of prisoners.
By virtue of Addendum no. 2 to the Order, Zhytomyr special unit was composed as follows: the commander of the unit (a major), four officers (two captains and a senior lieutenant), two heads of detachments (senior warrant officers) and eighteen warrant officers. The total number of unit officers was twenty five.
According to the report by Mr S.O. Zlotenko, head of the guarding, supervision and security division, submitted to the Head of the State Prison Department on 6 September 2007, there was no video recording of the training exercises conducted on 30 May 2001 and 29 January 2002.
According to the information note produced by the deputy Governor of Zamkova Prison, dated 27 June 2007, cells nos. 2, 8 and 29 in the Monastyr measured 30.8 m2, 22.8 m2 and 35 m2, respectively.
According to the information note prepared by the acting head of the documentation service in Khmelnytsky Regional Prison Department, the documents relating to the “operative situation” in Zamkova Prison and files relating to these issues have been destroyed, according to Order no. 21 of the State Prison Department of 4 February 2004 “On approval of the list of documents created in the course of the operation of penitentiary bodies and institutions of the State service for the enforcement of sentences, designating the terms of storage”.
The documentary evidence provided by the Government concerning the investigation into the applicants' complaints may be summarised as follows.
On 17 August 2001 Prosecutor Volkov, in response to the complaints lodged by the applicants, replied that no violations of the law had been found on the basis of the allegations of ill-treatment.
On 14, 20 and 26 September 2001 the head of the division within the General Prosecutor's Office responsible for supervising the enforcement of sentences in criminal cases, after examining the complaints lodged by Mr G. Zherdev alleging ill-treatment of the applicants by the “Berkut” special police force, requested the First Deputy Prosecutor of the Khmelnytsky Region to conduct an investigation into them.
On 24 September and 1 October 2001 an assistant to Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor supervising the enforcement of sentences in criminal cases, requested Mr Volkov, the Shepetivka Deputy Prosecutor supervising compliance with the law in the enforcement of criminal sentences, to conduct an investigation into the complaints lodged by Mr Zherdev.
On 9 November 2001 Mr Volkov replied to Mr Ilchenko's complaints about the conditions of detention and stated that the conditions in question complied with the law.
On 12 April and 13 May 2002 respectively the head of the division in the General Prosecutor's Office supervising the enforcement of sentences in criminal cases and the Deputy Prosecutor General requested the Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor's Office to conduct an investigation into the complaints lodged by Mr Zherdev. These complaints were transferred to Mr Bukher, the senior assistant prosecutor of Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor's Office, who was responsible for supervising the enforcement of sentences in criminal cases and had been ordered to investigate the matter.
On 7 May 2002 Mr Stasiuk, assistant to the Shepetivka Prosecutor, acting on orders from Mr Bukher, questioned the prisoners detained in cells nos. 8 and 29 (Mr Ilchenko, Mr Kulik and Mr Litvinov), who stated that they had been beaten by members of the special forces in the course of the search conducted at the Prison on 29 January 2002. The other prisoners who were questioned stated that no physical force had ever been applied to any prisoner in the course of the search and that nobody from cell no. 29 had ever been beaten. Mr Stasiuk also questioned Zamkova Prison personnel, including Mr Zakharov, Mr Mazurenko, Mr Chudyuk, Mr Gaydamaka, Mr Volkov and Mr Bondar. They all confirmed that no force had ever been used against the prisoners. Mr Bondar stated that no medical assistance had been requested by the prisoners after the second training exercise and that no one had received any injuries. Mr Bondar's statement mentioned that Mr Kulik suffered from miositis of the spine muscles (міозит м'язів спини) and osteochondrosis (остеохондроз).
On 10 May 2002 Mr Volkov, the Shepetivka Prosecutor, ordered the Governor of Zamkova Prison to apply disciplinary measures to the prisoners Mr Kulyk, Mr Lytvynov and Mr Ilchenko for their failure to comply with the lawful procedure for submitting complaints. In particular, he alleged that they had violated Article 44 of the Code for the Enforcement of Sentences, and Rules 17.2 and 33.1 of the Penitentiary Internal Rules.
On 29 May 2002 Mr Bukher, the senior assistant prosecutor of the Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor's Office, questioned Mr Ilchenko in person. In his explanations, Mr Ilchenko again asserted that he had been beaten by the special forces. He also alleged that his complaints had not been forwarded by the staff of Zamkova Prison and that Mr Gaydamaka and Mr Boyko had tried to force him to withdraw his complaints. Mr Ilchenko also stated that prosecutor Volkov and his assistant wanted him to withdraw the complaints lodged. Additionally, he thought that they were in fact covering up for violations of the law in Zamkova Prison.
On 11 June 2002 Mr Bukher issued a resolution, by which the Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor's Office refused to institute criminal proceedings, finding no unlawfulness on the basis of the applicants' complaints. In particular, it found that the applicants Mr Ilchenko and Mr Davydov had not been ill-treated by the “Berkut” special police forces, which had allegedly trained in Zamkova Prison and conducted a search of the premises and prisoners. According to the text of this resolution:
“... Mr Zherdev, repeatedly, without verifying truthfulness of information, had sent complaints [on behalf of prisoners Mr Ilchenko, Mr Kulyk, Mr Druzenko, Mr Lytvynov and Mr Myronov] to various State and non-governmental organisations about violation of the prisoners' rights, ... including unlawful use of force by the prison's employees, the officers of the special forces, poor conditions of detention ... He received this information from these prisoners, contrary to the procedure established by law.
The following had been established in the course of investigation, based on the personal files of the prisoners, materials of the previous inspections by the special prosecutor's office and other information.
... On 29 January 2002 the employees of Zamkova Prison, and not “Berkut” effectuated previously planned ... measures aimed at finding underground tunnels, prohibited items, means for escape, [they] inspected technical and engineering security means, in presence of the Shepetivka prosecutor ... and no complaints were made.
Inmates, who at the same period of time stayed in the same cell with Mr Davydov and Mr Ilchenko have not confirmed infliction of physical injuries in their explanations, other unlawful acts on the part of [Prison] officials.
... the prisoners were provided with residential space of 2,5 square metres, everyone having an individual sleeping place and linen, clothes and shoes according to season.
... there were no complaints about poor medical treatment ...
... there were no postal envelopes and pens available in the Prison shop ...”
On 15 June 2002 the Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor informed the Deputy Prosecutor General, who was reviewing the complaints by Mr Zherdev, that an investigation into these complaints revealed no evidence of ill-treatment of the applicants. Mr Bukher sent letters to Mr Zherdev and prisoners Mr Ilchenko, Mr Druzenko, Mr Mironov, Mr Lytvynov and Mr Kulyk, informing them of his resolution refusing to initiate criminal proceedings.
On 11 July 2002 the Deputy Prosecutor General again instructed the Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor to conduct an investigation into these complaints. In particular, the instruction referred to a joint investigation into the complaints by the regional prosecution service, Prison Department officials, and medical staff from the region and representatives of the Ombudsperson. The instruction also stated that it was necessary to investigate other matters, such as whether the applicants had applied for medical assistance and whether they received it, and whether they had complained to the prosecution service.
On 24 July 2002 Mr Yantselovsky, a senior assistant to the Khmelnytsky Regional Prosecutor, questioned sixteen persons, including prisoners and personnel of Zamkova Prison, who all stated that no physical force had been applied to the prisoners in the course of the search conducted on 29 January 2002. Mr Ilchenko and a prisoner Mr Pavlysyk refused to give evidence concerning the complaints.
On 6 August 2002 the Acting Prosecutor of the Khmelnytsky Region informed the Deputy Prosecutor General that Mr Zherdev's complaints were unsubstantiated. The investigation file had been transferred to the General Prosecutor's Office for examination.
On 15 October 2001 Mr S.I. Skokov, the head of the department for educational, social and psychological work with prisoners, informed the First Deputy Head of the State Prison Department that the applicants' complaints were ungrounded. This information was provided in reply to request from the First Deputy Head of the State Prison Department and on the basis of the investigation report produced by Lieutenant Danovsky, an inspector from the department for educational, social and psychological work with prisoners, who inspected Zamkova Prison in person from 3 to 4 October 2001. The report contained no review of medical evidence and was largely based on the fact that training of 30 May 2001 was conducted lawfully as it was based on a lawful decision to conduct this training and was supervised by the special prosecutor Volkov. The report also referred to the first and second applicants' personal files. It mentioned that the first and second applicants, were dangerous criminals and the first applicant (Mr Davydov) was complaining frequently to the authorities.
From August 2002 to 4 May 2006 the applicants' then representative Mr Zherdev unsuccessfully complained to various authorities, including the General Prosecutor's Office, about various interferences with the applicants' correspondence. He also raised various issues concerning the applicants' poor conditions of detention, ill-treatment in 2002-2005 and violations of their rights.
On 14 April 2003 the Governor of Zamkova Prison Mr Snegir, in reply to the letter of Mr Zherdev, stated that none of the prisoners concerned (including Mr Druzenko, Mr Gomenyuk and Mr Ilchenko) had ever requested an application form from him to institute proceedings before the European Court of Human Rights. Furthermore, he stated that the prisoners were serving their sentence according to the relevant law provisions and no violations were found on the basis of his complaints. He attached to his letter standard letters with statements from Mr Ilchenko, Mr Druzenko, Mr Kulyk, Mr Myronov, Mr Martov and Mr Kuzmenko, all dated 1-5 April 2003, in which they mentioned that they no longer wished to correspond with Mr Zherdev and that they had no complaints about the two training events, Zamkova Prison and its officers. He further mentioned that the prisoners Mr Ilchenko, Mr Druzenko and Mr Gomenyuk were held in single occupancy cells.
The relevant extracts from the above Recommendation, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 24 September 1982, provide as follows:
“... Recommends the governments of member states:
to apply, as far as possible, ordinary prison regulations to dangerous prisoners;
to apply security measures only to the extent to which they are necessarily required;
to apply security measures in a way respectful of human dignity and rights;
to ensure that security measures take into account the varying requirements of different kinds of dangerousness;
to counteract, to the extent feasible, the possible adverse effects of reinforced security conditions;
to devote all necessary attention to the health problems which might result from reinforced security;
...
to have a system for regular review to ensure that time spent in reinforced security custody and level of security applied do not exceed what is required;
to ensure, when they exist, that reinforced security units have the appropriate number of places, staff and all necessary facilities;
to provide suitable training and information for all staff concerned with the custody and treatment of dangerous prisoners.”
The relevant extracts from Recommendation no. R (87) 3, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 12 February 1987, provide:
“The basic principles
... 1.  The deprivation of liberty shall be effected in material and moral conditions which ensure respect for human dignity and are in conformity with these rules.
... 3.  The purposes of the treatment of persons in custody shall be such as to sustain their health and self-respect and, so far as the length of sentence permits, to develop their sense of responsibility and encourage those attitudes and skills that will assist them to return to society with the best chance of leading law-abiding and selfsupporting lives after their release.
... 5.  The protection of the individual rights of prisoners with special regard to the legality of the execution of detention measures shall be secured by means of a control carried out, according to national rules, by a judicial authority or other duly constituted body authorised to visit the prisoners and not belonging to the prison administration.
Accommodation
... 14.1.  Prisoners shall normally be lodged during the night in individual cells except in cases where it is considered that there are advantages in sharing accommodation with other prisoners.
Where accommodation is shared it shall be occupied by prisoners suitable to associate with others in those conditions. There shall be supervision by night, in keeping with the nature of the institution.
The accommodation provided for prisoners, and in particular all sleeping accommodation, shall meet the requirements of health and hygiene, due regard being paid to climatic conditions and especially the cubic content of air, a reasonable amount of space, lighting, heating and ventilation...
Medical services
1.  At every institution there shall be available the services of at least one qualified general practitioner. The medical services should be organised in close relation with the general health administration of the community or nation. They shall include a psychiatric service for the diagnosis and, in proper cases, the treatment of states of mental abnormality.
Sick prisoners who require specialist treatment shall be transferred to specialised institutions or to civil hospitals. Where hospital facilities are provided in an institution, their equipment, furnishings and pharmaceutical supplies shall be suitable for the medical care and treatment of sick prisoners, and there shall be a staff of suitably trained officers.
... 29.  The medical officer shall see and examine every prisoner as soon as possible after admission and thereafter as necessary, with a particular view to the discovery of physical or mental illness and the taking of all measures necessary for medical treatment; the segregation of prisoners suspected of infectious or contagious conditions, the noting of physical or mental defects which might impede resettlement after release; and the determination of the fitness of every prisoner to work.
1.  The medical officer shall have the care of the physical and mental health of the prisoners and shall see, under the conditions and with a frequency consistent with hospital standards, all sick prisoners, all who report illness or injury and any prisoner to whom attention is specially directed.
The medical officer shall report to the director whenever it is considered that a prisoner's physical or mental health has been or will be adversely affected by continued imprisonment or by any condition of imprisonment.
Discipline and punishment
Discipline and order shall be maintained in the interests of safe custody, ordered community life and the treatment objectives of the institution.
... 35. The following shall be provided for and determined by the law or by the regulation of the competent authority:
conduct constituting a disciplinary offence;
the types and duration of punishment which may be imposed;
the authority competent to impose such punishment;
access to and the authority of the appellate process.
1.  No prisoner shall be punished except according to the terms of such law or regulation, and never twice for the same act.
Reports of misconduct shall be presented promptly to the competent authority who shall decide on them without undue delay.
No prisoner shall be punished unless informed of the alleged offence and given a proper opportunity of presenting a defence.
... 37.  Collective punishments, corporal punishment, punishment by placing in a dark cell, and all cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment shall be completely prohibited as punishments for disciplinary offences.
1.  Punishment by disciplinary confinement and any other punishment which might have an adverse effect on the physical or mental health of the prisoner shall only be imposed if the medical officer after examination certifies in writing that the prisoner is fit to sustain it.
In no case may such punishment be contrary to, or depart from, the principles stated in Rule 37.
The medical officer shall visit daily prisoners undergoing such punishments and shall advise the director if the termination or alteration of the punishment is considered necessary on grounds of physical or mental health.
Information to, and complaints by, prisoners
1.  Every prisoner shall on admission be provided with written information about the regulations governing the treatment of prisoners of the relevant category, the disciplinary requirements of the institution, the authorised methods of seeking information and making complaints, and all such other matters as are necessary to understand the rights and obligations of prisoners and to adapt to the life of the institution.
If a prisoner cannot understand the written information provided, this information shall be explained orally.
1.  Every prisoner shall have the opportunity every day of making requests or complaints to the director of the institution or the officer authorised to act in that capacity.
A prisoner shall have the opportunity to talk to, or to make requests or complaints to, an inspector of prisons or to any other duly constituted authority entitled to visit the prison without the director or other members of the staff being present. However, appeals against formal decisions may be restricted to the authorised procedures.
Every prisoner shall be allowed to make a request or complaint, under confidential cover, to the central prison administration, the judicial authority or other proper authorities.
Every request or complaint addressed or referred to a prison authority shall be promptly dealt with and replied to by this authority without undue delay.
Personnel
... 63.1.  Staff of the institutions shall not use force against prisoners except in self-defence or in cases of attempted escape, or active or passive physical resistance to an order based on law or regulations. Staff who have recourse to force must use no more than is strictly necessary and must report the incident immediately to the director of the institution.
Staff shall as appropriate be given special technical training to enable them to restrain agressive prisoners.
Except in special circumstances, staff performing duties which bring them into direct contact with prisoners should not be armed. Furthermore, staff should in no circumstances be provided with arms unless they have been fully trained in their use.
... Treatment objectives and regimes
Imprisonment is by the deprivation of liberty a punishment in itself. The conditions of imprisonment and the prison regimes shall not, therefore, except as incidental to justifiable segregation or the maintenance of discipline, agravate the suffering inherent in this.
Every effort shall be made to ensure that the regimes of the institutions are designed and managed so as:
to ensure that the conditions of life are compatible with human dignity and acceptable standards in the community;
to minimise the detrimental effects of imprisonment and the differences between prison life and life at liberty which tend to diminish the self-respect or sense of personal responsibility of prisoners; ...
... 71.1.  Prison work should be seen as a positive element in treatment, training and institutional management.
Prisoners under sentence may be required to work, subject to their physical and mental fitness as determined by the medical officer.
... Additional rules for special categories
Prison administrations should be guided by the provisions of the rules as a whole so far as they can appropriately and in practice be applied for the benefit of those special categories of prisoners for which additional rules are provided hereafter.”
The relevant extracts from the Appendix to Recommendation no. R (99) 22 of the Committee of Ministers, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 30 September 1999, provide:
“... II.  Coping with a shortage of prison places
... 7.  Where conditions of overcrowding occur, special emphasis should be placed on the precepts of human dignity, the commitment of prison administrations to apply humane and positive treatment, the full recognition of staff roles and effective modern management approaches. In conformity with the European Prison Rules, particular attention should be paid to the amount of space available to prisoners, to hygiene and sanitation, to the provision of sufficient and suitably prepared and presented food, to prisoners' health care and to the opportunity for outdoor exercise. ...”
The Report to the Government of Ukraine concerning the visit undertaken from 15 to 23 July 1999 by the CPT states that the prisoners of the Kharkiv SIZO and Prison no. 85 complained to the members of the CPT about physical violence and the destruction of personal objects by hooded officers from a special detachment (the report referred to “Spetsnaz” or special forces) which regularly intervened in Prison no. 85 (§§ 25-26, with regard to “Ill-treatment”). Physical violence had been applied to the prisoners held in disciplinary detention. The report mentioned that the Ukrainian authorities recognised the existence of a special forces operating under the auspices of the Regional Prison Department. They claimed that this unit was involved in supervisory searches in the cells. The aim had been to prevent acts contrary to the law.
The relevant extracts from the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to  carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 10 to 26 September 2000 read as follows:
“... 2.  Ill-treatment
In Vinnytsia Prison No. 176 ... Allegations were also heard concerning interventions of teams from the Regime and Protection Department; prisoners stated that they have been stripped to their underpants by members of such teams and, sometimes, draged out of their cell and beaten. On examination by a medical member of the delegation, one prisoner was found to have a healed whitened 6 cm long by 1 cm wide scar on his back, consistent with his allegation of having been beaten with rubber batons during the previous New Year period. Further, it was alleged that during the weekly searches, the cells were turned upside down and that, occasionally, especially at night, teams would use a Rottweiler dog to ensure that cells were rapidly cleared of their occupants.
The CPT recommends that the authorities at all levels (central, regional and local) deliver the clear message that all forms of ill-treatment of prisoners are not acceptable and will, if they occur, be severely punished.
Further, the CPT recommends that the Ukrainian authorities carry out a thorough enquiry into the methods used at Vinnytsia Prison No. 176 by teams from the Regime and Protection Department, during their interventions in the establishment. It would also like to be informed of the results of the enquiries initiated by the Director of Simferopol SIZO No. 15 referred to in paragraph 62, as well as of any measures subsequently taken.”
The relevant extracts from the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to  carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 24 November to 6 December 2002 read as follows:
“... 2.  Ill-treatment
During the 2002 visit, the delegation received no allegations of physical illtreatment by prison staff working in Prison No. 8 and SIZO No. 21.
However, in early April 2003, the CPT received allegations that, following its delegation's visit to SIZO No. 21, prisoners interviewed by the delegation had been intimidated by prison staff. It was also alleged that, between 5 February and 15 March 2003, hooded prison staff members had carried out searches in the prison, during which prisoners had been beaten because they had protested at the way in which the searches were being carried out (numerous objects, including documents concerning proceedings underway, were seized).
The CPT recommends that the Ukrainian authorities carry out an independent and thorough investigation into these allegations, and that they inform the Committee, in due course, of the results of the investigation.
At Colony No. 14, the delegation received allegations according to which, in April/May 2002, after an evening roll call, several hooded prison staff members, said to be drunk, had entered Sector No. 3 and had beaten prisoners from wards 11, 13 and 20 with truncheons, assisted by prisoners who were also hooded. By letter of 15 April 2003, the Ukrainian authorities submitted the conclusions of an official inquiry into these allegations, carried out by the local and regional prison administration. It emerged from the conclusions that the allegations had not been confirmed. The conclusions were based on: written declarations by prisoners in Sector No. 3 that there had been no such incidents and that they had no complaints about the prison administration; an interview with the officer responsible for Sector No. 3, a report by the head of the operational section and an examination of various registers kept in the prison, none of which made any mention of incidents during the period in question; and the absence of requests from the prosecutor's office for an inquiry into such incidents.
The CPT is far from convinced by this inquiry and the conclusions drawn from it. It is a wholly internal non-independent prison administration inquiry.
The CPT recommends that the Ukrainian authorities deliver to the staff of Colony No. 14 the clear message that all forms of ill-treatment are unacceptable and will, if they occur, be the subject of severe sanctions.”
The relevant extracts from the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to  carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 9 to 21 October 2005 read as follows:
“... The CPT also recommends that the Ukrainian authorities review as soon as possible the norms fixed by legislation for living space per prisoner, ensuring that these are at least 4 m² in all the establishments under the authority of the Department for the Enforcement of Sentences. ...”
The relevant extracts from the Report by the Commission for Human Rights, Mr T. Hammarberg, on his Visit to Ukraine (1017 December 2006), for the attention of the Committee of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly (, 26 September 2007, CommDH (2007) 15) read:
Under Article 8 §§ 2 and 3 of the Constitution, its provisions are directly applicable. There is a guaranteed right to lodge an action directly on the basis of the Constitution in defence of the constitutional rights and freedoms of the individual and citizen.
Under Article 55 §§ 2 and 4, everyone is guaranteed the right to challenge the decisions, actions or omissions of State authorities, bodies of local self-government, officials and officers of a court of law. After exhausting all domestic legal remedies everyone has the right to appeal for the protection of his rights and freedoms to the relevant international judicial institutions or to the relevant authorities of international organisations of which  is a member or in which it participates.
Article 63 § 3 provides that incarcerated persons enjoy all human and civil rights, subject only to those restrictions determined by law and established by a court ruling.
The relevant extracts of Articles 25 and 99 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 28 December 1960, in force at the material time, provide:
Article 4
The obligation to institute criminal proceedings and investigate a crime
“The court, prosecutor or investigator must, to the extent that it is within their power to do so, institute criminal proceedings in every case where evidence of a crime has been discovered, take all necessary measures provided by law to establish whether a crime has been committed and the identity of the perpetrators and punish them.”
Article 25
Supervision by the prosecutor in criminal proceedings
“... The prosecutor shall carry out his or her functions in criminal proceedings in compliance with the laws and regulations ... and independently of any state bodies and officials...”
Article 94
Grounds for instituting criminal proceedings
“Criminal proceedings shall be instituted on the following grounds:
(1)  applications or communications from enterprises, institutions, organisations, officials, representatives of official bodies, public and individuals;
(2)  communications from the representatives of authorities, public or individual citizens, who have apprehended the suspect in the place where the crime was committed or caught red handed;
(3)  acknowledgement of guilt;
(4)  information published in the media;
(5)  direct detection of signs of a crime by a body of inquiry or investigation, a prosecutor or a court.
A case may be instituted only when there is sufficient evidence that a crime has been committed.”
Article 97
Obligation to accept applications or communications with regard to crimes and the procedure of their examination
“A prosecutor, investigator, body of inquiry or a judge shall be obliged to accept applications or communications as to the committed or prepared crimes, including in cases that are outside their competence.
Following an application or communication about a crime the prosecutor, investigator, body of inquiry or a judge shall be obliged, within the three-day time limit, adopt one of the following decisions:
(1)  to institute criminal proceedings;
(2)  to refuse to institute criminal proceedings;
(3)  to remit the application or communication for further examination according to jurisdiction.
Simultaneously, all possible measures shall be applied to prevent further crime or to discontinue pending crime. ... Measures of protection shall be applied to ensure security of the person who informed about a crime ... against real danger to life...
In the event there is necessity to examine the information or communication about crime, before initiating criminal proceedings, such an examination shall be conducted by a prosecutor, investigator or body of inquiry, within the time-limit of ten days, by means of gathering explanations from separate citizens or officials or by means of withholding necessary documents.
Application or communication with regard to crime, before the criminal proceeding shall be initiated, shall be reviewed by means of search and seizure measures. Conduct of specific search and seizure acts, determined by legislative acts of , effectuated upon agreement with the court, on the basis of approved by a prosecutor request of the head of the respective operative department or his deputy. Resolution of the court authorising [such acts] shall be adopted and can be appealed against according to a procedure and in circumstances, specified in Articles 177 [search in premises for documents or objects], 178 [seizure of documents or objects] and 190 [examination of locality, premises, objects and documents.] of this Code.”
Article 99-1
Challenging decisions on refusal to initiate criminal proceedings
“... A resolution by investigator or body of inquiry refusing to initiate criminal proceedings can be appealed to the relevant prosecutor and if that ruling was issued by the prosecutor to the higher prosecutor. An appeal shall be lodged by the person whose interests are infringed or by his/her representative within seven days from the date of receipt of the ruling.
A resolution by investigator or body of inquire refusing to initiate criminal proceedings can be appealed by a person whose interests are infringed or by his/her representative to court under procedure prescribed by Article 236-1 of this Code.
A resolution by a court on refusal to initiate criminal proceedings can be appealed by person whose interests are infringed or by his/her representative to the higher court within seven days from the date of its receipt...”
Article 236-1
Challenging resolution on refusal to initiate criminal proceedings in the court
“Complaints against the resolution of the body of enquiry, investigator, prosecutor refusing to initiate criminal proceedings shall be lodged with the district (city) court ... by the person whose interests are touched upon, or a representative of that person, ... within seven days from its receipt or information given by the prosecutor that he refused to quash the resolution.”
Article 236-2
Judicial examination of the challenge against the resolution refusing to institute criminal proceedings
“Complaints against the resolution of the prosecutor, investigator or body of inquiry refusing to institute criminal proceedings shall be examined by a sole judge within a period of ten days from the moment the case-file arrives at the court.
The judge shall request relevant materials on which the refusal to initiate criminal proceedings was based, examine them and inform the prosecutor and the complainant about the date it will be examined. If necessary a judge shall hear explanations of a person who lodged the complaint. A verbatim record of a hearing shall be concluded.
... a judge shall take one of the following decisions:
1)  to quash the resolution refusing to initiate criminal proceedings and return the case-file materials for additional examination;
2)  to reject the complaint.
The resolution of a judge shall be appealed against to the court of appeal within seven days from the moment it was adopted by a prosecutor or a complainant.
A copy of the judge's resolution shall be sent to a person, who adopted the contested resolution, prosecutor and a person, who lodged the complaint.”
According to the practice of the domestic courts, a review of a prosecutor's resolution to refuse to institute criminal proceedings was limited to a review of compliance with procedural and substantive grounds for such a refusal (приводи та підстави для порушення кримінальної справи). In particular, the procedural grounds which would be reviewed were those enumerated in Article 94 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The substantive grounds were those set out in Article 4 of the Code (see, among other sources, judgment 30 January 2003 given by the  in case no. N 1-12/2003; Plenary Supreme Court Resolution of 11 February 2005, in force until 21 December 2007). Inactivity of the body of enquiry, investigator or prosecutor resulting in a decision not being taken under Article 97 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure could be appealed according to the procedure established in Chapter 31-А of the Code of Civil Procedure (Plenary Supreme Court Resolution of 11 February 2005, cited above).
According to Article 10 of the Code, the officials of penitentiary institutions and the prisoners held therein shall comply with the law.
The correctional labour institutions enforcing prison sentences were correctional labour colonies, prisons and educational labour colonies. Adults were to serve their sentences in a correctional labour colony or a prison (Article 12 of the Code). The types of correctional labour colony, classified according to the degree of security of the regime, included: colony-settlements for persons who committed reckless criminal acts, and general regime, reinforced regime, strict regime and special regime colonies (Article 13 of the Code). The type of penitentiary institution and the particular detention regime were to be determined by the Prison Department (Article 19 of the Code). A convict was to be transferred to the relevant correctional labour institution within ten days of the date on which the judgment in a criminal case became final (Article 20 of the Code). This provision indicated that every convicted person was to have a personal file.
Under Article 28 of the Code, the principal characteristics of the regime in penal institutions were: compulsory isolation and permanent supervision, so as to avert any possibility of crimes or other acts against public order being committed by the prisoners; strict and continuous observance of obligations by these persons; and various detention conditions dependent on the character and gravity of the offence and the personality and behaviour of the prisoner. In particular, those serving their sentences were obliged to wear a uniform. They were subjected to searches; body searches were to be conducted by persons of the same sex as the person searched. Correspondence was subjected to censorship, and parcels and packages were subjected to opening and verification. A strict internal routine and rules were to be observed in correctional labour institutions.
By Article 29 of the Code, in the event of malicious infringement of disciplinary rules by a prisoner serving his sentence under the strict regime, the Governor of the Prison had the right to impose a new period, which could not exceed six months, for serving of the sentence under the strict regime.
According to Article 44 of the Code, prisoners had the right to submit proposals, make statements and lodge complaints with State bodies, non-governmental organisations and officials. These had to be sent in accordance with the penitentiaries' Internal Rules and were to be examined according to the procedure established by law. Complaints addressed to the Ombudsperson and the prosecutor's office were to be dispatched within one day of their receipt. The prisoners were to be duly informed of the results of examination of their proposals, complaints and statements. (Following introduction of a new Code on 11 July 2003, which replaced Correctional Labour Code as from 1 January 2004, and further changes introduced to Article 113 of the Code on the Enforcement of Sentences on 1 December 2005 and Order no. 275, adopted by the State Department for the Enforcement of Sentences on 25 December 2003, correspondence sent to the European Court of Human Rights can no longer be reviewed. However, Article 113 § 3 of the Code establishes that as a general rule all correspondence shall be subject to review).
In Article 47 of the Code, “malicious violation of the regime” was defined as a prisoner's failure to comply with the lawful demands of the administration; unsubstantiated refusal to work (more than three times during the year), bearing in mind that work was mandatory for all prisoners as stipulated by Article 49 of the Code; the consumption of alcohol, drugs or other substances; the production, storage, purchase and distribution of prohibited items; gambling; minor hooliganism; systematic avoidance of treatment for contagious diseases (active tuberculosis, venereal disease, etc.). The finding that an prisoner was a “malicious violator of the regime” led to sanctions for infringements of the detention regime, provided that such sanctions were imposed on the basis of a resolution or order of the respective superior and were not declared null and void by a court decision. Also, the work performed by the prisoners was to comply with the task of their rehabilitation and re-education (Article 49 of the Code).
By virtue of Article 71 of the Code, the Governor of the Prison, his deputy, the head of the department for social-psychological work, the senior instructor and instructors in the correctional labour colony had the right to impose disciplinary sanctions on prisoners. Such sanctions were to correspond to the factual circumstances and gravity of the offence. Previous disciplinary sanctions and the prisoner's explanations were to be taken into account. Sanctions were to be enforced immediately after being imposed and the prisoner had the right to appeal against them to the hierarchical superior, which did not prevent enforcement of the sanction (Article 68 of the Code). Disciplinary sanctions included: prohibition on receiving parcels and, for the course of one month, on buying food in the prison shop; annulment of improved conditions of detention; placement in the SHIZO, with or without participation in work; or placement of the prisoner in solitary confinement isolation ward (карцер). A change of the regime for serving one's sentence was to be carried out on the basis of a substantiated decision of the Prison Governor, approved by the penitentiary's supervisory board. Other disciplinary sanctions were imposed on the basis of a written or verbal order by the Governor.
Under Article 74 of the Code, prisoners had to be held in conditions that corresponded to basic sanitary and hygiene standards. Inmates in correctional labour colonies had to be allowed at least 2 m2 floor space per person. Penitentiary institutions had to ensure that legal aid and necessary medical treatment were provided to prisoners (Article 76 of the Code).
According to Article 81 of the Code, in the event of physical resistance to officers of correctional labour institutions, rampage or other violent acts, prisoners were to be subjected to means of restraint such as handcuffs, a restraint jacket (гамівна сорочка), rubber truncheons, tear gas and other special means of restraint, as provided for by Article 14 of the Police Act, in order to prevent injuries to themselves or others. Physical measures were to be applied only where it was impossible to use other means of restraint, could not exceed the measures necessary for execution of tasks by the administration and were to be imposed in such a way as to minimise the damage to the offender's health. The administration of the penitentiary was to provide victims with any necessary medical assistance without undue delay.
Article 82 of the Code allowed the use of weapons in exceptional circumstances and if other means did not facilitate attainment of the desired result, if a prisoner attacked or inflicted another intentional life-threatening act on a penitentiary employee or other persons. Every instance of the use of weapons had to be communicated to the prosecutor.
According to Article 128 of the Code, employees of the penitentiary institutions who acted brutally towards the prisoners or whose acts infringed prisoners' human dignity were to be subjected to disciplinary or criminal liability. A penitentiary employee who committed a disciplinary offence for a second time was to be dismissed.
Under section 12(1) of the Prosecution Service Act, the public prosecutor was to deal with petitions and complaints concerning breaches of the rights of citizens and legal entities, with the exception of complaints that fell within the jurisdiction of the courts. Subsection 4 provided that an appeal against a prosecutor's decision was to be lodged with the hierarchically superior prosecutor or a court. Subsection 5 provided that the Prosecutor-General's decision was final.
Under section 44(1), the matters subject to the public prosecutor's supervision were to extend to the following areas: adherence to the legal rules on correctional labour or supervision of those establishments responsible for the enforcement of sentences or coercive measures ordered by a court; adherence to the procedures and conditions for holding or sanctioning persons in such establishments; the rights of such persons; the manner in which the relevant authorities carried out their duties under the criminal law; and compliance with the legislation on the enforcement of sentences. The public prosecutor could at any time visit establishments where prisoners were serving their sentences, in order to conduct interviews or consult documents; he or she could also examine the legality of orders, resolutions and decrees issued by the administrative authorities of such institutions, terminate the implementation of sanctions or measures imposed on prisoners, appeal against such sanctions or measures or annul them if they did not comply with the law, and request officials to give explanations concerning breaches.
The Internal Prison Rules (Правила внутрішнього розпорядку виправно-трудових установ) were approved by Order no. 110 of the State Prison Department on 5 June 2000. The “Rules” were subsequently modified and remained in force until 25 December 2003. They may be summarised as follows.
By Rule 1.1 of the Rules, they were to provide guidance for the enforcement and serving of sentences, According to the legislation in force. The rules were to be binding on all correctional labour institutions or medical institutions attached to them (Rule 1.2).
According to Rule 12.3, single occupancy cells in the special-regime correctional labour colonies and solitary confinement cells were not to measure less than 3 m2. Windows in prisons and in PKT or cell-type premises in correctional labour colonies were to be 1.3-1.4 m in width and 1.15–1.2 m in height, and those in SHIZO, DIZO and solitary confinement cells were to be 0.5 m by 0.9 m. Windows were to be equipped with external steel grating or metal shutters and protected by internal gratings. Floors were to be constructed from concrete and covered with wooden planking. Walls were also to be made out of concrete and covered with white paint (Rule 12.4). The doors to the cells were to be 6 cm thick, covered by sheet steel and reinforced by metal angles around the entire perimeter. The centre of the doors was to have an opening for supervision of the prisoners. The middle of the door was to have an opening measuring 18 x 22 cm and 95 cm from the floor, for the transfer of food, books, etc. Doors were to open into the corridor and be kept locked (Rule 12.5). Cells in correctional labour colonies with general, reinforced, strict and special regimes, and in the SHIZO and DIZO were to be equipped with additional internal doors made from round metal rods and transversal metal bars.
Under Rule 12.10, cells in SHIZO, DIZO, solitary confinement cells and single occupancy cells in special regime colonies were to be equipped with folding beds, which were to be lifted and locked in place from the wake-up bell until lights out, and other necessary furniture.
According to Rule 16.1 the relationship between prisoners and employees of penitentiary institutions was to be based on strict compliance with the law. Under Rule 16.3, prisoners were to fully comply fully with the demands of the penitentiary staff.
According to Rule 17.3, prisoners were prohibited from sending and receiving correspondence in any manner contrary to the procedure established by these Rules.
By Rule 20.1, the staff were to remain in the penitentiary in the event of complications in the operative circumstances in the correctional labour colony; a duty roster was to be organised for the staff.
Under Rules 31.1-31.5, prisoners were entitled to send letters according to the norms established by the Correctional Labour Code. Letters and complaints were to be sent only through the correctional labour institution's administration. Special mailboxes were to be installed on the territory of the penitentiary and were to be opened on a daily basis by specially designated persons. Prisoners incarcerated in prison regime and in cell-type premises were to forward their letters through the representatives of the prison. Letters were to be dropped into the mailboxes or transferred to representatives of the administration unsealed. Inmates' letters which used a secret language or script or other conventions, or those that were cynical in nature or contained information that was not be disseminated were not to be sent to the addressee, and the prisoner was to be duly informed.
According to Rules 33.1.-33.9, prisoners were to submit their complaints orally or in writing. Written complaints were to be addressed to the administration of the correctional labour colony. Inmates were to be provided with paper and a pen in order to set out their complaints in writing. Complaints which could be examined by the prison administration immediately, without being sent to other institutions or organisations, were to be examined without delay. Complaints addressed to state institutions and NGOs and their officials were to be sent with an accompanying letter, setting out the penitentiary's assessment of them. Complaints sent to the Ombudsperson or prosecutors were not subject to review and were to be sent to the addressees within a day of their receipt. In the event of the repeated submission of a complaint, the administration was to state in its cover letter which body had examined the previous complaint and to provide the results of their examination. Complaints which were referred to a body that was not competent to examine them were not to be sent, and the prisoner was to be given a recommendation to send his or her complaints to a competent body. If the prisoner insisted, however, the complaints were to be sent to the designated institution. Complaints containing obscene or prohibited expressions were not to be sent to the addressees and the persons who submitted them were to be disciplined. Complaints submitted in writing were to be registered with the colony's secretariat sent to the addressees within three days. Oral complaints were also to be registered in a special register. Replies to the complaints were to be announced to prisoners within three days and attached to the prisoners' personal files. The prisoners were to bear the costs of sending complaints. If the prisoner was unable to pay, however, the expenditure for sending complaints was to be borne by the penitentiary.
By virtue of Rules 44.1-44.4, the examination and search of the prisoners and of the premises and territories of residential and industrial zones of correctional labour colonies were to be conducted according to the procedure established by the State Prison Department. It was prohibited to damage linen, clothes, belongings and other objects without unless it was necessary. Searches in the residential and industrial zones were to be conducted according to the scheduled plan. A document was to be drawn up on the basis of the search results. The time frame for searches was to be established by the penitentiary's administration.
According to the Rule 49, the Prison duty officer was to record every instance of use of the measures of special restraint, such as handcuffs, restraint jacket, special gear and firearms in a special register.
Under Rule 69, the placement of a prisoner in the SHIZO, DIZO or solitary confinement cell of isolation ward (“single occupancy cells”) was to be effectuated on the basis of a resolution of the Governor (in certain instances a duty officer), based on explanations by the prisoner and a medical report on the prisoner's ability to be held in such a cell. Inmates placed in the SHIZO, DIZO or solitary confinement cells were to be fully searched. They were allowed certain essential sanitary and personal hygiene items and a change of clothes. Inmates held in these cells were prohibited from meeting relatives, could not receive parcels and were not allowed to buy food and essential items. They were not allowed to play table games, send letters or smoke. They were fully responsible for maintaining order in the cells in which they were detained. The prisoners could not leave the SHIZO, DIZO or solitary confinement cells before expiry of the term of disciplinary punishment, except for medical reasons. After serving the disciplinary punishment the prisoner was to be immediately released from the disciplinary cell by the duty officer or his deputy, in the presence of the head of the department.
According to Rule 70, prisoners who were held in disciplinary cells were not entitled to wear warm outer clothing, but could have them only when they left the premises. The bed linen was to be provided only at bedtime. Inmates held in DIZO cells were to be allowed a one-hour daily walk, while those held in SHIZO and single occupancy cells were to have only a thirty-minute walk.
Under Rule 74, Governors of penitentiary institutions, their deputies, heads of departments and services were periodically to visit the SHIZO, DIZO, and solitary confinement cells and the cell-type premises in the general, enforced and strict regime colonies, and single occupancy cells in the special regime colonies. They were to examine the conditions of detention in them and take measures to eliminate any shortcomings found.
According to Rule 77, correctional labour facilities were to provide two types of medical assistance: clinical medical examinations and supervision of prisoners for the purpose of evaluating their health and, if an illness was discovered, applying therapy and restoring their working capacity; and outpatient medical treatment and in-patient general and specialised treatment, according to the means and methods recommended by the Ministry of Health. Individuals arriving in correctional labour institutions were to undergo a mandatory medical examination, the results of which were recorded in the prisoners' medical files.
Order no. 167 provided, inter alia, that a special unit could participate in the search and inspection of penitentiary institutions and prisoners. It could also be involved in special actions relating to riots, mass disobedience, the taking of hostages and other extraordinary circumstances. (The Order and the Regulation were in force from 10 October 2005 to 26 December 2007, when the Order's registration was annulled by the Ministry of Justice of  with effect from 14 January 2008. This Order and Regulation replaced the previous Order no. 163 of 8 September 2003 “On creation of special units of the system of enforcement of sentences, approval of staffing needs and Regulations on these units”, which was not publicly accessible). According to expert opinion no. 15/88 of the Ministry of Justice and the opinion of the Secretariat of the Agent of the Government of Ukraine before the European Court of Human Rights, Order no. 167 and the Regulations approved by it did not comply with the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights.
The 2004 report notes, in general, the use of the special forces by the Prison Department for actions within penitentiary institutions (відпрацювання установ) and for searches conducted in them. The Commissioner stated that the practice of using such units could be equated to torture. In particular, the report stated that prisoners were forced out of their cells, beaten with truncheons, had to lie on the floor, were put in the “roztyazhka” (розтяжка) position (i.e. “spreadeagled” or in a position whereas a person stood with his arms against the wall and legs stretched wide apart; see paragraph 13 of the Annex to the judgment) during searches and were forced to sit (навприсядки) with their hands behind their heads while waiting for their turn to be searched. Inmates were forced to remain stretched out for a couple of hours and to swear that they would not violate the regime and would cooperate with the penitentiary administration. The fact of use of such units was discovered in Prison no. 78 of the Khmelnytsky region. The report generally notes that the main purpose of these searches was in reality to demonstrate force rather than to find prohibited items. It also referred to the problematic situation with regard to overcrowding in prisons and penitentiary institutions in . However, the report provided no information as what actions were undertaken by the authorities on the basis of these findings.