The case originated in three applications (nos. 40503/17, 42902/17 and 43643/17) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by thirteen Russian nationals comprising (i) Mr M.K., (ii) Mr M.A., Mrs M.A. and five minor children, and (iii) Mr M.K., Mrs Z.T. and three minor children (“the applicants”), on 8 June, 16 June and 20 June 2017, respectively. The President of the Section acceded to the applicants’ request for their names not to be disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant in case no. 40503/17 was represented by Ms S. Gregorczyk-Abram, Ms M.J. Radziejowska and Mr J. Białas, lawyers practising in Warsaw. The applicants in case no. 42902/17 were represented by Mr M. Matsiushchankau, a Belarusian human-rights defender who was granted leave to represent the applicants pursuant to Rule 36 § 4 (a) of the Rules of Court. The applicants in case no. 43643/17 were represented by Ms M.K. DębskaKoniecek, a lawyer practising in Warsaw. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska, and subsequently by Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 8 June, 16 June and 20 June 2017 respectively, the Court (the duty judge) indicated to the respondent Government interim measures under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, namely not to return the applicants to Belarus (see paragraphs 16, 33 and 59). The interim measure indicated in case no. 42902/17 was lifted on 29 August 2018 (see paragraph 51), the interim measures indicated in cases nos. 40503/17 and 43643/17 remain in force.
The applicants alleged that the Polish authorities had repeatedly denied them the possibility of lodging an application for international protection, in breach of Article 3 of the Convention. They also invoked Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention, alleging that their situation had not been reviewed individually and that they were victims of a general policy that was followed by the Polish authorities with the aim of reducing the number of asylum applications registered in Poland. The applicants stated that, under Article 13 in conjunction with Article 3 of the Convention and Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention, lodging an appeal against a decision denying someone entry into Poland did not constitute an effective remedy as it would not be examined quickly enough, would have no suspensive effect and would not be examined by an independent body. Moreover, the applicants complained that the Polish authorities had not complied with the interim measures granted to them by the Court, in breach of Article 34 of the Convention.
On 13 July, 3 August and 21 July 2017 respectively, the applications were communicated to the Government. Having regard to the Court’s findings in I v. Sweden (no. 61204/09, §§ 40-46, 5 September 2013), it was decided that Russia would not be given notice of the present application.
The Government and the applicants filed written observations on the admissibility and merits of the case.
In addition, written comments concerning case no. 42902/17 were received from the Centre for Advice on Individual Rights in Europe, the Dutch Council for Refugees, the European Council on Refugees and Exiles and the International Commission of Jurists (acting jointly), the President of the Section having given them leave to do so (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The facts of the cases, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant, Mr M.K., is a Russian national.
In the period from July 2016 until 8 June 2017 he travelled to the Polish-Belarusian border crossing at Terespol on approximately thirty occasions. He submitted that each time that he had visited that border crossing he had expressly stated a wish to lodge an application for international protection; on at least several of those occasions, he had presented that application in written form (a copy of this document was submitted to the Court).
The applicant also submitted that on one occasion (on 17 March 2017) his representative had also been at the border checkpoint at Terespol but had not been allowed to meet with the applicant or be present at his questioning by the border guards. The presence of the applicant’s lawyer at the border was a part of a wider effort to provide legal assistance to asylumseekers organised by a group of lawyers from the Warsaw Bar Association. On the same day fifty-one persons – mainly of Chechen origin – presented themselves at the border checkpoint at Terespol. At the same time fourteen lawyers carrying powers of attorney from those persons were at the border and requested to be allowed to assist their clients during the second stage of the border-control process. Their request was refused. All those represented by the lawyers in question were returned to Belarus without the possibility of meeting with their representatives.
According to the applicant, when talking to the border guards he expressed fears for his safety. He told the guards that he was from Chechnya and that before leaving that region he had been detained numerous times without any legal basis. He told them that on one occasion, while being questioned by the Chechen police, he had been tortured and forced to sign a statement agreeing to serve as an informant for the police; subsequently, the police had tried to find and arrest him. He presented to the border guards documents confirming that after being tortured he had developed posttraumatic stress disorder. He also told the border guards that he could not remain in Belarus as his visa had expired and that in practice it would be impossible for him to obtain international protection there. The border guards then summarily turned him away, sending him back to Belarus.
On each occasion that the applicant presented himself at the border crossing at Terespol administrative decisions were issued turning him away from the Polish border on the grounds that he did not have any documents authorising his entry into Poland and that he had not stated that he had been at risk of persecution in his home country but was in fact trying to emigrate for economic or personal reasons. The official notes prepared by the officers of the Border Guard reported that the applicant had indicated, inter alia: his desire to live and work in Poland or Germany, his desire to find a wife and start a family in Poland, his lack of any family in Chechnya, his wish to travel to join friends residing in Europe, his lack of employment and money, his refusal to denounce his friends to the authorities, and his wish to escape from the Chechen justice system in order to avoid responsibility for an accident in which someone had died.
The applicant appealed against at least one of those administrative decisions (that decision had been issued on 17 March 2017). On 12 June 2017 the head of the National Border Guard (Komendant Główny Straży Granicznej) upheld the decision in question. The applicant lodged an appeal with the Warsaw Regional Administrative Court (Wojewódzki Sąd Administracyjny w Warszawie). The proceedings before that court are pending.
On 8 June 2017, when the applicant presented himself at the border crossing at Terespol, his representative lodged a request under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court asking the Court to prevent the applicant from being removed to Belarus. She indicated that, as a Russian citizen, the applicant had no genuine possibility of applying for international protection in Belarus and was at constant risk of expulsion to Chechnya, where he would face the threat of torture or of other forms of inhuman and degrading treatment.
On 8 June 2017, at 10.52 a.m., the Court (the duty judge) decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Polish Government that the applicant should not be removed to Belarus until 23 June 2017. The Government were informed of the interim measure before the planned time of expulsion. Nevertheless, the applicant was returned to Belarus at 11.25 a.m. He appealed against that decision.
On 1 September 2017 the head of the National Border Guard upheld that decision. He stated, inter alia, that under domestic law, an interview with a foreigner who did not have documents allowing him to cross the Polish border was to be held by an officer of the Border Guard without the participation of other persons, including the lawyer representing that foreigner. The head of the National Border Guard added that the applicant had not expressed any wish to apply for international protection, as had he lodged such an application, the border guards would have received it. According to the head of the National Border Guard, the applicant had not substantiated that he had indeed tried to lodge such an application. Instead, the official note prepared by the Border Guard officer who had interviewed him stated that the applicant had expressed a wish to escape the judicial authorities in Chechnya and to travel to meet with friends to Germany. When referring to the interim measure indicated by the Court, the head of the National Border Guard stated that it was impossible to remove from Polish territory a person who had not legally crossed a border in the first place and that domestic law provided no basis for allowing the applicant to enter Poland.
The applicant appealed to the Warsaw Regional Administrative Court. The proceedings before this court are still pending.
On 9 June 2017 the applicant returned to the border checkpoint at Terespol, carrying with him a copy of a letter informing his representative of the Court’s decision concerning the interim measure. The applicant submitted that he had been searched by border guards and questioned about the people who had helped him and who had secured him legal representation and how this representation had been paid for. The applicant also alleged that his copy of the letter from the Court had been confiscated from him. The Government maintained that neither any such search nor any seizure of that document had taken place. They also stated that the applicant had not been questioned regarding his legal representation. They furthermore stated that during his conversation with the officers of the Border Guard the applicant had not expressed any need for international protection; rather, he had declared that he wished to go to Germany, where his family lived.
On the same day the Government requested that the Court lift the interim measure indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. They argued that the applicant had never requested international protection, and nor had he given any reasons for the need for such protection. They also maintained that as the applicant had not been admitted to Poland by the border guards, he had not been legally in Poland and could therefore not be removed. In the Government’s view the applicant had abused the interim measure in order to pressurise the Polish Border Guard officers into giving him permission to enter Poland.
On 14 June 2017 the Court (the duty judge) decided not to lift the interim measure, but rather to prolong it until further notice and to indicate to the Government that in the light of the submissions made to the Court (especially the applicant’s written application and his submissions, copies of which had been forwarded to the Government), the Court considered that the applicant had lodged a request for international protection. The Court clarified that the indication, made to the Government on 8 June 2017, that the applicant should not be removed to Belarus should be understood in such a way that when he presented himself at a Polish border checkpoint his application for asylum would be received and registered by the Border Guard and forwarded for examination by the competent authorities. Pending examination of the asylum application, the applicant should not be sent back to Belarus.
The applicant arrived at the border checkpoint at Terespol on at least three more occasions. On each occasion he was turned away. The official notes made by the officers of the Border Guard state that on those three occasions he had indicated that he wished to enter Poland because he had not had any employment in Chechnya and he wished to live and work in Poland and to visit his friends in Germany; he also stated that he had a sister who lived either in Germany or in France. The Government also submitted that during one of the interviews with the officers of the Border Guard the applicant had stated that he had been helped by Belarusian nongovernmental organisations but that he did not know any Polish lawyers and that he had never talked to the psychologist who had signed a psychological report that he was carrying. The applicant contested those allegations. He submitted to the Court that he had indeed been subjected to a psychological examination (organised by a non-governmental organisation on 5 and 7 June 2017), the results of which he had presented in his submissions to the Court and to the Border Guard officers. He also submitted that he had declared to the officers of the Border Guard that he was in contact with his representative and that he was able to contact her by telephone at any time.
On at least one of the occasions on which the applicant went to the Terespol border checkpoint (on 19 June 2017) his representative sent a copy of his application for international protection via email, fax and ePUAP (the Internet platform that enables individuals to contact the public administrative authorities) to the Border Guard at Terespol and to the Polish Border Guard Headquarters in Warsaw. She also informed of that fact the department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in charge of dealing with proceedings before international human rights bodies (where the agent of the Polish Government in charge of dealing with the Court is based). In her letter she also referred to the interim measure indicated by the Court under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. On 22 June 2017 the Deputy Director of the Department for Aliens at the National Border Guard headquarters (Zastępca Dyrektora Zarządu do Spraw Cudzoziemców Komendy Głównej Straży Granicznej) replied to the applicant’s representative, indicating to her that an application for international protection might be submitted only at the Polish border by the applicant in person.
On 8 September 2017, when submitting their observations on the admissibility and merits of the case, the Government again requested that the Court lift the interim measure indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. They cited the same reasons as those cited in their previous request. On 13 November 2017 the President of the Section refused their request.
On an unspecified date the applicant left Belarus, stating that he was afraid of deportation to Chechnya. He is currently residing in Siberia, Russia.
The applicants, Mr M.A. (“the first applicant”) and Mrs M.A. (“the second applicant”) are Russian nationals. They are married. The other five applicants are their minor children, who were travelling with them.
In April 2017 the applicants travelled to the Polish-Belarusian border crossing at Terespol on two occasions. According to them, on each occasion they expressed a wish to lodge an application for international protection.
According to the applicants, when talking to the border guards, they expressed fears for their safety. They told the border guards that they were from Chechnya. The first applicant submitted that in 2005 he had started to have problems with officers of the special services because his relatives had participated in the second Chechen war. Police officers had come to his home and taken him for questioning to a police station. His home had been raided by armed people wearing masks. Subsequently, he had decided to leave the Chechen Republic and had applied for international protection in Poland. Later, he had moved to Austria. In 2010 he had returned to Chechnya and had started working at the Department for Protection (participating in some counter-terrorist operations and provided security to governmental officials). He had quit that job, but before doing so, he had been asked if he was planning to join any illegal armed groups in Syria. The first applicant submitted that on one occasion he had been taken to the headquarters of the Department for Protection. He had been asked to become an informant for the Chechen security services but had refused to do so. On another occasion police officers had come to his home and forcibly taken him to a police station. He had again been asked to become an informant, but he had refused. He submitted that afterwards he had been tortured with electric shocks and by being beaten in his lumbar region (lower back), head and other parts of his body. After that he, together with the second applicant and their children, had left their home and had travelled to Belarus, with the aim of travelling onwards to Poland. They had told the border guards that they could not continue their stay in Belarus, as their visas had expired and that in practice it would be impossible for them to obtain international protection there. The border guards had then summarily turned them away, sending them back to Belarus.
On both occasions on which the applicants presented themselves at the border crossing at Terespol, administrative decisions were issued turning them away from the Polish border on the grounds that they did not have any documents authorising their entry into Poland and that they had not stated that they were at risk of persecution in their home country but that they were simply trying to emigrate for economic or personal reasons. The official notes prepared by the officers of the Border Guard observed that the applicants had cited (i) their desire to seek a better life in Europe for their big family and to join family members in Germany and obtain social benefits there, and (ii) the lack of employment opportunities in Chechnya.
The applicants did not appeal against the administrative decisions issued on those occasions.
At the same time, in April and May 2017, they also tried to enter Lithuania and – according to their statements to the Court – lodge an application for international protection there. The proceedings before the Lithuanian authorities were the subject of a separate application concluded by a judgment of the Court delivered in late 2018 (see M.A. and Others v. Lithuania, no. 59793/17, 11 December 2018).
On 16 June 2017, when the applicants presented themselves at the border crossing at Terespol, their representative lodged a request under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, asking the Court to prevent the applicants from being removed to Belarus. He indicated that, as Russian citizens, they had no genuine possibility of applying for international protection in Belarus and were at constant risk of expulsion to Chechnya, where the first applicant would face the threat of torture or other forms of inhuman and degrading treatment.
At 10.48 a.m. on 16 June 2017 the Court (the duty judge) decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Polish Government that the applicants should not be removed to Belarus until 30 June 2017. The Court clarified that the indication that the applicants should not be removed to Belarus should be understood in such a way that when they presented themselves at a Polish border checkpoint their application for asylum should be received and registered by the Border Guard and forwarded for examination to the competent authorities. Pending examination of the asylum application, the applicants should not be sent back to Belarus. The Government were informed of the interim measure before the planned time of expulsion. Nevertheless, the applicants were returned to Belarus at 11.25 a.m. The official note prepared by border guards on this occasion stated that, when at the border, the applicants had expressed the wish to enter Poland in order to settle and raise their children there.
On 20 June 2017 the applicants returned to the border checkpoint at Terespol, carrying with them an application for international protection and a copy of a letter informing their representative of the Court’s decision concerning the interim measure. Again, they were turned away and sent back to Belarus. The Government submitted that in the course of their conversation with the officers of the Border Guard the applicants had not expressed any need for international protection; rather, they had declared that they wished to settle in Europe owing to the lack of adequate employment opportunities in Chechnya.
While the applicants were trying to apply for asylum, a Polish lawyer cooperating with the applicants’ representative sent a copy of the first applicant’s application for international protection via email, fax and ePUAP to the Border Guard at Terespol and to the Polish Border Guard headquarters in Warsaw. She also informed (by letter) of that fact the department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in charge of dealing with proceedings before international human-rights bodies (where the agent of the Polish Government in charge of dealing with the Court is based). In her letter she also made a reference to the interim measure indicated by the Court on 16 June 2017 under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court (see paragraph 33 above). On 22 June 2017 the Deputy Director of the Department for Aliens at the Polish Border Guards’ headquarters answered to the letter from the lawyer in question, indicating to her that an application for international protection might be submitted only at the Polish border by the applicant in person.
On 23 June 2017 the Government requested that the Court lift the interim measure indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. They argued that the applicants had never requested international protection, and nor had they given any reasons for such protection. They also maintained that as the applicants had not been admitted to Poland by the country’s border guards, they had never been legally in Poland in the first place and could therefore not be removed. The Government stated that, in their opinion, the applicants had abused the interim measure in order to pressurise the Polish Border Guard officers into giving them permission to enter Poland. A similar approach was presented by the Government in their letter dated 28 June 2017.
On 30 June 2017 the Court (the duty judge) decided not to lift the interim measure but to extend it until 21 July 2017, and indicated to the Government that in the light of the submissions made to the Court, it considered that the applicants had lodged a request for international protection. At the same time the Court expressed concern as regards the Government’s refusal to register the applicants’ asylum applications. On 19 July 2017 the Court (the duty judge) extended the interim measure until 3 August 2017. On 3 August 2017 the duty judge extended the interim measure until further notice.
In the period between 3 August and 11 December 2017 the applicants arrived at the border checkpoint at Terespol on at least three more occasions. They were turned away. The Government submitted that on one of those occasions the applicants had presented a document entitled “Request for international protection” prepared by their representative in Polish, but stated that they had not understood its contents as they did not speak Polish. The Government also alleged that while being interviewed by the border guards the applicants had made statements that contradicted the account of their history given in the document. The applicants also submitted to the Court a Russian-language version of the first applicant’s application for international protection (dated May 2017 and addressed to the Lithuanian authorities). The text of this document corresponds to the statements submitted in Polish.
On 20 September 2017, when submitting observations on the admissibility and merits of the case, the Government again requested that the Court lift the interim measure indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. They cited the same reasons as those cited in their previous application. On 6 December 2017 the President of the Section refused their request.
On 13 December 2017 the applicants’ representative informed the Court that the previous day (12 December 2017) the applicants had again tried to lodge an application for international protection at the border checkpoint at Terespol. Again, decisions denying them entry had been issued. However, when on their way to catch the train that was to take them back to the city of Brest, in Belarus, the second applicant, who was at the time seven or eight months pregnant, had slipped and fallen. The applicants’ representative submitted that she had been taken to the hospital in Biała Podlaska, Poland and remained under the supervision of border guards. He also stated that she had been carrying a written application for international protection and had attempted to submit it to the officers of the Border Guard.
Referring to the above information, the applicants’ representative lodged a fresh request under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, asking the Court to indicate to the Government: 1) not to return the second applicant to Belarus, 2) not to obstruct the lodging of an asylum application by the second applicant and 3) to make sure that the second applicant and her foetus were properly examined by a qualified doctor and that they had access to the best available medical services.
On 14 December 2017 the Court (the duty judge) decided to refuse the request in respect of point 3. With reference to points 1 and 2 of the request the Court reminded the Government that the interim measure indicated on 16 June 2017 and prolonged until further notice on 3 August 2017 was still in force.
On the same day the second applicant was released from hospital and returned to Belarus. She lodged an appeal against the decision of 12 December 2017 (see paragraph 40 above) denying her entry into Poland. According to the information submitted to the Court, the proceedings concerning her appeal are still pending before the head of the National Border Guard.
During the period between October and December 2017 the applicants’ relatives residing in Chechnya received a number of summonses for the first applicant to appear before the police. In December 2017 those summonses were delivered to Brest, Belarus, where the applicants were residing. The first applicant was summoned to the police station in Brest and informed that he and his family had to leave Belarus. Otherwise, they would be deported and banned from entering the country again.
The applicants left Belarus and travelled to Smolensk, Russia, where the first applicant was immediately detained by the police and – according to the information his wife received from their relatives in Chechnya –transferred to the town of Grozny in the Chechen Republic.
The second applicant decided to return with her children to Belarus and to try again to lodge an application for international protection. After one unsuccessful attempt, on 7 January 2018 the border guards at Terespol received her application and forwarded it for review by the head of the Aliens Office (Szef Urzędu do Spraw Cudzoziemców). The second applicant and her children were placed in a refugee reception centre.
On 20 May 2018 the applicants’ representative informed the Court that in February 2018 the first applicant had been released from detention in the Chechen Republic. According to the representative, the applicant had no knowledge as to where he had been detained. He alleged that he had been beaten by the personnel of the detention facility and provided photos of significant bruises on his body.
In March 2018 the first applicant left Chechnya again and travelled to Belarus. On 20 March 2018 he travelled to Terespol and lodged an application for international protection. He was admitted to Poland and joined the second applicant and their children in a refugee reception centre.
On 18 May 2018 the applicants voluntarily left the refugee reception centre and travelled to Germany. Owing to their departure the proceedings concerning their applications for international protection were discontinued (on 30 May 2018 with respect to the second applicant and her children and on 4 June 2018 with respect to the first applicant).
On 7 June 2018 the German authorities lodged requests for the applicants to be transferred back to Poland under Regulation EU No. 604/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an application for international protection lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national or a stateless person (“the Dublin III Regulation”). On 14 June 2018 the head of the Aliens Office agreed to examine the applicants’ applications for international protection. According to the information submitted to the Court, the applicants have not yet been transferred to Poland.
On 29 August 2018, the President of the Section, following an application lodged by the respondent Government, decided to lift the interim measure indicated to the Government in the applicants’ case.
The applicants, Mr M.K. (“the first applicant”) and Mrs Z.T. (“the second applicant”), are Russian nationals. They are married. The remaining applicants are their three minor children.
In the period from September 2016 to July 2017 the applicants travelled to the border crossing at Terespol on twelve occasions. According to the applicants, on each occasion they expressed a wish to lodge an application for international protection; on at least one occasion they were carrying that application in written form (a copy of the relevant document was submitted to the Court).
According to the applicants, on one occasion (on 17 March 2017) their representative was also at the border checkpoint at Terespol, but was not allowed to meet them or be present during their questioning by the border guards. Their representative’s presence at the border was related to the events that were described above with respect to case no. 40503/17 (see paragraph 11 above).
According to the applicants, when talking to the border guards, they expressed fears for their safety. The first applicant told the border guards that in the Chechen Republic he had been kidnapped, detained and tortured by people he did not know because of his alleged participation in the disappearance of an officer (or collaborator) of the local office of the Department for Combatting Organised Crime who had been a relative of people close to Ramzan Kadyrov, the head of the Chechen Republic. Later, the applicants and their children had gone to Poland and then to Austria. From Austria, where they had unsuccessfully applied for international protection, they had been deported to Russia. The first applicant had gone into hiding and the second applicant had gone back to her family village in Chechnya with their children. She stated that upon her return she had been harassed, threatened and questioned about her husband. On one occasion she had been kidnapped and detained for around twenty-four hours, during which time she had been interrogated and threatened with sexual violence. She had been asked about the whereabouts of her husband. The applicants presented to the border guards documents confirming that, as torture victims, they had developed post-traumatic stress disorder. They also stated that they could not continue their stay in Belarus, as their visas had expired and that in practice it was impossible for them to obtain international protection there. The border guards then summarily turned them away, sending them back to Belarus.
On each occasion that the applicants presented themselves at the border crossing at Terespol, administrative decisions were issued turning them away from the Polish border on the grounds that they did not have any documents authorising their entry into Poland and that they had not stated that they were at risk of persecution in their home country but were in fact trying to emigrate for economic or personal reasons. The official notes prepared by the officers of the Border Guard reported that the applicants had indicated, inter alia, their lack of money, together with their wish to: live in Poland, receive financial support, seek a better life in Europe, travel to Austria to join a family member residing there, settle and work in Germany, and educate their children in Europe.
The applicants appealed at least once against the decisions issued on 17 March 2017 refusing entry. On 12 June 2017 the head of the National Border Guard upheld those decisions. The applicants appealed to the Warsaw Regional Administrative Court. The proceedings before that court are pending.
On 20 June 2017, when the applicants presented themselves at the border crossing at Terespol, their representative lodged a request under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, asking the Court to prevent the applicants from being removed to Belarus. She indicated that, as Russian citizens, the applicants had no genuine possibility of applying for international protection in Belarus and were at constant risk of expulsion to Chechnya, where they would face the threat of torture and other inhuman and degrading treatment.
At 10.14 a.m. on 20 June 2017 the Court (the duty judge) decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Polish Government that the applicants should not be removed to Belarus until 4 July 2017. The Government were informed of the interim measure before the planned time of expulsion. The applicants were nevertheless returned to Belarus at 11.25 a.m. The official note prepared by the border guards on this occasion stated that, when at the border, the applicants had expressed the wish to enter Poland because they had not been able to find employment in Chechnya and because they wished to raise their children in Europe.
On 27 June 2017 the Government requested the Court to lift the interim measure indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. They argued that the applicants had never requested international protection, nor given any reasons to justify such protection. The Government stated that, in their opinion, the applicants had abused the interim measure in order to pressurise the Polish Border Guard officers into giving them permission to enter Poland.
On 4 July 2017 the Court (the duty judge) decided not to lift the interim measure but to extend it until 21 July 2017, and indicated to the Government that – in the light of the submissions made to the Court (especially the documents attached to the request for an interim measure and the applicants’ submissions to the Court, copies of which had been sent to the Government) – it appeared that the applicants had tried to submit a request for international protection. On 21 July 2017 the duty judge extended the interim measure until further notice.
In the period between 22 June and 6 September 2017 the applicants returned to the border checkpoint at Terespol at least seven further times. On one occasion they also tried to lodge an application for international protection at another border checkpoint (at Czeremcha-Połowce). Each time they were turned away. On two of those occasions they appealed against the decisions refusing entry. According to the information provided to the Court, the proceedings in respect of those cases are still pending before the head of the National Border Guard.
The applicants submitted that on all those occasions they were carrying (i) a copy of a letter informing their representative of the Court’s decision concerning the interim measure and (ii) written applications for international protection. They had also clearly expressed a wish to lodge those applications. The Government alleged that the applicants had never expressed such a wish. The official notes prepared by the officers of the Border Guard stated that during their questioning the applicants had expressed a wish to live and work in Poland and to send their children to school there.
On at least three of the occasions on which the applicants arrived at the Terespol and Czeremcha-Połowce border checkpoints, their representative sent a copy of their application for international protection via email and fax to the relevant units of the Border Guard. In her letter she also made a reference to the interim measure indicated by the Court under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
On 11 September 2017, when submitting observations on the admissibility and merits of the case, the Government again requested that the Court lift the interim measure indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. On 13 November 2017 the President of the Section refused their request.
On an unspecified date the applicants left Belarus in order to avoid deportation. They indicated that they were travelling within an undisclosed region. They submitted that they remained in hiding for fear of being tracked by the Chechen authorities.
The 1997 Constitution contains the following provisions relating to the rights of foreigners:
Article 37
“1.  Anyone under the jurisdiction of the Polish State shall enjoy the freedoms and rights ensured by the Constitution.
Exemptions from this principle with respect to foreigners shall be specified by statute.”
Article 56
“1.  Foreigners shall have the right of asylum in the Republic of Poland, in accordance with principles specified by statute.
Foreigners who, in the Republic of Poland, seek protection from persecution, may be granted the status of a refugee, in accordance with international agreements to which the Republic of Poland is a party.”
The procedure for granting refugee status and “tolerated stays” (pobyt tolerowany) to foreigners and their expulsion is regulated by the Act of 13 June 2003 on granting protection to aliens within the territory of the Republic of Poland (Ustawa o udzielaniu cudzoziemcom ochrony na terytorium Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej – hereinafter “the 2003 Act”). The 2003 Act was amended on multiple occasions, in particular in order to transpose into the Polish law Directive 2011/95/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on standards for the qualification of thirdcountry nationals or stateless persons as beneficiaries of international protection, for a uniform status for refugees or for persons eligible for subsidiary protection, and for the content of the protection granted and Directive 2013/32/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on common procedures for granting and withdrawing international protection (see paragraphs 85-91 below).
The grounds and conditions for granting refugee status or supplementary international protection are set out in sections 13-22 of the 2003 Act. The procedure for granting protection is set out in sections 23-54f of that Act.
Under sections 24 and 29 of the 2003 Act the Border Guard is obliged to provide a foreigner who expresses a wish to apply for international protection in Poland with the possibility to lodge such an application and to facilitate it, inter alia, by ensuring the assistance of a translator and by giving – at the foreigner’s request or with their consent –access to representatives of international or non-governmental organisations assisting refugees. A person who has lodged an application for international protection is obliged to report to the reception centre indicated by the border guards (section 30(1) (5i) of the 2003 Act). That application for international protection will then be forwarded for examination to the head of the Aliens Office, who should decide on it within six months (section 34(1) of the 2003 Act).
The foreigner in question can lodge an appeal against a decision issued by the head of the Aliens Office with the Refugee Board (Rada do Spraw Uchodźców). A decision issued by the Refugee Board can be appealed against by lodging an appeal with the Warsaw Regional Administrative Court and – as a last resort – a cassation appeal with the Supreme Administrative Court (Naczelny Sąd Administracyjny).
If an application for international protection and an appeal against a decision of the head of the Aliens Office have been lodged, the enforcement of the return procedure is not initiated and any procedure that has already been initiated is suspended. An appeal lodged with an administrative court does not have automatic suspensive effect.
In the event that a foreigner who presents himself or herself at a border checkpoint does not express a wish to lodge an application for international protection and does not have a valid document allowing him or her to enter Poland, the border guards must instigate a refusal-of-entry procedure, which is regulated by sections 33 and 34 of the Aliens Act of 12 December 2013 (Ustawa o cudzoziemcach – hereinafter “the 2013 Act”).
Under those provisions a decision refusing entry is issued by the head of the relevant unit of the Border Guard (Komendant placówki Straży Granicznej) and is executed immediately. A person who has been denied entry into Poland can appeal against that decision to the head of the National Border Guard and, subsequently, lodge an appeal with the Warsaw Regional Administrative Court and a cassation appeal with the Supreme Administrative Court. None of those remedies has suspensive effect.
Under section 33 paragraph 1 of the 2013 Act the proceedings prior to the issuance of a refusal-of-entry decision are limited to hearing the foreigner in question and the persons travelling with him or her, a review of the documents in his or her possession, verifying the relevant registries and obtaining necessary information from other State institutions and relevant entities. Paragraph 2 of this section provides that in cases in which there is no doubt that the foreigner does not comply with the conditions of crossing the border, the proceedings may be limited only to a review of the documents in his or her possession.
On 17 May 2018, in one of the cases concerning appeals against the refusal-of-entry decisions issued by the head of the Border Guard Unit at Terespol (namely case no. II OSK 2766/17), the Supreme Administrative Court held that the situation provided in paragraph 2 of section 33 of the 2013 Act was to be treated as extraordinary and that it did not arise in situations in which the foreigner in question raised any claims concerning a need for international protection. The administrative court indicated that the fact that the foreigner in the case before it had raised in her appeal the fact that she was an asylum-seeker proved that her case raised some doubts and that the administrative body should have investigated it further. The Supreme Administrative Court also indicated that if the administrative body had decided to question the foreigner, it could not have limited itself to drafting a brief official note, but would have been obliged to prepare a record of the questioning.
Furthermore, on 26 July 2018 (case no. II OSK 1752/18) the Supreme Administrative Court stressed that the fact that the foreigner had attempted to enter Poland numerous times and that he or she had demanded to be heard in the presence of his or her lawyer should have resulted in a more detailed examination of his or her case by the Border Guard. It also stressed that the interpretation of the 2013 Act had to take into consideration the principle of non-refoulement, which constituted a starting point for the interpretation of the rights and obligations of foreigners presenting themselves at the border and of the authorities responsible for border control.
Article 78 § 1 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, as amended by the Treaty of Lisbon, which entered into force on 1 December 2009, provides:
“The Union shall develop a common policy on asylum, subsidiary protection and temporary protection with a view to offering appropriate status to any third-country national requiring international protection and ensuring compliance with the principle of non-refoulement. This policy must be in accordance with the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 and the Protocol of 31 January 1967 relating to the status of refugees, and other relevant treaties.”
The Charter of Fundamental Rights, which has formed part of the primary law of the European Union since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon, contains an express provision guaranteeing the right to asylum. Article 18 of the Charter provides:
“The right to asylum shall be guaranteed with due respect for the rules of the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 and the Protocol of 31 January 1967 relating to the status of refugees and in accordance with the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Treaties’).”
Article 19 of the Charter provides:
Protection in the event of removal, expulsion or extradition
“1.  Collective expulsions are prohibited.
No one may be removed, expelled or extradited to a State where there is a serious risk that he or she would be subjected to the death penalty, torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
Article 17 of the Agreement provides:
“In regard to the movement of persons, the Parties shall endeavour to abolish the controls at the common frontiers and transfer them to their external frontiers. To that end, they shall endeavour to harmonise in advance, where necessary, the laws and administrative provisions concerning the prohibitions and restrictions which form the basis for the controls and to take complementary measures to safeguard security and combat illegal immigration by nationals of States that are not members of the European Communities.”
Article 20 of the Agreement provides:
“The Parties shall endeavour to harmonise their visa policies and the conditions for entry onto their territories. In so far as is necessary, they shall also prepare the harmonisation of their rules governing certain aspects of the law on aliens in regard to nationals of States that are not members of the European Communities.”
Article 3 of Regulation (EU) No. 2016/399 provides:
“This Regulation shall apply to any person crossing the internal or external borders of Member States, without prejudice to: ...
(b) the rights of refugees and persons requesting international protection, in particular as regards non-refoulement.”
Article 4 of the Regulation stipulates:
“When applying this Regulation, Member States shall act in full compliance with relevant Union law, including the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter’), relevant international law, including the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28 July 1951 (‘the Geneva Convention’), obligations related to access to international protection, in particular the principle of non-refoulement, and fundamental rights. In accordance with the general principles of Union law, decisions under this Regulation shall be taken on an individual basis.”
The Directive sets detailed standards for recognising third-country nationals and stateless persons as refugees.
Article 2 (d) defines a refugee as:
“... a third-country national who, owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership of a particular social group, is outside the country of nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country, or a stateless person, who, being outside of the country of former habitual residence for the same reasons as mentioned above, is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to return to it ...”
Article 2 (h) of the Directive clarifies that:
“application for international protection’ means a request made by a third-country national or a stateless person for protection from a Member State, who can be understood to seek refugee status or subsidiary protection status, and who does not explicitly request another kind of protection, outside the scope of this Directive, that can be applied for separately”
Article 21 Paragraph 1 of the Directive stipulates:
“Member States shall respect the principle of non- refoulement in accordance with their international obligations.”
Article 3 § 1 of Directive 2013/32/EU provides:
“This Directive shall apply to all applications for international protection made in the territory, including at the border, in the territorial waters or in the transit zones of the Member States, and to the withdrawal of international protection.”
Article 8 of the Directive stipulates:
“1.  Where there are indications that third-country nationals or stateless persons held in detention facilities or present at border crossing points, including transit zones, at external borders, may wish to make an application for international protection, Member States shall provide them with information on the possibility to do so. In those detention facilities and crossing points, Member States shall make arrangements for interpretation to the extent necessary to facilitate access to the asylum procedure.
Member States shall ensure that organisations and persons providing advice and counselling to applicants have effective access to applicants present at border crossing points, including transit zones, at external borders. Member States may provide for rules covering the presence of such organisations and persons in those crossing points and in particular that access is subject to an agreement with the competent authorities of the Member States. Limits on such access may be imposed only where, by virtue of national law, they are objectively necessary for the security, public order or administrative management of the crossing points concerned, provided that access is not thereby severely restricted or rendered impossible.”
Article 9 of the Directive regulates the right of a person who has lodged an application for international protection to remain in the Member State in which he or she lodged the application. It provides:
“1.  Applicants shall be allowed to remain in the Member State, for the sole purpose of the procedure, until the determining authority has made a decision in accordance with the procedures at first instance set out in Chapter III. That right to remain shall not constitute an entitlement to a residence permit.
Member States may make an exception only where a person makes a subsequent application referred to in Article 41 or where they will surrender or extradite, as appropriate, a person either to another Member State pursuant to obligations in accordance with a European arrest warrant or otherwise, or to a third country or to international criminal courts or tribunals.
A Member State may extradite an applicant to a third country pursuant to paragraph 2 only where the competent authorities are satisfied that an extradition decision will not result in direct or indirect refoulement in violation of the international and Union obligations of that Member State.”
Articles 1A and 33 § 1 of the Geneva Convention provide:
Article 1A
“... For the purposes of the present Convention, the term ‘refugee’ shall apply to any person who ... owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it.”
Article 33 § 1
“No Contracting State shall expel or return (‘refouler’) a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion.”
In its Note on International Protection of 13 September 2001 (A/AC.96/951, § 16), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which has the task of monitoring the manner in which the States Parties apply the Geneva Convention, indicated that the principle of non-refoulement laid down in Article 33, was:
“... [A] cardinal protection principle enshrined in the Convention, to which no reservations are permitted. In many ways, the principle is the logical complement to the right to seek asylum recognized in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It has come to be considered a rule of customary international law binding on all States. In addition, international human-rights law has established non-refoulement as a fundamental component of the absolute prohibition of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. The duty not to refoule is also recognized as applying to refugees irrespective of their formal recognition, thus obviously including asylum-seekers whose status has not yet been determined. It encompasses any measure attributable to a State which could have the effect of returning an asylumseeker or refugee to the frontiers of territories where his or her life or freedom would be threatened, or where he or she would risk persecution. This includes rejection at the frontier, interception and indirect refoulement, whether of an individual seeking asylum or in situations of mass influx.”
In its Advisory Opinion on the Extraterritorial Application of NonRefoulement Obligations under the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol adopted on 26 January 2007, the UNHCR stipulated:
“7.  The prohibition of refoulement to a danger of persecution under international refugee law is applicable to any form of forcible removal, including deportation, expulsion, extradition, informal transfer or “renditions”, and non-admission at the border in the circumstances described below. This is evident from the wording of Article 33(1) of the 1951 Convention, which refers to expulsion or return (refoulement) “in any manner whatsoever” ... It applies not only in respect of return to the country of origin or, in the case of a stateless person, the country of former habitual residence, but also to any other place where a person has reason to fear threats to his or her life or freedom related to one or more of the grounds set out in the 1951 Convention, or from where he or she risks being sent to such a risk.
...As a general rule, in order to give effect to their obligations under the 1951 Convention and/or 1967 Protocol, States will be required to grant individuals seeking international protection access to the territory and to fair and efficient asylum procedures.
... the obligation under Article 33(1) of the 1951 Convention not to send a refugee or asylum-seeker to a country where he or she may be at risk of persecution is not subject to territorial restrictions; it applies wherever the State in question exercises jurisdiction. ...
... the purpose, intent and meaning of Article 33(1) of the 1951 Convention are unambiguous and establish an obligation not to return a refugee or asylum-seeker to a country where he or she would be risk of persecution or other serious harm, which applies wherever a State exercises jurisdiction, including at the frontier, on the high seas or on the territory of another State.”
The General Assembly of the United Nations stated in Article 3 of its Declaration on Territorial Asylum, adopted on 14 December 1967 (A/RES/2312 (XXII)), that:
“No person referred to in article 1, paragraph 1, shall be subjected to measures such as rejection at the frontier or, if he has already entered the territory in which he seeks asylum, expulsion or compulsory return to any State where he may be subjected to persecution.”
On 19 September 2016, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the New York Declarations for Refugees and Migrants, in which it stated:
“24.   ... We will ensure that public officials and law enforcement officers who work in border areas are trained to uphold the human rights of all persons crossing, or seeking to cross, international borders ... We reaffirm that, in line with the principle of non-refoulement, individuals must not be returned at borders.
 ...
Reaffirming that all individuals who have crossed or are seeking to cross international borders are entitled to due process in the assessment of their legal status, entry and stay, we will consider reviewing policies that criminalize cross-border movements.
...
We reaffirm the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol thereto as the foundation of the international refugee protection regime. ...”
Section X of the Guidelines on human-rights protection in the context of accelerated asylum procedures (adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 1 July 2009 at the 1062nd meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies) reads:
“1.  Asylum seekers whose applications are rejected shall have the right to have the decision reviewed by a means constituting an effective remedy.
Where asylum seekers submit an arguable claim that the execution of a removal decision could lead to a real risk of persecution or the death penalty, torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the remedy against the removal decision shall have suspensive effect.”
On 11 August 2016 representatives of the Polish Ombudsman (Rzecznik Praw Obywatelskich) visited the border checkpoint at Terespol and conducted an unannounced inspection. The representatives were allowed to observe interviews conducted by officers of the Border Guard with foreigners who had arrived at the border without valid visas or other documents allowing them to enter Poland.
The representatives of the Ombudsman observed seventy-nine interviews. They noted that the interviews had been conducted at four stands, three of which had been placed at such a short distance from each other that interviews could have been easily overheard by third parties (such as other foreigners). The interviews had been conducted in Russian and had lasted, on average, between one and four minutes.
The representatives of the Ombudsman noted that during sixty-two of the interviews observed by them, the individuals interviewed had not expressed any intention of applying for international protection in Poland, and nor had they provided information that could have suggested that they had come to Poland with such an intention. During five interviews the representatives of the families in question had explicitly declared to the border guards their intention of lodging an application for international protection. Only one of those families had been allowed to lodge such an application. During further twelve interviews, the foreigners had given reasons for leaving their country that – according to the representatives of the Ombudsman – could have indicated that they had experienced persecution within the meaning of Geneva Convention or had been in risk of their lives, personal freedom or safety. Furthermore, of this group, only one family had been given an opportunity to lodge an application for international protection.
The report (which was published in English) contained the following description of the observed interviews:
“In each case, whenever foreigners’ answers mentioned risks persisting in the country of origin, officers asked several additional questions about, among other things, specific incidents that could prove such risks and the fact whether such incidents were reported, for example, to law enforcement agencies. In the view of inspectors, although that is a subjective opinion, officers did not attach much importance to information provided in such cases by foreigners and they were focusing more on proving that the reason for leaving the country was of [an] economic nature. After questions about possible risks, they very often moved on to ask further about a profession performed in the country and the intention to find employment in Poland. The declaration of such an intention itself, although again that is the subjective opinion of inspectors, in many cases sufficed for an officer to assume that a given foreigner came to Poland for economic reasons, despite his/her concerns of other nature.”
The representatives of the Ombudsman also referred to the way in which the course of the interviews had been documented by the officers of the Border Guard. They stated (in English):
“The course of each interview is documented in the form of an entry in a log that an officer maintains ... Such an entry contains only information concerning foreigners’ personal details and details of other members of family who accompany him/her, the country of origin, passport numbers and, what is most important, the purpose that the foreigner gives for coming to Poland. The last piece of information is recorded in the form of laconic statements, such as going to Germany; doesn’t want to live with her husband; has no money; wants to live in Poland. In case the interview results in the refusal to enter the territory of Poland, identical information concerning the purpose of arrival is included in the memo [the official note]. The memo is attached to the files of the administrative proceedings in which the decision is issued to refuse the right of entry. This way of documenting interviews which have paramount importance for a possible recognition of a foreigner as a person seeking protection against persecution in the country of origin should be deemed highly insufficient. Firstly, based on an entry made by an officer, it is not possible to reconstruct, even roughly, the course of the interview. Secondly, a foreigner has no chance to inspect the entry, and hence cannot in any way refer to it or set the information right.”
The report of the inspection concluded that interviews aimed at determining the purpose of each foreigner’s arrival in Poland were conducted in conditions which did not provide at least a minimum degree of privacy. It reiterated that if during an interview a foreigner referred to circumstances indicating an intention to apply for international protection in Poland, the relevant application should be accepted from them for review and that, under domestic law, officers of the Border Guard did not have the authority to perform any preliminary verification of data provided by the foreigners in this respect. The report explicitly stated that the inspection had revealed certain cases when Border Guard officers had not allowed foreigners to lodge an application for international protection even though they had either directly declared such an intention during their respective interview or had mentioned circumstances that may have indicated that they had been persecuted in their country of origin.
On 15 May 2018 a second visit by the representatives of the Polish Ombudsman took place at the border checkpoint at Terespol. The employees of the Ombudsman’s office were present during eight interviews concerning eighteen foreigners out of a total of thirty-two persons who arrived at the Terespol border crossing on that day without carrying a valid visa or other documentation allowing them to enter Poland. They noted that during six of those interviews (concerning sixteen persons), the foreigners in question had expressed a wish to lodge an application for international protection and that in all the cases they had been allowed to lodge applications and had been admitted to Poland. In one case, this had happened only after the Ombudsman’s representatives had indicated to the officers of the Border Guard their doubts concerning the course of the respective interview; the interview had then been repeated. Those sixteen persons had all been foreigners who had lodged applications for international protection on that day. No application had been lodged by any of the persons interviewed at the counter at which no representative of the Ombudsman had been present.
The report of the Ombudsman’s office also noted that a number of applications for international protection were accepted for review on 15 May 2018 – a significantly higher than on any other day in the two-week period preceding the visit. According to official data submitted by the Border Guard, in the period between 1 and 14 May 2018, the maximum number of applications lodged on one day was two (concerning between one and six persons per day).
On 10 January 2017 the Terespol border crossing was inspected by representatives of the Children’s Ombudsman (Rzecznik Praw Dziecka).
The representatives of the Children’s Ombudsman were allowed to observe interviews conducted with ten families who did not have documents allowing them to enter Poland. They noted that the conditions in which the interviews were conducted had improved since the inspection by the representatives of the Ombudsman. Conversations with the border guards now took place in a separate room with three desks, at which interviews were carried out simultaneously. The desks were separated from each other by screens.
The inspectors noted that members of six families interviewed in their presence had explicitly stated that they wanted to apply for international protection in Poland. All of them had been afforded that possibility. Their applications had been accepted for review and the families were allowed to enter Poland. The other four families had not expressed any wish to apply for international protection, either directly or indirectly. As discovered later by the inspectors, only the six families that had expressed a wish to apply for international protection in their presence and one person travelling alone were permitted to lodge such applications on that day.
The representatives of the Children’s Ombudsman talked also to a dozen or so other families who had been interviewed by the officers of the Border Guard on that day, but not in the presence of the inspectors. The members of six of those families told the inspectors that they had tried to lodge an application for international protection numerous times but had been unsuccessful. They described cases of torture, threats and other forms of persecution that, according to the inspectors, should have justified the acceptance of such applications from them for review. All those families claimed that they had given the same account of their circumstances to the border guards.
The representatives of the Children’s Ombudsman asked the head of the Terespol Border Guard Unit for copies of the official notes prepared during the interviews with those families and compared the content of those notes with the statements that the foreigners gave them just minutes after being interviewed by the border guards. In all cases they found significant discrepancies between the statements given to them by the foreigners and the content of the notes drafted by the border guards. For instance, a woman (called “Z.K.” in the report) told the representatives of the Children’s Ombudsman that her husband had been killed by police officers and that her son had been detained and tortured numerous times. The official notes – drafted when she had, on several occasions, presented herself at the border – recorded that she had indicated that she had had problems looking after her family since the death of her husband, that she wished to raise and educate her children in Poland and that she had no prospects in her own country. Another woman (who had tried to cross the border on the same day) told the representatives of the Children’s Ombudsman that her husband had been abducted and accused of being a follower of Wahhabism, whereas the official notes concerning her arrivals at the Polish-Belarusian border stated that she had told the border guards that she had had no employment or money in Chechnya, that she wished to provide her child with better living conditions and education, and that she wanted to join her sisters, who resided in Germany.
The report concluded its account of the above-mentioned conversations by indicating:
“Although it is obvious that by no means in all cases would the reasons for applying for international protection cited by the foreigners in fact justify the granting of such protection (which could depend on a number of factors, including the possibility of obtaining legal protection in the country of origin or the possibility of relocating within this country), it is unquestionable that before the representatives of the Children’s Ombudsman those foreigners indicated a threat to their personal security. This kind of circumstances, if declared in front of the officers of the Border Guard, should result in the acceptance [for review] of applications for international protection from those foreigners.”
It furthermore stated that:
“In this context it should be emphasised that it seems incomprehensible and contrary to the principles of logic and life experience that the foreigners who presented themselves for border control numerous times would not have indicated such circumstances to the officers of the Border Guard (on whose decision depended the question of whether their applications for international protection would be received [for review] and whether they would be allowed to enter the territory of Poland), if they were capable of expressing them freely, a dozen or so minutes after leaving the border control, in front of the representatives of the Children’s Ombudsman present at the border crossing on [that day].”
Moreover, after the applications for international protection were accepted for review from the six families mentioned above, the representatives of the Children’s Ombudsman talked to members of four of those families. All of them stated that they had been at the Terespol border checkpoint numerous times and that on all of those occasions they had indicated a wish to apply for international protection. Until that day, they had been denied such a possibility. They stated that the statements given by them on those previous occasions had not differed from the ones made that day in the presence of the inspectors.
The representatives of the Children’s Ombudsman asked the head of the Terespol Border Guard Unit for copies of the official notes prepared on the previous occasions on which those families had presented themselves at the Polish-Belarusian border and compared them with the statements that the foreigners had given on 10 January 2017 and that had been recorded in their applications for international protection submitted on that day. They found that there were significant differences between the content of those documents and the statements made on the latter date. For instance, one of the men who had applied for international protection on 10 January 2017 had stated that he had asked for refugee status, as he could not return to his country of origin. He had submitted that he had been a taxi driver and had been accused of transporting militants. He said that two of his brothers had been killed and that he was wanted by the Chechen authorities. He had expressed fear for the security of his children and family. The official notes drafted during his previous interviews reported that before 10 January 2017 he had declared to the officers of the Border Guard that he lacked money and that he wanted to work, live and educate his children in Poland.
In the conclusion of its report on the inspection the Office of the Children’s Ombudsman stated that the inspection had not directly confirmed that foreigners at the Terespol border checkpoint had been denied the possibility to lodge an application for international protection (as all of the interviews conducted in the presence of the inspectors had been conducted correctly). The report did however, indicate that the results of the conversations conducted with the foreigners in the interviews in which the inspectors had not participated – given comparison that decisions denying them entry had been issued – raised the highest concern. The Children’s Ombudsman indicated, inter alia, that it was advisable to change the form in which interviews with foreigners were documented from that of official notes to that of more detailed minutes, which would have to be read to the foreigner and signed by him or her.
On 31 August 2016 the Polish Minister of the Interior and Administration was interviewed in a television programme in which he was asked about the situation at the Terespol border checkpoint. He told the journalist interviewing him that the policy of the Polish government was aimed at protecting Polish citizens against an influx of Muslim refugees and that the government would not be pressured by those who wanted to bring the migration crisis onto Polish territory. When asked specifically about the claims of those at the Terespol border checkpoint that they were fleeing the dangers of a totalitarian regime, the Minister indicated that there was no ongoing war in Chechnya and that they were people heading to Western Europe. He stated that the Chechens at the Polish-Belarusian border at that time would not be accepted into Poland.
In its annual report on the state of the world’s human rights in 2017, Amnesty International stated that Belarus lacked a functioning asylum system and repeatedly handed over individuals seeking international protection to the authorities of countries where they were at real risk of torture or other ill-treatment.
In its annual report on the human-rights situation in 2017, Human Rights Watch stated:
“Belarus failed to provide meaningful protection to hundreds of asylum-seekers, mostly from the Russian republic of Chechnya, who arrived in Belarus with the aim of crossing the border into Poland and requesting asylum. Belarus lacks a functioning asylum system. During 2017 it returned at least two asylum-seekers from Chechnya back to Russia, which authorities view as a safe country of origin, putting them at grave risk of ill-treatment.”