The case originated in an application (no. 7268/10) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Akif Hasanov (“the applicant”), on 28 January 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Aliyev, lawyer based in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic courts’ judgments were not adequately reasoned and that in the appeal proceedings he had not been informed of the time and place of the hearing. He further alleged that he was sentenced to a heavier penalty than the one that was applicable at the time the criminal offence was committed. Subsequently, he also complained that the effective exercise of his right of petition had been hindered by the domestic authorities.
On 16 March 2016 notice of the complaints under Articles 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c), 7 § 1 and 34 of the Convention was given to the respondent Governments and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Baku.
On an unspecified date in November 2007 the police indicted the applicant before the Khatai District Court on charges of minor hooliganism for insulting N.H. and E.N., the applicant’s respective brother and neighbour, in the street.
On 20 November 2007, the Khatai District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to five days’ administrative detention.
The judgment was immediately enforced in accordance with the domestic law and the applicant was accordingly detained.
On 26 November 2007, after his release, the applicant appealed against the judgment, arguing that at the time of the alleged offence he had been in hospital, that the first-instance court had relied only on the statement of one of the victims, and that it had not taken into account his disability, which excluded the possibility of his detention.
Attached to his appeal, the applicant submitted the release note dated 20 November 2007 issued by Baku No. 2 Clinic Hospital stating that from 31 October until 20 November 2007 the applicant had received treatment at the said hospital.
On 12 December 2007 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal lodged by the applicant.
It appears from the documents in the case file that on 10 November 2008, 7 and 13 January 2009 the applicant sent letters to the Khatai District Court, the Baku Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court complaining about the circumstances of his arrest and detention by the police. In these letters, he did not complain about the Baku Court of Appeal’s alleged failure to examine his appeal or to provide him with a copy of a decision in that connection.
It further appears from the documents in the case file that following a request by the applicant on an unspecified date in 2009, on 24 August 2009 the Registrar of the Baku Court of Appeal issued to the applicant a copy of the appeal court’s decision dated 12 December 2007.
According to the Government, the relevant case file containing records of the case had been destroyed owing to the expiration of time provided by the domestic archive regulations.
On 8 August 2014 the applicant’s lawyer, Mr I. Aliyev, was arrested on charges of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship and abuse of authority. During a search of his office, a number of documents were seized by the State authorities, including all the case files relating to applications before the Court that were in the possession of Mr I. Aliyev, as a representative of applicants before the Court. On 25 October 2014 some of the seized documents were returned to Javad Javadov, Mr. I. Aliyev’s lawyer.
By a fax dated 28 August 2014, Mr I. Aliyev informed the Court of the seizure of the case files, alleging a breach of Article 34 of the Convention in respect of all the applications affected. In letters that he sent to the Court in September 2014 Mr I. Aliyev reiterated his complaint concerning the seizure of the case files.
The Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”), as in force at the material time, provided:
“433.1.  A complaint or protest against a decision delivered in administrative proceedings shall be examined within ten days of the date of the receipt [thereof].
2.  If a person who committed an administrative offence is sentenced to administrative detention, a complaint or protest against the decision concerning that administrative detention shall be examined within three days of the date of the receipt of the respective complaint or protest.”
“...
3.  Decision concerning a complaint or protest against a decision concerning administrative detention shall be delivered to an executing organ (authorised person) as well as to a person who is sentenced to administrative detention at the date when it was pronounced.”