The case originated in an application (no. 8513/11) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Baybala Alibala oglu Abil (Bəybala Əlibala oğlu Əbil – “the applicant”), on 5 January 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Aliyev, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his right to stand for election, as guaranteed by Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, had been infringed.
On 26 August 2014 notice of the application was given to the Government. The applicant and the Government each submitted written observations on the admissibility and merits of the case. Observations were also received from the International Commission of Jurists, to whom the President had given leave to intervene as a third party in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in Baku.
The applicant was nominated by the Classic Popular Front Party to stand as one of its candidates in the parliamentary elections of 7 November 2010. On an unspecified date in early October 2010 he applied for registration as a candidate in the single-mandate Garadagh Electoral Constituency No. 11 and, on 5 October 2010, the Constituency Electoral Commission (“the ConEC”) registered him as a candidate.
While the applicant’s registration was pending, on 4 October 2010 several posters containing the applicant’s photograph, biography and a text purportedly describing his electoral platform were hung on walls of various buildings in Qizildash, a settlement in the Garadagh district. According to the applicant, this was not carried out by him or his electoral staff. The official campaigning period for the 2010 parliamentary elections was scheduled to start on 15 October 2010 and, under Article 75.2 of the Electoral Code, it was prohibited to campaign before that date.
According to the documents submitted by the applicant, the posters showed an incorrect date as his date of birth, contained incorrect information as to his previous career posts in both his party and in the executive authorities, and the full name of his political party was also given incorrectly. It also contained numerous spelling mistakes.
According to the applicant, he found out about the above-mentioned posters at 8 a.m. on 4 October 2010. At 8:30 a.m. he informed the ConEC chairman of this fact by telephone and complained orally that the posters had been orchestrated by his political opponents as an attempt to sabotage his electoral candidacy. Later that day, he submitted a written complaint to the ConEC, where he also mentioned that the posters in question were fake and contained a lot of incorrect information. He requested the ConEC to take lawful measures to stop “the sabotage”, to find the perpetrators and to hold them responsible.
On the same day, a similar complaint was lodged by the applicant’s electoral representative with the police, but to no avail.
On the same day, the ConEC informed the applicant by a letter that it had received “complaints by citizens” about the illegal dissemination of his electoral platform in Qizildash. In this connection, the applicant was informed that, by a decision of 4 October 2010, the ConEC had decided to issue a formal warning to the applicant for starting his electoral campaigning early, in breach of the requirements of Article 75.2 of the Electoral Code. The applicant was warned that, if he did not cease illegally campaigning, the ConEC would consider the question of cancellation of his candidacy. The decision to issue the warning was taken in the applicant’s absence and a copy was eventually sent to the applicant by post on 13 October 2010 and was received by him on 18 October 2010.
On 5 October 2010 the applicant was formally registered as a candidate (see paragraph 6 above).
On 6 October 2010 the applicant sent an information request to the ConEC, asking inter alia for details as to the “complaints by citizens” received by the ConEC, the process of examination of those complaints, and the reasons for not inviting the applicant or his representative to participate in the examination. By a letter of 13 October 2010 (after most of the below-mentioned proceedings had taken place) the ConEC responded that on 4 October 2010 it had received complaints from four specifically-named residents of Qizildash, that based on those complaints the ConEC had requested a number of precinct electoral commissions (“PEC”) located in Qizildash to investigate whether the information in those complaints was correct, that an expert group at the ConEC, having examined the complaints and the responses from the PECs, had given its opinion and that, based on that opinion, on 4 October 2010 the ConEC had taken its decision.
On 7 October 2010 the applicant personally wrote to the ConEC chairman, stating that what was happening in Qizildash were attempts at sabotaging his candidacy and asking the chairman to take measures to stop them. It appears that he received no reply. On 9 October 2010 he sent a similar complaint by telegram to the chairman of the Central Electoral Commission (“the CEC”). He received no reply to this telegram.
In the meantime, on 6 October 2010 the applicant lodged a complaint against the ConEC’s decision of 4 October 2010 with the CEC. He complained that he had only been informed of that decision by means of a letter but, to date, had not been given a copy of it. He argued that the decision had not been based on any reliable evidence of any wrongdoing on his part and complained that, contrary to the requirements of Articles 40.2, 40.9 and 40.10 of the Electoral Code, it had been taken in his absence.
By a decision of 11 October 2010, the CEC dismissed the applicant’s complaint, following its examination by the CEC expert group. In its decision, the CEC noted briefly that the applicant’s complaint was unsubstantiated, that the ConEC decision had been lawful and that there were no grounds for quashing it. According to the CEC expert group’s opinion, which accompanied the CEC decision, the applicant had been invited to participate in the examination of the complaint by the CEC expert group and by the CEC but he had not submitted any evidence beyond the evidence he had submitted together with his complaint.
The applicant appealed against this decision to the Baku Court of Appeal, arguing that the electoral commissions’ decisions had been unlawful and incorrect, that the ConEC had not ensured his participation in its meeting, and that both commissions had not adequately examined the arguments raised in his complaints, namely the fact that his alleged electoral posters had contained numerous mistakes which he would not have made and that he himself had repeatedly informed and complained to the commissions about the dissemination of those posters.
On 20 October 2010 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal, finding that the electoral commissions’ decisions had been lawful and that the applicant had failed to submit any reliable evidence proving that the posters had not been disseminated by him or that their dissemination had been an act of sabotage of his candidacy.
On 1 November 2010 the Supreme Court dismissed a further appeal by the applicant, upholding the appellate court’s reasoning.
In the meantime, on 5 October 2010 the applicant lodged another written complaint with the ConEC, complaining that unknown persons had done the same thing – hanging false campaign posters in his name on the walls of various buildings – in Alat, another settlement located in his constituency. On 8 October 2010 the ConEC notified him by letter that it had received his complaint and had forwarded it to the local police office for inquiry and the necessary measures to be taken. No further response was given to this complaint by the police.
On 10 October 2010 a resident of Alat, K.M., wrote a complaint to the ConEC stating that on 9 October 2010 someone had hung the applicant’s election posters on the walls of his house. He further noted that some people on the street had noticed the posters and informed him that it was illegal to display election materials. Lastly, he asked the ConEC to take “lawful measures in connection with the illegally hung posters”.
The ConEC officials questioned K.M. and three other Alat residents in connection with the above complaint. They each gave handwritten statements on the same day, 10 October 2010.
K.M. stated that on 9 October 2010 another resident of Alat, J.A., had come to his house and asked him whether he could hang the applicant’s election posters on the walls of his house and that K.M. had allowed him to do so.
A statement made by I.I., another Alat resident, was essentially identical to that of K.M. He stated that he had allowed J.A. to hang a poster on the walls of his house.
A handwritten statement prepared by another Alat resident, F.S., a teahouse owner, was essentially identical to those of K.M. and I.I. He stated that he had allowed J.A. to hang a poster on the walls of his teahouse.
J.A., the resident mentioned in K.M.’s, I.I.’s and F.S.’s statements, stated that on 9 October 2010 he had been approached by a man whose first name was Vahid and who introduced himself as the applicant’s close relative and electoral representative. According to J.A., Vahid gave him 150 Azerbaijani manats (AZN) and promised him AZN 300 more in exchange for J.A.’s help in hanging the applicant’s election posters around the settlement. J.A. took the money and hung the posters on various houses, including K.M.’s and I.I.’s houses and F.S.’s teahouse.
On the same day, the ConEC requested the chairmen of six PECs located in Alat to verify the above allegations.
The chairmen of four PECs informed the ConEC that they had not found any campaign posters of the applicant on the territory of their respective precincts.
The chairmen of PECs nos. 5 and 6 informed the ConEC that they had discovered that the applicant’s campaign material had been disseminated on the territory of their respective precincts.
On 11 October 2010 the ConEC expert group examined the above complaints and reports by the PECs, determined that the applicant had breached the requirements of the electoral law for a second time, and issued an opinion that the ConEC should seek a court order fining the applicant for having committed an administrative offence.
By a letter posted on 11 October 2010 the ConEC requested the applicant to appear before the ConEC at 3 p.m. on the same day and to give an explanation in connection with the complaints about him. That letter was delivered to the applicant on 13 October 2010 and, for that reason, until that date he remained unaware of the developments described in paragraphs 2129 above.
Based on its expert group’s opinion of 11 October, on 12 October 2010 the ConEC took a decision to request the district court to sentence the applicant to an administrative fine for breaching Articles 2.6.10, 75.2, 88.4.1 and 88.4.2 of the Electoral Code. The decision briefly summarised the Alat residents’ and the PECs’ statements (see paragraphs 21-29 above), and noted that those statements proved that a person named “Vidadi” (sic – “Vahid”: see paragraph 26 above), who was the applicant’s representative, had begun to disseminate the applicant’s campaign material ahead of the official start of the electoral campaign. The decision was taken in the applicant’s absence.
Based on the above decision, on 12 October 2010 the ConEC chairman drew up an administrative-offence record (inzibati xəta haqqında protokol) in respect of the applicant under Article 39.1 (breach of the rules on the period for conducting the pre-election or referendum-related campaigning) of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”).
According to the applicant, a copy of the administrative-offence record of 12 October 2010 was shown to him for the first time during a hearing at the Garadagh District Court on 15 October 2010, while a copy of the ConEC decision of 12 October 2010 was given to him on 19 October 2010.
On 15 October 2010 the Garadagh District Court held a hearing to determine the request made by the ConEC.
The applicant made two written submissions to the court, apparently either during the hearing or on the day of the hearing. In the first, he requested the court to take into account, inter alia, his complaints to the ConEC and the police of 4 October 2010, his complaint to the ConEC of 5 October 2010, his information request to the ConEC of 6 October 2010, his complaint to the CEC of 6 October 2010, and the election poster in question containing incorrect information about him, copies of which he attached to his submissions.
In his second submission he noted that, from the documents he received during the court proceedings, he had become aware of a person named Vahid who allegedly claimed to be his electoral representative. He denied having any representatives named Vahid and noted that all his representatives were present in the courtroom. He made the following requests to the court: (a) to grant him more time to acquaint himself with the case material; (b) to take measures to identify the person named Vahid and to hear him in person at the court hearing; and (c) to apply to the prosecution authorities for a criminal investigation into the actions of J.A. who had stated that he had accepted a payment for unlawful activities. There are no documents in the case file showing that the court responded to any of the above requests by the applicant.
At the oral hearing, the applicant and his representatives argued that, despite the applicant’s own numerous complaints which he had been making since 4 October 2010 to various authorities about illegal actions being taken in his name and against him, the electoral authorities had wrongly concluded that he had breached electoral law. He maintained that his candidacy was being sabotaged.
The court also heard evidence from the chairman and two members of the ConEC who maintained their findings reached in the ConEC decision of 12 October 2010.
The court further heard evidence from J.A., K.M., I.I. and F.S., all of whom reiterated their written statements as made to the ConEC.
Based on the above submissions, the Garadagh District Court found that the available evidence proved that the applicant had breached Article 39.1 of the CAO and sentenced him to an administrative fine in the amount of AZN 25 (around 23 euros (EUR) at the time).
The applicant appealed, arguing that the Garadagh District Court had not examined the documents adduced by him in evidence and had not responded to his requests and arguments. He requested the appellate court to quash the first-instance court’s judgment and reiterated his requests that the person named Vahid be identified and examined at the court hearing and that the case be referred to the prosecution authorities for investigation of J.A.’s actions.
By a judgment of 29 October 2010 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the Garadagh District Court’s judgment, without expressly responding to the applicant’s arguments and holding that the lower court had correctly found that the available case material proved that the applicant had breached the relevant legal provisions. No further appeal lay against the Court of Appeal’s judgment.
Referring to the Garadagh District Court’s judgment of 15 October 2010, on the same day the ConEC decided, in accordance with Article 113.2 of the Electoral Code, to request the Baku Court of Appeal to cancel the applicant’s candidacy for breaching Article 39.1 of the CAO and Articles 75.2, 88.4.1 and 88.4.2 of the Electoral Code. This decision was taken in the applicant’s absence.
In his written submissions to the court in response to the ConEC’s request, the applicant reiterated his earlier arguments at length and maintained that the alleged illegal campaigning and the subsequent actions taken against him had been staged to sabotage his candidacy.
By a judgment of 19 October 2010 the Baku Court of Appeal granted the ConEC’s request and cancelled the applicant’s candidacy. In reaching this decision, it examined the ConEC’s and the applicant’s oral and written submissions and the documents available in the case file. No witnesses were heard.
Following an appeal by the applicant, on 1 November 2010 the Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeal’s judgment, holding that the lower court had correctly applied the substantive and procedural requirements of the domestic law and that the arguments raised in the applicant’s appeal were unsubstantiated.
At the material time the applicant’s representative in the present case, Mr I. Aliyev, was also representing twentyseven other applicants in cases concerning the 2010 parliamentary elections and a number of applicants in other cases before the Court.
On 8 August 2014 criminal proceedings were instituted against Mr Aliyev, which were the subject of a separate application brought by him before the Court (see Aliyev v. Azerbaijan, nos. 68762/14 and 71200/14, 20 September 2018). On 8 and 9 August 2014 the investigating authorities seized a large number of documents from Mr Aliyev’s office, including all the case files relating to the proceedings pending before the Court which were in Mr Aliyev’s possession. They concerned over 100 applications in total. The file relating to the present case was also seized in its entirety. The facts relating to the seizure and the relevant proceedings are described in more detail in Annagi Hajibeyli v. Azerbaijan (no. 2204/11, §§ 21-28, 22 October 2015).
On 25 October 2014 the investigating authorities returned a number of the case files concerning the applications lodged with the Court, including the file relating to the present application, to Mr Aliyev’s lawyer.
The relevant provisions of the Electoral Code, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“2.6.  Persons participating in elections (referendums) shall comply with the terms set out below:
...
6.10.  not to influence voters to one’s side through illegal activities; ...”
“40.2.  ... [C]andidates registered in the relevant constituency and their authorised representatives or counsel ... have the right to observe the meetings of electoral commissions and the vote counting; ... obtain copies of the decisions of the constituency and precinct electoral commissions and other election documents ...; observe the implementation of other election activities in electoral commissions.
...
9.  In accordance with the rules specified in Article 20.1 of this Code, the relevant electoral commission shall provide information on the timings of processing election documents and meetings of the electoral commission to: the superior election commissions [and to] each registered candidate and his or her authorised representative ...
10.  Representatives of the interested parties shall have the right to be present at meetings at which electoral commissions are investigating formally submitted complaints. ...”
“75.1.  Any form of electoral campaigning on election day and the preceding day shall be prohibited.
2.  The electoral campaign shall begin twenty-three days before election day and end twenty-four hours before election day. ...”
“87.3.  Printed and audiovisual electoral campaign material should contain information about the organisation that produced it and the organisation that ordered its production, the number of issues and the date of production.
4.  A registered candidate, political party, bloc of political parties, or referendum campaign group should submit to the electoral commission detailed information about their printed electoral campaign materials or their copies, and the addresses of organisations that ordered and produced those materials.
5.  It shall be prohibited to distribute electoral campaign materials in breach of the requirements of Articles 87.3 and 87.4 of this Code.”
“88.4.  Candidates, registered candidates, political parties, blocs of political parties, referendum campaign groups, their authorised representatives, and other persons and organisations who participate directly or indirectly in an electoral campaign are prohibited from gaining the support of voters in the following ways:
4.1.  giving money, gifts and other valuable items (except for badges, stickers, posters and other campaign materials having nominal value) to voters, except for the purposes of performing organisational work;
4.2.  giving or promising rewards contingent on the outcome of the voting to voters who were involved in the above-mentioned organisational work; ...”
“113.2.  Registration of a candidate or a referendum campaign group shall be cancelled in the cases mentioned below and in the manner provided by law on the basis of a final court verdict in respect of a criminal offence or a final court judgment in respect of an administrative offence:
...
2.2.  if it is established that a candidate or referendum campaign group has been conducting an electoral campaign before being registered or before the period indicated in Article 75 of this Code (this provision may not serve as a ground for restricting the freedom of expression and thought guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan);
2.3.  if it is established that there has been a[n unlawful] gain of voter support, that is if a candidate, political party, bloc of political parties, referendum campaign group, or their authorised representatives or counsel are found to have committed actions prohibited by Article 88.4 of this Code; ...”
The relevant provisions of the 2000 Code of Administrative Offences, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“39.1.  Breach of the rules or the time period established by law for conducting an electoral or referendum-related campaign is punishable by a fine in an amount of twenty-five to fifty manats. ...”