The case originated in an application (no. 37614/11) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Aydin Oktay oglu Shukurov (Aydın Oktay oğlu Şükürov – “the applicant”), on 1 June 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Aliyev, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the election in his electoral constituency had not been free and fair owing to numerous instances of electoral fraud. His right to stand for election had been infringed on account of the relevant authorities’ failure to deal effectively with his complaints concerning election irregularities.
On 9 December 2013 the application was communicated to the Government. The applicant and the Government each submitted written observations on the admissibility and merits of the case. Observations were also received from the International Commission of Jurists (the ICJ), to whom the President had given leave to intervene as a third party in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The circumstances of the case are similar to those in Gahramanli and Others v. Azerbaijan (no. 36503/11, §§ 6-32, 8 October 2015).
The applicant was nominated by the Classic wing of the Popular Front party to stand as a candidate in the parliamentary elections of 7 November 2010 in the single-mandate Zangilan-Gubadly Electoral Constituency No. 125. The applicant lost the election in his constituency.
After election day, the applicant lodged a complaint with the Central Electoral Commission (the “CEC”) concerning a number of irregularities in his constituency that had allegedly taken place during election day. He complained of various types of irregularity, including interference by public officials, illegal campaigning, obstruction and intimidation of election observers, ballot-box stuffing, repeated voting by the same individuals, incorrect vote-counting procedures, and a falsely inflated voter turnout. In support of his allegations, the applicant submitted various types of evidence documenting specific instances of the irregularities complained of, including statements made by election observers, and video and audio recordings.
On 20 November 2010 the CEC issued a decision rejecting the applicant’s claims. Its reasoning was similar to that in the CEC decision in Gahramanli and Others (cited above, §§ 21-26).
The applicant lodged further complaints with the Baku Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court which, on 24 November and 1 December 2010 respectively, dismissed the applicant’s appeals. Their reasoning was similar to that in their respective decisions in the Gahramanli and Others case (cited above, §§ 27-32).
In the meantime, before the Supreme Court delivered its final decision in the applicant’s case, on 29 November 2010 the Constitutional Court had confirmed the country-wide election results, including the election results in the applicant’s constituency, as final (ibid., § 30).
At the material time Mr Intigam Aliyev was representing not only the applicant in the present case, but also a total of twentyseven other applicants in cases concerning the 2010 parliamentary elections and a number of applicants in other cases before the Court.
On 8 August 2014 criminal proceedings were instituted against Mr I. Aliyev, which are the subject of a separate application brought by him before the Court (application no. 68762/14). On 8 and 9 August 2014 the investigation authorities seized a large number of documents from Mr I. Aliyev’s office, including all the case files relating to the proceedings pending before the Court, which were in Mr Aliyev’s possession and which concerned over 100 applications in total. The file relating to the present application was also seized in its entirety. The facts relating to the seizure and the relevant proceedings are described in more detail in Annagi Hajibeyli v. Azerbaijan (no. 2204/11, §§ 21-28, 22 October 2015).
On 25 October 2014 the investigation authorities returned a number of the case files concerning the applications lodged before the Court, including the file relating to the present application, to Mr Aliyev’s lawyer.
The relevant domestic law and international documents concerning, inter alia, the system of electoral commissions and procedures for examination of electoral disputes, as well as observations made during the 2010 parliamentary elections in Azerbaijan, are summarised in Gahramanli and Others (cited above, §§ 33-51).