The case originated in two applications (nos. 60367/08 and 961/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Aslan Bachmizovich Khamtokhu and Mr Artyom Aleksandrovich Aksenchik (“the applicants”), on 22 October 2008 and 11 February 2011 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Ms N. Yermolayeva, Ms A. Maralyan, Ms E. Davidyan and Ms K. Moskalenko, lawyers practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants, who had been sentenced to life imprisonment, complained that they were subjected to discriminatory treatment vis-à-vis certain other categories of convicted offenders who were exempt from life imprisonment by operation of law.
The applications were allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 27 September 2011 a Chamber of that Section decided to give notice of the above complaints to the Government and declared the remainder of the applications inadmissible. On 13 May 2014 a Chamber of that Section, composed of Isabelle BerroLefèvre, Khanlar Hajiyev, Julia Laffranque, Linos-Alexandre Sicilianos, Erik Møse, Ksenija Turković, and Dmitry Dedov, judges, and also of Søren Nielsen, Section Registrar, decided to join the proceedings in the applications (Rule 42 § 1) and declared the case partly admissible. On 1 December 2015 a Chamber of the former First Section, composed of András Sajó, Khanlar Hajiyev, Julia Laffranque, Linos-Alexandre Sicilianos, Erik Møse, Ksenija Turković, and Dmitry Dedov, judges, and also of André Wampach, Deputy Section Registrar, relinquished jurisdiction in favour of the Grand Chamber, none of the parties having objected to relinquishment (Article 30 of the Convention and Rule 72).
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24 of the Rules of Court. At the final deliberations, André Potocki, substitute judge, replaced Julia Laffranque, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 24 § 3).
The applicants and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1) on the merits. In addition, third-party comments were received from Equal Rights Trust, a non-governmental organisation based in London, the United Kingdom, which had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 20 April 2016 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Maralyan, Ms Yermolayeva, Ms Davidyan and Mr Matyushkin, and their answers to questions put by the Court.
The applicants, Mr Khamtokhu and Mr Aksenchik, were born in 1970 and 1985 respectively. They are currently serving life sentences in the Yamalo-Nenetskiy Region of Russia.
On 14 December 2000 the Supreme Court of the Adygea Republic found the first applicant guilty of multiple offences, including escape from prison, attempted murder of police officers and State officials, and illegal possession of firearms, and sentenced him to life imprisonment.
On 19 October 2001 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation upheld the first applicant’s conviction on appeal.
On 26 March 2008 the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation quashed the appeal judgment of 19 October 2001 by way of supervisory review and remitted the matter for fresh consideration.
On 30 June 2008 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation upheld the first applicant’s conviction on appeal. The court reclassified some of the charges against him but the life sentence remained unchanged.
On 28 April 2010 the Tomsk Regional Court found the second applicant guilty on three counts of murder and sentenced him to life imprisonment.
On 12 August 2010 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation upheld that conviction on appeal.
The 1960 Criminal Code of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) provided that capital punishment could not be imposed on anyone below the age of 18 or on a woman who was pregnant either at the time of the offence or at the time of judgment (Article 23). The alternative to the death sentence was fifteen years’ imprisonment. There was no provision for life imprisonment.
On 29 April 1993 the RSFSR Criminal Code was updated and the exemption from capital punishment in Article 23 was extended to all women, and to young offenders and offenders aged 65 or over.
The Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, which has replaced the RSFSR Criminal Code since 1 January 1997, adopted a more detailed inventory of penalties. It provides for up to twenty years’ imprisonment (Article 56), life imprisonment (Article 57) and capital punishment (Article 59). Women, young offenders below the age of 18 and offenders aged 65 or over are exempted, in identical terms, from both life imprisonment and capital punishment (Articles 57 § 2 and 59 § 2). By way of a pardon, capital punishment can be commuted to life imprisonment or twenty-five years’ imprisonment (Article 59 § 3). In 2009 the Constitutional Court imposed an indefinite moratorium on capital punishment in Russia (for the text of the decision, see A.L. (X.W.) v. Russia, no. 44095/14, § 51, 29 October 2015).
Article 57 (“Life imprisonment”) reads as follows:
“1.  Life imprisonment may be imposed for particularly serious offences against life and ... public safety.
Life imprisonment may not be imposed on women, persons who were under eighteen years of age at the time they committed the offence or men who were sixty-five or older at the time the conviction was pronounced.”
A court may pronounce the offender sentenced to life imprisonment eligible for early release after the first twenty-five years provided that he has fully abided by the prison regulations throughout the previous three years (Article 79 § 5).
The Constitutional Court has consistently declared inadmissible complaints about the alleged incompatibility of Article 57 § 2 of the Criminal Code with the constitutional protection against discrimination. The most recent reiteration of its settled position can be found in its judgment of 25 February 2016 and reads as follows:
“A ban on imposing life sentences or capital punishment on certain categories of offenders cannot be seen as a breach of the principle of equality before the law and the courts (Article 19 of the Constitution) or a breach of Russia’s international legal commitments. It is justified by the need to take into account the age and social and physiological characteristics of such individuals on the basis of the principles of justice and humanity in the criminal law with a view to attaining, in a more comprehensive and efficient way, the objectives of criminal punishment in a democratic State based on the rule of law. According to the case-law of the Constitutional Court, the ban does not prevent [courts] from meting out just punishment to other categories of offenders which corresponds to the gravity of the crime committed, the circumstances of its commission and the personality of the offender; it does not undermine their rights and, accordingly, is not discriminatory against them (decisions no. 638-O-O of 21 October 2008, no. 898-O-O of 23 June 2009, no. 1382-O-O of 19 October 2010, no. 1925-O of 18 October 2012, and no. 1428-O of 24 September 2013).”
According to the information available to the Court, there are currently nine member States of the Council of Europe where life imprisonment does not exist: Andorra, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro, Norway, Portugal, San Marino, Serbia and Spain. In the rest of the world, many Central and South American countries (Bolivia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, El Salvador, Uruguay and Venezuela) have abolished life imprisonment, with some exceptions during wartime.
A comparative survey of the sentencing guidelines in thirty-seven member States of the Council of Europe in which offenders may be sentenced to life imprisonment reveals that all of them establish a special sentencing regime for juveniles or young adults, whether by way of including special provisions in the Criminal Code or enacting specific legislation dealing with juvenile delinquents. Life imprisonment of offenders below the age of 18 years is prohibited in thirty-two member States; Austria, Liechtenstein, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Sweden extend the prohibition to young adults up to the age of 21, and Hungary includes those who had not yet turned 20 at the time the offence was committed.
As regards older offenders, four member States, not including Russia, establish a specific sentencing regime: an offender who has reached retirement age (Azerbaijan), the age of 60 (Georgia) or 65 (Romania and Ukraine) cannot be sentenced to life imprisonment. In Romanian law, the maximum sentence in such a case may not exceed thirty years’ imprisonment.
As regards gender-related distinctions, the criminal law of Albania, Azerbaijan and Moldova – in addition to Russia – imposes a blanket ban on life imprisonment for women. Armenian and Ukrainian criminal law prohibits courts from imposing life sentences on women who were pregnant at the time of the offence or at the time of sentencing, and a similar provision can be found in the Bulgarian Criminal Code, which exempts pregnant female offenders from life imprisonment without parole.
Article 6 § 5 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides:
“Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by persons below eighteen years of age and shall not be carried out on pregnant women.”
Article 37 (a) of the Convention on the Rights of the Child provides:
“States Parties shall ensure that:
(a)  No child shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without possibility of release shall be imposed for offences committed by persons below eighteen years of age ...”
The Committee on the Rights of the Child, in General comment No. 10 (2007), recommended:
“Given the likelihood that a life imprisonment of a child will make it very difficult, if not impossible, to achieve the aims of juvenile justice despite the possibility of release, the Committee strongly recommends the States parties to abolish all forms of life imprisonment for offences committed by persons under the age of 18.”
The United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution A/RES/67/166 on Human Rights in the Administration of Justice on 20 December 2012, urging States –
“... to ensure that, under their legislation and practice, neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without the possibility of release ... is imposed for offences committed by persons under 18 years of age, and ... to consider repealing all other forms of life imprisonment for offences committed by persons under 18 years of age.”
For the text of Article 6 § 5 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, see paragraph 23 above.
The United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) reads in the relevant parts:
“1.  Adoption by States Parties of temporary special measures aimed at accelerating de facto equality between men and women shall not be considered discrimination as defined in the present Convention, but shall in no way entail as a consequence the maintenance of unequal or separate standards; these measures shall be discontinued when the objectives of equality of opportunity and treatment have been achieved.
Adoption by States Parties of special measures, including those measures contained in the present Convention, aimed at protecting maternity shall not be considered discriminatory.”
The UN Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules):
“Considering that women prisoners belong to one of the vulnerable groups that have specific needs and requirements ...”
“The accommodation of women prisoners shall have facilities and materials required to meet women’s specific hygiene needs ... in particular women involved in cooking and those who are pregnant, breastfeeding or menstruating.”
“1.  Gender-specific health-care services at least equivalent to those available in the community shall be provided to women prisoners.”
“Clear policies and regulations on the conduct of prison staff aimed at providing maximum protection for women prisoners from any gender-based physical or verbal violence, abuse and sexual harassment shall be developed and implemented.”
“1.  Pregnant or breastfeeding women prisoners shall receive advice on their health and diet ...”
On 11 January 2006 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation Rec(2006)2 to member States on the European Prison Rules, which replaced Recommendation No. R (87) 3 on the European Prison Rules accounting for the developments which had occurred in penal policy, sentencing practice and the overall management of prisons in Europe. The amended European Prison Rules read in particular as follows:
“13.  These rules shall be applied impartially, without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other status.
...
3.  Prisoners shall be allowed to give birth outside prison, but where a child is born in prison the authorities shall provide all necessary support and facilities.”
The European Parliament’s Resolution of 13 March 2008 on the particular situation of women in prison recommends:
“14.  (...) that the imprisonment of pregnant women and mothers with young children should only be considered as a last resort and that, in this extreme case, they should be entitled to a more spacious cell, and an individual cell if possible, and should be given particular attention, especially in terms of diet and hygiene; considers, furthermore, that pregnant women should receive antenatal and postnatal care and parenting classes of a standard equivalent to those provided outside the prison environment.”