The applications concern alleged discrimination by the respondent State, based on the relevant domestic legislation, in the provision of benefits to disabled civilians (civilni invalidi) compared to disabled war veterans (vojni invalidi) in situations involving the same paraplegic disability.
A list of the applicants is set out in the appendix, as are the applicants’ personal details, the dates of introduction of their applications before the Court and the information regarding their legal counsel, respectively.
The Government were initially represented by their acting Agent and State Attorney, Ms Olivera Stanimirović. The Government were subsequently represented by their current Agent, Ms Zorana Jadrijević Mladar.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 10 July 2005 the applicant fell from a height of approximately five metres and sustained a paraplegic disability which left him unable to use his legs and reliant on a wheelchair.
In 2006 the applicant was diagnosed by the relevant authorities as being 100% disabled, and was then granted an assisted living allowance followed by an increased assisted living allowance, that is, an allowance for necessary assistance from another person because of the seriousness of his injury (dodatak za pomoć i negu drugog lica).
On 18 December 2008 the applicant brought a civil discrimination claim against the competent branch of the respondent State – the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Policy (Ministarstvo rada, zapošljavanja i socijalne politike) – seeking damages for mental anguish. The applicant maintained that in accordance with the relevant legislation, as a disabled civilian, he had been awarded fewer types of benefits and a much smaller amount in total than those classified as disabled war veterans, despite having exactly the same disability. In particular, the applicant submitted that unlike disabled war veterans, he had not been entitled to a personal disability allowance (lična invalidnina) or an orthopaedic allowance (ortopedski dodatak), and that even the increased assisted living allowance which he had been granted had been significantly lower than that granted to such individuals (see paragraphs 32 and 34-37 below).
On 23 October 2009 the Novi Sad Municipal Court (Opštinski sud u Novom Sadu) ruled against the applicant. In so doing, it noted that disabled civilians had indeed been placed in a less favourable position (stavljeni u nepovoljniji položaj) than disabled war veterans, but this had been based on the applicable provisions of domestic law, and the relevant administrative authorities therefore had no choice but to apply them in the applicant’s case.
Following an appeal lodged by the applicant, on 17 March 2011 the Novi Sad Court of Appeal (Apelacioni sud u Novom Sadu) upheld the judgment rendered at first instance. In its reasoning, the court expressed the opinion that the mere fact that different categories of disabled persons were entitled to different benefits “did not amount to discrimination”, particularly in view of the State’s margin of appreciation in matters involving social policy. Furthermore, affirmative action or positive discrimination was aimed at achieving substantive equality for a particular group of persons who were in a fundamentally different situation to others, including disabled war veterans in the context of the present case. Lastly, the court considered that “discrimination could only occur in the application of the ... [relevant] ... legislation if the persons in question were treated differently from other persons in an identical or similar situation”.
On 27 April 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law (revizija).
On 25 August 2011 the Supreme Court of Cassation (Vrhovni kasacioni sud) dismissed that appeal and endorsed the reasoning of the lower courts. Furthermore, it held that the assessment of the “constitutionality” (ustavnost) of any piece of legislation was a matter within the competence of the Constitutional Court itself.
On 8 December 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal (ustavna žalba) in which he: (i) restated the facts of his case; (ii) complained in the same manner as before of being discriminated against; (iii) referred to various domestic provisions prohibiting discrimination; (iv) cited related international legal instruments, including Article 14 of the Convention and Protocol No. 12 thereto; and (v) relied on the constitutional principles of equality and the direct applicability of human rights as guaranteed in ratified international treaties.
On 11 September 2012 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud) rejected that appeal, noting that the applicant had complained of a breach of two constitutional principles, not of a violation of specific constitutional rights, and that such principles were of an “accessory character”. Hence, in the absence of a finding of a violation of a specific constitutional right, no breach of a constitutional principle could be established. According to the information contained in the case-file, the applicant’s lawyer was served with that decision on 2 October 2012.
On 9 May 1970 and 15 June 1986 the second and third applicants respectively were injured in traffic accidents, and on 30 August 1994 the fourth applicant was injured in a shooting incident. They all sustained paraplegic disabilities which left them unable to use their legs and reliant on wheelchairs.
Between 1987 and 2007 the applicants were all diagnosed by the relevant authorities as being 100% disabled, and they were then granted an assisted living allowance followed by an increased assisted living allowance. All the applicants also became active in promoting disability rights, as founders, leaders and/or members of a number of organisations dedicated to this cause.
On 27 November 2007 the applicants brought a joint civil discrimination claim against the competent branch of the respondent State – the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy (Ministarstvo rada i socijalne politike) – seeking damages for mental anguish. The applicants maintained that in accordance with the relevant legislation, disabled civilians like them had been awarded fewer types of benefits and much smaller amounts in total than those classified as disabled war veterans, despite having exactly the same disability. In particular, unlike disabled war veterans, disabled civilians had not been entitled to a personal disability allowance or an orthopaedic allowance, while the assisted living allowance had also been significantly reduced (see paragraphs 32 and 34-37 below).
On 1 October 2008 the Novi Sad Municipal Court ruled in favour of the applicants and ordered that they should each be paid 500,000 Serbian dinars (RSD), approximately 6,440 euros (EUR) at that time, on account of the mental anguish suffered as a consequence of the discrimination to which they had been subjected. Furthermore, the applicants were awarded costs in the total amount of RSD 186,000, approximately EUR 2,400 at that time. In its reasoning, the court focused on and accepted the fact that disabled civilians had indeed been placed in a less favourable position than disabled war veterans with regard to the assisted living allowance. Notably, despite having the same disability and the same needs in terms of their situation, disabled civilians were granted significantly lower amounts.
Following an appeal by the respondent State, on 9 September 2010 the Novi Sad Court of Appeal overturned that judgment and ruled against the applicants. It held, as in the first applicant’s case (see paragraph 9 above), that the mere fact that different categories of disabled persons were entitled to different benefits “did not amount to discrimination”, particularly in view of the State’s margin of appreciation in matters involving social policy. Furthermore, positive discrimination was aimed at achieving substantive equality for a particular group which was in a fundamentally different situation to others – disabled war veterans in the context of the present case. The court noted, again just like in the first applicant’s case, that “discrimination could only occur in the application of the ... [relevant] ... legislation if the persons in question were treated differently from other persons in an identical or similar situation”, but on this occasion the court also referred to the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights. Lastly, the Court of Appeal expressed the opinion that groups of persons who were not covered by measures or acts of positive discrimination might not be deemed as having suffered a breach of their rights guaranteed by law solely because they were not covered by such measures or acts.
Following an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicants, on 16 November 2011 the Supreme Court of Cassation upheld the ruling and the reasoning of the Court of Appeal. Furthermore, it held that the assessment of the constitutionality of any piece of legislation was a matter within the competence of the Constitutional Court itself.
On 19 March 2012 the applicants lodged a constitutional appeal. In the appeal, they restated the facts of their case, complained of the alleged discrimination in question in the same manner in which they had previously complained before the other courts, and disagreed with the views expressed by the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of Cassation.
In its decision dispatched on 10 September 2015 the Constitutional Court concluded that the applicants had effectively relied on Articles 21, 23 and 32 of the Constitution, which contained the prohibition on discrimination, the right to respect for one’s human dignity and the right to a fair trial respectively. The court, however, then went on to reject their appeal in its entirety. In particular, the Constitutional Court held that: (i) it could not act as a court of fourth instance, in the absence of “manifest arbitrariness” in the lower courts’ reasoning; (ii) the applicants’ arguments had at times been confusing and/or contradictory; and (iii) the applicants’ claims to the effect that different pieces of legislation were inconsistent with each other and/or unconstitutional should have been raised in separate constitutional proceedings focused on these issues alone (u postupku za ocenu ustavnosti zakona). According to the information contained in the case-files, the applicants’ lawyer was served with that decision on 11 September 2015.
Article 21 provides that “everyone shall be equal before the Constitution and the law” and “shall have the right to equal legal protection, without discrimination”. All “direct or indirect discrimination based on any ground, particularly on grounds of race, sex, national or social origin, birth, religion, political or other opinion, property status, culture, language, age, mental or physical disability shall be prohibited”. Special measures which may be introduced in order to achieve full equality of individuals or group of individuals who are otherwise in a substantively unequal position compared to other citizens shall not be deemed as discrimination.
Article 69 § 1 provides, inter alia, that persons and families in need are entitled to assistance based on the principles of social justice, humanism, and respect for human dignity.
Article 69 § 4 provides, inter alia, that disabled persons, war veterans and victims of war are afforded special protection, in accordance with the law.
Article 168 § 2 provides, inter alia, that every natural person has the right to lodge an application (inicijativa) for the institution of proceedings regarding the assessment of the “constitutionality” (ustavnost) and/or “legality” (zakonitost) of a specific piece of legislation.
Article 170 provides that “a constitutional appeal may be lodged against individual decisions or actions of State bodies or organisations exercising delegated public powers that violate or deny human or minority rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, if other legal remedies [for the protection of those rights or freedoms] have already been exhausted or have not been prescribed”.
Article 50, Article 53 § 1, Article 58 § 1, Article 61 and Article 62 of this Act provided, inter alia, that the Constitutional Court could institute proceedings for the assessment of the constitutionality and/or legality of a piece of legislation of its own motion, providing that two thirds of its judges decided to do so. When, however, an application for the assessment of the constitutionality and/or legality of a piece of legislation was lodged by a natural person, it would be up to the Constitutional Court itself to rule as to whether formal proceedings would be brought. If it decided to do so, a formal decision to this effect would be rendered. If proceedings were brought and a breach of the Constitution or a ratified international treaty was established, the impugned legislation, or certain provisions thereof, would cease to be in force as of the date of publication of the Constitutional Court’s decision in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia. Anyone whose rights had been violated by an individual decision based on the application of that legislation was entitled, within six months of the Constitutional Court’s decision being published, to ask the relevant authorities to amend any such decision. In the alternative, the Constitutional Court could decide to order other measures or award compensation to the aggrieved parties if it considered that effective redress could not otherwise be secured.
Article 50, Article 53 § 1, Article 58 § 1, Article 61 and Article 62 of the Constitutional Court Act, as summarised above, remained, in so far as relevant, substantively unaffected by the adoption of the amendments to this Act in 2011.
The Constitutional Court Act was subsequently again amended in 2013 and 2015.
Article 9 provided, inter alia, that persons who lacked the means to support themselves were, depending on the circumstances, entitled to one or more of the following benefits: (i) a basic monthly social security allowance; (ii) a monthly assisted living allowance; (iii) work-related training services; (iv) home assistance, family placement and institutional care services; (v) general social care services; and (vi) a benefit consisting of a one-off payment, in situations of particular urgency.
Articles 10 and 11 provided, inter alia, that individuals who required social assistance were entitled, under the further conditions set out in the Act itself, to a basic monthly social security allowance (pravo na materijalno obezbeđenje) equating to 16% of the average salary, adjusted according to the cost-of-living index on a monthly basis.
Articles 23, 25 and 25 (a) provided, inter alia, that an assisted living allowance could be granted to an individual in need of another person’s help because of the seriousness of his or her injury. An increased assisted living allowance, for persons classified as being 100% disabled, amounted to 70% of the average net salary, which sum was subject to a cost-of-living adjustment twice a year.
This Act was repealed by the 2011 Social Welfare Act (Zakon o socijalnoj zaštiti, published in OG RS no. 24/11) in April 2011.
Article 21 provided, inter alia, that disabled war veterans were entitled to the following monthly allowances: (i) a personal disability allowance; (ii) an assisted living allowance; (iii) an orthopaedic allowance; and (iv) an unemployment allowance. The same provisions then went on to list a number of other entitlements related to veterans’ healthcare and nutritional and mobility needs, and the provision of orthopaedic products.
With respect to veterans who were 100% disabled, Articles 28 and 29 provided that their personal disability allowance was equal to the average net salary, increased by 80%.
Articles 39 and 40 provided that veterans who were 100% disabled were also entitled to an assisted living allowance in the same amount.
Articles 43 and 44 provided, inter alia, that veterans who were 100% disabled and who had suffered a serious injury to their limbs were entitled to an orthopaedic allowance amounting to 29% of the average net salary increased by 80%.
This Act was subsequently amended in 2009 and 2018 and was ultimately repealed by the Veterans’ and War-related Entitlements Act (Zakon o pravima boraca, vojnih invalida, civilnih invalida rata i članova njihovih porodica, published in OG RS no. 18/20) in March 2020. Article 2 of the 2020 Act proclaims, inter alia, that the benefits granted to veterans in this legislation are based also on “the principle of national recognition”.
The relevant sections of this document read as follows:
Equality and non-discrimination (art. 5)
“9. The Committee is concerned that anti-discrimination legislation is not systematically applied, that legislation lacks a clear definition of disability-based discrimination and does not address all forms of discrimination. It is further concerned that neither the concept of reasonable accommodation nor recognition that the denial of such accommodation is a form of discrimination are explicitly included in 
anti-discrimination laws. The Committee also expresses its concern that little information has been provided on sanctions available for contravening the rights of persons with disabilities.
The Committee recommends that the State party review its legislative framework to incorporate a definition of disability-based discrimination that explicitly deals with all forms of discrimination and the concept of reasonable accommodation and ensure that the relevant laws and regulations define the denial of reasonable accommodation as a form of discrimination on grounds of disability. The Committee also recommends that the State party introduce effective and proportional remedies, including dissuasive penalties.”
The relevant sections of this document read as follows:
Equality and non-discrimination (art. 5)
“7. The Committee is concerned that, for the purposes of entitlement to social services and benefits, a distinction is made between different causes of impairments, such as war or accidents ...
The Committee recommends that disability-based services and benefits be made available to all persons with disabilities, irrespective of the cause of their impairment ...”
The relevant sections of this document read as follows:
Equality and non-discrimination (art. 5)
“10. The Committee is concerned at:
...
(b) Different legal entitlements for persons with disabilities whose impairment is not a consequence of the war, in comparison with those for civilian victims of war and for war veterans with disabilities;
...
The Committee recommends that the State party:
...
(b) Develop and apply harmonized criteria, assessment procedures and entitlements for assessing the degree of impairment for all persons with disabilities regardless of the cause of the impairment ...”
Paragraph 7 of this report provides, inter alia, that the term “assistance” within the meaning of that Convention “does not cover ... benefits paid in respect of war injuries” and that such benefits “are generally governed by different laws to those governing social security and social assistance benefits”.