The case originated in an application (no. 44818/11) against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 10 June 2011 by the British Gurkha Welfare Society, a non-governmental unincorporated association which acts on behalf of 399 Gurkha veterans, Mr Tikendra Dewan, a joint Nepalese and British national born in 1953, and Mr Subarna Adhikari, a Nepalese national born in 1960 (“the applicants”).
The applicants were represented by Mr E. Cooper of Slater and Gordon (UK) LLP (formerly Russell Jones & Walker Solicitors), a lawyer practising in London. The United Kingdom Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms A. McLeod of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
On 16 January 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
.  The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
.  Nepalese Gurkha soldiers have served the Crown since 1815, initially as soldiers in the (British) Indian Army. Following Indian independence in 1947, six Gurkha regiments were transferred to the Indian Army, while four regiments became an integral part of the British Army. More than 200,000 Gurkha soldiers fought in the two world wars, and in the past fifty years they have served in Hong Kong, Malaysia, Borneo, Cyprus, the Falklands, Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan. They have served in a variety of roles, mainly in the infantry but also as engineers and in signals and logistics units.
Today, they form the Brigade of Gurkhas (“the Brigade”), in which only Nepali nationals are eligible for service. The Brigade is not an operational brigade in the conventional sense; rather, it is an administrative entity which ensures that Gurkha units, into which all Gurkha soldiers are recruited and serve, are able to be integrated into – and form part of – other operational brigades in the British Army.
The Brigade was originally based in the Far East, in the region formerly known as Malaya. In 1971 the Brigade’s base moved to Hong Kong. On completion of the handover of Hong Kong to China in July 1997, the home base moved to the United Kingdom. Consequently, the majority of Gurkhas are currently stationed in the United Kingdom, although since 1962 a section of the Brigade has been stationed in Brunei.
Pursuant to a memorandum of understanding of 9 November 1947 (“the Tripartite Agreement”), the Governments of the United Kingdom, India and Nepal agreed that the salary of Gurkhas serving in the British Army would be set by reference to rates applied by India in respect of Indian soldiers so as to avoid competition between the Indian and British armies for Gurkha recruits. The Brigade’s basic pay was therefore set in accordance with the Indian Pay Code, although cost-of-living allowances were paid for service outside Nepal. These allowances used to be calculated by reference to local living expenses (for example, in Hong Kong or Brunei), but in 1997, when the Brigade’s home base moved to the United Kingdom, a “universal addition” was introduced to ensure that, whenever a Gurkha soldier was serving outside Nepal, his take-home pay would be similar to that of a non-Gurkha soldier in the British Army of comparable rank and experience. However, the “universal addition” was not treated as pensionable pay.
Prior to 1 April 2006, Married Accompanied Service entitlement (that is, an entitlement for the soldier to be accompanied by wife and children) was for one married accompanied tour of between two and three years in the first fifteen years of service and for permanent accompanied service for Gurkhas ranked Colour Sergeant and above. However, with effect from 1 April 2006, those who had served for three years or more in the Brigade were entitled to Married Accompanied Service (in other words, they were entitled to be joined in the United Kingdom by their wives and children).
Gurkha soldiers are required to retire after fifteen years’ service, subject to the possibility, dependent on rank, of one or more yearly extensions.
In comparison, other soldiers in the British Army are entitled to serve for twenty-two years.
.  Historically, Gurkha soldiers were discharged to Nepal and it was presumed that they would remain there during retirement.
On 25 October 2004 the Immigration Rules (HC 394) were changed to permit Gurkha soldiers with at least four years’ service who retired on or after 1 July 1997 (the date that the Gurkha’s home base relocated to the United Kingdom) to apply for settlement in the United Kingdom. Approximately 90 per cent of the 2,230 eligible Gurkha soldiers have since applied successfully to settle in the United Kingdom with their qualifying dependants.
On 21 May 2009 the Secretary of State for the Home Department announced a new policy under which all former Gurkhas who had served in the British Army for at least four years would be eligible for settlement in the United Kingdom. Approximately thirty-five per cent of those eligible have since applied for resettlement in the United Kingdom.
.  The Tripartite Agreement provided that the pensions of Gurkhas serving in the British Army would also be set by reference to the rates applied by India to Indian soldiers.
In 1949 the Gurkha Pension Scheme (“GPS”) was established by Royal Warrant and applied the former Indian Army Pensions Code to Gurkhas serving in the Brigade. Pension entitlements under the GPS were index-linked to the cost of living in Nepal as it was presumed that the Gurkhas would retire there. Pensions were immediately payable upon retirement and could not be deferred. A Gurkha who retired without having served fifteen years would be entitled to no pension whatsoever.
In 1981 Gurkha pensions were reviewed and the rate payable was set at the highest rate applicable under the Indian Army pension arrangements.
In 1999, following a ministerial review, the rates applicable to the pensions of Gurkhas in the Brigade were increased by over 100 per cent, taking them over the scales set by the Indian Army. The rationale for the increase was that a Gurkha who retired from the Brigade to Nepal would not receive the benefit of various schemes which soldiers retiring from the Indian Army could access, such as the provision of certain medical facilities. The increase applied to all Gurkhas regardless of the date of discharge.
.  Non-Gurkha soldiers retiring from the British Army are entitled to pensions under either the Armed Forces Pensions Scheme 1975 (“AFPS 75”) or the Armed Forces Pensions Scheme 2005 (“AFPS 05”) depending on when they commenced service. Neither scheme is indexlinked with the cost of living in the soldier’s country of origin.
Under the AFPS, soldiers are eligible for deferred pensions, payable at the age of 60, provided that they have rendered at least two years’ service before leaving the British Army. In order to receive an immediate pension officers are required to serve for sixteen years and all other ranks are required to serve for twenty-two years; however, in practice fewer than one fifth of non-Gurkha soldiers in the British Army serve for sufficiently long periods to be eligible for an immediate pension.
.  The annual pension entitlement under the GPS is broadly equivalent – taking into account the adjustments made in 1981 and 1999 – to one-third of that under the AFPS.
Following the 2004 amendment to the Immigration Rules (see paragraph 13 above), the Secretary of State for Defence announced a review of the Gurkhas’ Terms and Conditions of Service. The review noted that the 2004 amendment to the Immigration Rules and the changes to Married Accompanied Service (see paragraph 9 above) had changed the traditional assumption that British Gurkhas would retire in Nepal, and pointed to a future in which they could be expected increasingly to regard the United Kingdom, rather than Nepal, as their family base. The Review Team therefore concluded that, the affordability issues notwithstanding, the major differences in Gurkha terms and conditions of service could no longer be justified on legal or moral grounds and recommended that they be modernised by bringing them largely into line with those available to the wider Army.
With regard to pensions, the review concluded that on balance the GPS was more suitable than the AFPS to support the life-cycle of the great majority of Gurkhas up until July 1997. However, moving the Brigade’s base to the United Kingdom and the subsequent change to the Immigration Rules had altered the previously valid assumption that Gurkhas would retire in Nepal. For a Gurkha retiring to a second career in the United Kingdom, the GPS profile was
“clearly wrong, paying sums too small to be useful at a time when he does not need them and an inadequate pension at retirement age. As the life profile of the typical Gurkha approaches that of his UK/Commonwealth counterpart, there can be little to be said in favour of providing them with such different pension benefit profiles.”
.  The report recommended that serving and retired members of the Brigade should be allowed to transfer from the GPS to either AFPS 75 or 05, depending on when they enlisted. Those who were already in the GPS and wished to remain in it could do so, but it would be closed with effect from April 2006.
In March 2007 the United Kingdom formulated the Gurkha Offer to Transfer (“GOTT”) and this was given effect in the Armed Forces (Gurkha Pension) Order 2007 (“the 2007 Order”). Gurkhas who retired before 1 July 1997 did not qualify for the GOTT. However, the GOTT enabled Gurkha soldiers who retired on or after 1 July 1997 to transfer from the GPS to either AFPS 75 or AFPS 05 depending on when they first enlisted in the British Army. The terms of any transfer were such that the accrued rights to a pension for service after 1 July 1997 would transfer into the AFPS scheme on a year-for-year basis.
In respect of service rendered before 1 July 1997 the Explanatory Memorandum to the 2007 Order explained that
“although Gurkha service from 1 July 1997 is transferable on a one-for-one basis, Article 2 L4 provides that pre-1997 Gurkha service counts proportionately depending upon the rank of the transferee. This proportion is not arbitrary: it has been arrived at after careful calculation by the Government Actuary’s Department. It represents broadly the value of the pre-1997 benefits accrued in the GPS. A Gurkha transferring to either AFPS will be given fair pension value for his GPS service.”
Under the actuarial calculation adopted by the Government, a year’s service before 1 July 1997 translated – in terms of pension entitlement – to the equivalent of between 23 and 36 per cent of the value of a year’s service of a non-Gurkha soldier of equivalent rank.
The transition from the GPS to the AFPS for those opting to transfer who were already in receipt of a pension under the GPS did not deprive them of their existing GPS pension, which would continue to be paid. Transfer to the relevant AFPS occurred at 60 or 65, when they received the preserved pension. However, as they had been in receipt of the GPS pension from around the age of thirty-three, the capital value of the pension pot at retirement age would be reduced by the payments received under the GPS up to that date.
Nearly all serving Gurkhas elected to transfer to the AFPS (only 0.3 per cent elected to remain in the GPS). Of those who had retired, but remained eligible for transfer, approximately three per cent elected to remain in the GPS.
.  The first applicant is a non-governmental unincorporated association that acts on behalf of 399 former members of the Brigade.
.  The second applicant is a former Gurkha soldier who retired from the Brigade on 8 February 1997 after having accumulated fifteen years’ service. As he completed his service prior to 1 July 1997, he is ineligible to transfer any of his pensionable years to one of the AFPSs. His pension continues to be governed by the GPS and, as such, is valued at approximately fifty per cent of that which a British soldier of equivalent rank would receive for the same period and type of service.
.  The third applicant is a former Gurkha soldier who retired from the Brigade on 31 July 2002 after having accumulated almost thirty-one years’ service. The last five years of service were transferred into the AFPS on a year-for-year basis. The preceding twenty-six years of service were transferred under an actuarial calculation pursuant to the 2007 Order. Under that calculation the pensionable value of each of his years of service was regarded as equivalent to approximately twenty-seven per cent of a pensionable year served by a British soldier of equivalent rank engaged in the same type of service.
On 7 March 2008 the applicants issued an application for judicial review in the High Court challenging the legality of both (a) the decision that Gurkhas who retired prior to 1 July 1997 were not entitled to transfer their pension rights under the GPS into the AFPS and (b) the decision that, for those Gurkhas who retired after 1 July 1997, service before that date did not rank on a year-for-year basis. The challenge was advanced on three grounds: under the Race Relations Act 1976 (namely, that there had been a breach of a procedural duty to promote equality of opportunity); on grounds of irrationality; and under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 read together with Article 14. In relation to the third ground, the applicants alleged that they were discriminated against in their entitlement to an army pension on the basis of their age and/or nationality. In particular, they argued that they were treated differently both from younger Gurkha soldiers who had (more) years of service after 1 July 1997 and from regular British Army soldiers.
The applicants were granted permission to pursue their judicial review application. A hearing took place in October 2009. At the hearing the parties agreed that the 2009 change to the Immigration Rules (see paragraph 14 above) was irrelevant for the purpose of the proceedings.
.  On 11 January 2010 the High Court dismissed the application on all three grounds. In respect of the age discrimination challenge the High Court relied on its earlier decision in R (Gurung) v. Ministry of Defence [2008] EWHC 1496 (Admin) (summarised at paragraphs 45 – 49 below), in which it held that the difference in treatment did not occur due to the difference in age but due to the dates at which service had been rendered. The judge in the present applicants’ case noted that
“when lines are drawn for any purpose by reference to dates the result may well include some indirect age discrimination.”
.  In reaching this conclusion, the court rejected the argument – advanced by the applicants – that age discrimination should be treated as a “suspect” ground.
.  In respect of the discrimination-on-grounds-of-nationality challenge the High Court considered that it was bound by R (Purja and Others) v. Ministry of Defence [2003] EWCA Civ 1345 (summarised at paragraphs 41 – 44 below), in which the Court of Appeal had ruled that Gurkhas with service before 1 July 1997 were in a markedly different position from other soldiers serving in the British Army before that date. The difference in pension arrangements reflected the different historical position of the Gurkhas. Although the High Court accepted that the 2004 change in the Immigration Rules (see paragraph 13 above) undermined some of the assumptions supporting the decision in Purja, it held that the changes did not affect the reasoning of the Court of Appeal as that reasoning applied to the calculation of pension entitlements which accrued before 1 July 1997. For all the reasons advanced by the High Court Judge in Gurung, the High Court considered that the choice of 1 July 1997 to mark the boundary for different treatment of accrued pension was a rational and reasonable one.
.  The applicants were granted permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal. On appeal, their case was put exclusively by reference to Article 14 of the Convention read together with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
.  On 13 October 2010 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicants’ appeal. In respect of the discrimination-on-grounds-of-nationality claim the Court of Appeal, like the High Court, considered itself bound by the decision in Purja (cited above). In respect of the age-discrimination claim the court, relying on the Strasbourg Court’s judgment in Neill v. the United Kingdom, no. 56721/00, 29 January 2002, held that even if a relevant comparison could be drawn between older and younger Gurkhas, the Ministry of Defence could easily justify the difference in treatment.
.  On 13 December 2010 the Supreme Court refused to grant the applicants permission to appeal.
In Purja and Others, which concerned a challenge to the GPS brought prior to the 2004 changes to the Immigration Rules and the GOTT, the complainants submitted, inter alia, that the difference in pension rates between Gurkha and non-Gurkha soldiers was irrational and constituted direct discrimination on the grounds of nationality.
.  The High Court dismissed their complaints. In relation to the discrimination complaint, it held that the situation of Gurkha soldiers on retirement was not analogous to that of their non-Gurkha counterparts and some difference in treatment was therefore justified.
.  The complainants appealed to the Court of Appeal. In dismissing the appeal, Simon Brown LJ stated:
“... not only are Gurkhas, as the judge there observed, ‘leaving the United Kingdom and returning to Nepal, where their pensions will be paid, and conditions in Nepal are markedly different from those in the United Kingdom’, but it must be borne in mind too that these pensions are generally payable from a much earlier age. Whether that consideration - that the Gurkhas’ pensions become payable immediately after 15 years whereas British soldiers only receive theirs after 22 years or (in 83% of cases) at the age of 60 – is to be regarded as a) demonstrating that the two groups are not ‘in an analogous or relatively similar situation’ or b) providing ‘reasonable or objective justification’ for the distinction between their respective pension rates, or perhaps even c) suggesting that British soldiers are not after all enjoying ‘preferential treatment’ (all these phrases being taken from Stubbings – see paragraph 43 above), seems to me a matter of choice and ultimately immaterial.
The question directly raised by article 14 is whether the Gurkhas’ pension rights are ‘secured without discrimination on [the] ground [of] national ... origin’, which to my mind translates into the question whether, in regard to their pension rights, they have been unjustifiably less well treated than others because of their being Nepalese.
It can of course be said that it is only because they are Nepalese that the Gurkhas will be retiring to Nepal and living there more cheaply than their British counterparts. But I reject entirely the proposition that they are therefore to be regarded as unjustifiably less well treated on the ground of their nationality. It is, of course, only because they are Nepalese that they are recruited into the Gurkha Brigade in the first place. Nor am I impressed by [the claimants’] argument that because, say, an Irish or Jamaican (dual) national will be discharged from the British Army with a pension calculated without reference to wherever he may be intending to retire, so too should a Gurkha. I simply cannot recognise the two groups as being in ‘an analogous or relevantly similar situation’ looking at the nature of the Gurkha Brigade as a whole – the basis and circumstances of the Gurkhas’ recruitment, service and discharge.”
Chadwick LJ drew attention to five features distinguishing the situation of Gurkha soldiers from non-Gurkha soldiers:
“84.  It is enough to draw attention to the following: (i) Gurkha soldiers are recruited, exclusively, from Nepal, under arrangements to which the governments of Nepal and India have given approval; (ii) Gurkha soldiers are, invariably, discharged in Nepal at the end of their service, and have no right of abode in the United Kingdom; (iii) Gurkha soldiers will, almost invariably, complete 15 years’ service and retire on pension (payable with immediate effect) at or about the age of 35 years; (iv) there is an obvious, and recognised, need in those circumstances to foster and maintain links between Gurkha soldiers while in service and the country (Nepal) to which they will return on retirement; and (v) that need is enhanced by the wide social, economic and cultural differences between Nepal and the United Kingdom – and between Nepal and the other countries throughout the world in which Gurkha soldiers have been, or are likely to be, required to serve.
Taking those matters into account I find it impossible to reach the conclusion that the characteristics of soldiers serving in Gurkha units in the British Army are so closely analogous to the characteristics of soldiers serving in non-Gurkha units in the same Army that the circumstances call for a positive justification for the different treatment, in relation to basic pay and pensions, for which Gurkha TACOS provide. Once it is appreciated that there are good reasons for the payment of an immediate pension to Gurkha soldiers after 15 years’ service – as, plainly, there are, given the fact that Gurkha soldiers will return to Nepal on completion of their service - rather than a deferred pension payable at age 60 on retirement after less than 22 years’ service, or an immediate pension only after 22 years’ service, it seems obvious that the amount of the immediate pension payable to Gurkha soldiers will differ from the immediate, or the deferred, pension payable to non-Gurkha soldiers ...”
In Gurung and Others the complainants submitted that the pension policy adopted by the Government in the GOTT was irrational and resulted in a form of indirect age discrimination. The Article 14 challenge was based solely on the transfer value of the years of service before 1 July 1997 and related to the effect which the differences in transfer value created between groups of Gurkhas based on age and on their individual length of service at particular dates.
.  In its judgment the High Court had regard to the difficulty faced by the authorities in fixing the transitional arrangements following the decision to bring the Gurkhas’ pensions into line with those of other soldiers serving in the British Army. It stated:
“Transitional arrangements were required for those already in the GPS who might wish to transfer. Provision had to be made for the Gurkha who retired after 1st July 1997 under the GPS and was already in receipt of that pension but who still wished to transfer to the AFPS. The question was how the pension pot in the GPS should be transferred: at actuarial value or at a Year for Year value or a mixture of the two. The fact that the terms of service before 1st July 1997, and the pension arrangements, were fit for the previous assumption, as Purja held, obviously creates a problem for those whose years of service spanned that date. The first option would undervalue the years of service after 1st July 1997 by reference to the actual pay received with the [universal addition], and by comparison with the value earned in their pension pots by the rest of the British Army to whom, after that date, the same retirement assumptions now could be applied. The second, although not itself irrational, would give to the transferring Gurkha an enhancement to his pension not just by reference to its value but also by reference to assumptions inapplicable before 1st July 1997 when the pension or deferred pay was earned. The third, which was adopted, reflected the differences in the assumptions which underlay the pay and pension arrangements before and after 1st July 1997.
...
A distinction within the Brigade between pay and pension before and after 1st July 1997 reflects the point at which the Brigade of Gurkhas became UK based, and the retirement date after which [indefinite leave to enter or remain] became an option. The longer the service after 1997, the greater the personal connection with the UK and the corresponding loosening of the ties with Nepal, the greater the number of years transferred on a Year for Year basis. The converse is also the case: the greater the number of years served before 1997, the greater the ties with Nepal. Although in fact the percentage of retired Gurkhas coming to the UK after retirement between 1997 and 2004 is very high indeed, that does not mean that the pension transfer provision is irrational in not making it financially easier for them to do so. The system is a rough reflection of the degree of the ties with either country in which retirement could be enjoyed. The Year for Year transfer of all pension rights of those retiring after 1st July 1997 would create a sharp distinction between those Gurkhas who retired before and after that date in respect of years of service before that date.
...
The aim of the GOTT was not to allow the Gurkha to retire in the UK on an Immediate Pension at 33 years old free from further labour, nor to allow other servicemen now to do so under the AFPS. Nor was it to require retired or serving Gurkhas to forego the immediate pension to which their TACOS had entitled them, in order that at age 60 or 65 they would receive the preserved pension under the AFPS which is all that 15 years’ service would have entitled them to.”
.  With regard to the question of age discrimination, the court held:
“The grounds of differentiation here, not wholly aptly characterised as those of age, are not suspect grounds. The grounds of difference do not arise because someone is above or below a particular age, but because the introduction of changes which are not directly age related are defined by dates, and years of service. The drawing of lines, by reference to dates, around schemes which help some but not others is an inevitable part of many legislative or policy changes; this is the more so where a past disadvantage or even wrong is being remedied retrospectively. Of course, this means that either the older or younger will be affected; the date itself will import an indirect differentiation on age grounds. But that is a weak starting point for an assertion of indirect discrimination on age grounds. In any event, if there is a rational basis for the selection of the date as at which the changes are made, that disposes of the Article 14 challenge.”
.  Having regard to the generous margin of appreciation where the decision is about social and economic policy, particularly those concerned with the equitable distribution of public resources, the court concluded as follows:
“A line was drawn; that was in itself reasonable, and the particular dates chosen for its drawing are reasonable too. The difference reflects not age in reality but the number of years of service based in the Far East or in the UK. If there was indirect discrimination on the grounds of age or ‘other status’, it was justified and proportionate.”
Consequently, the High Court dismissed the application for judicial review.