The application concerns the alleged ineffectiveness of the investigation into the killing of the applicant’s son, as continued after the adoption of the Court’s judgment of 25 June 2013 in the case of Gheorghe Cobzaru v. Romania (no. 6978/08), in which a breach of Article 2 of the Convention had been found, and concluded by a judgment of the Bucharest County of 25 June 2013 holding that in the particular circumstances of the case the killing had been justified.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Bucharest. He was represented by Romani Criss, a non-governmental organisation based in Romania.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms S.-M. Teodoroiu, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On the night of 18 September 2006 the applicant’s son, who was suspected of stealing merchandise from a truck and of fleeing the police with a stolen car, was involved in a car chase with the police and was struck by a bullet in the throat; he eventually died from his injuries.
Relying in particular on Article 2 of the Convention, the applicant complained that his son had been murdered by the police officer A.S. and that no effective investigation had been carried out with a view to punishing those responsible.
In its judgment of 25 June 2013 (“the principal judgment”) the Court found a violation of Article 2 of the Convention under both its substantive and procedural limbs. Under Article 41 of the Convention, the Court granted the applicant EUR 30,000 in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
In particular, the Court found that the Romanian authorities had not shown that use of firearms by police officer A.S., in the middle of the night and without sufficient precautionary measures being taken before shooting, had been “absolutely necessary” in the circumstances, given also the absence of an adequate legislative and regulatory framework (see paragraphs 65-66 of the principal judgment).
The Court further found that the criminal investigation carried out into the incident of 18 September 2006 had been ineffective; it relied on the judgment of the Bucharest County Court of 28 November 2012 (see paragraphs 30 and 31 of the principal judgment) which had remitted the file to the prosecutor on account of several procedural shortcomings. These shortcomings were also identified by the Court, as follows: the significant delay in the investigation which at the time of the Court’s judgment was still pending before the domestic authorities (paragraphs 71 and 75 of the principal judgment); various flaws in the taking of evidence including in the preparation of a ballistics report aimed at elucidating the circumstances of the applicant’s son’s death (paragraphs 72 and 73 of the principal judgment); and the insufficient public scrutiny and insufficient protection of the applicant’s interests during the investigation (paragraph 74 of the principal judgment).
Subsequent to the remittal of the case to the prosecutor, as ordered by the Bucharest County Court on 28 November 2012 (see also paragraph 8 above), the criminal investigation into the incident of 18 September 2006 was reopened.
On 4 June 2015 the prosecutor’s office attached to the Bucharest County Court decided to close (clasare) the criminal investigation against A.S. in so far as the impugned acts had been committed with justifiable cause, as set out in Article 21 § 1 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 17 below). In particular, A.S. had acted in compliance with his obligations and duties as a police officer in charge of patrolling the area of the incident on the night of the events; the officer had acted on a reasonable suspicion that a crime was being committed. The fatal indirect shot (see paragraph 15 below) had been fired only after A.S. had issued a verbal warning and fired three vertical warning shots; it had thus been in compliance with the legal provisions regulating the use of firearms (see paragraph 18 below).
The prosecutor’s office based its decision on the following elements: statements given by A.S. as well as by the applicant; statements taken from the witnesses called by the applicant; ballistic and trace analysis reports of 28 March 2013 and 2 March 2015, aimed at elucidating the exact direction and distance of the fatal shot, the trajectory of the bullet and the relative positions of the shooter and the victim; and medical documents as well as a reconstruction of the events.
A forensic report designed to identify various other factors in the shooting, based on samples taken from the clothing of the police officer A.S. and the victim, could not be performed owing to the fact that the evidence gathered had become unsuitable for examination, having been damaged by a flood in 2012. Similarly, the National Institute of Forensic Medicine informed the investigation that samples taken on duct tape from the victim’s body tissue during the autopsy procedure had deteriorated as a result of specific laboratory examinations conducted in assessing the additional factors involved in the shooting; no other samples taken for the purpose of long-term conservation existed.
The prosecutor’s office stated that the taking of evidence had been performed in accordance with the applicant’s and his lawyer’s requests. The applicant and his lawyer had been involved in the reconstruction of events, as well as in the preparation of the ballistics reports and the forensic report, by being allowed to file requests and challenge the experts’ conclusions. They had had access to the items in the domestic case file throughout the entire investigation.
The decision of 4 June 2015 (see paragraph 10 above) was subsequently upheld by the Bucharest County Court on 14 October 2015. The court concluded that A.S. had acted in the exercise of his duties as a police officer in charge of patrolling in the area where the incident took place, with a view to ensuring public safety and preventing street crime.
The court also relied on the conclusions of the ballistics reports, which stated that the impact of the shot had been indirect, with the victim being hit by a fragment of bullet which had ricocheted from the concrete pavement in the courtyard where the shooting had taken place.
On 21 September 2017, that is, after the termination of the domestic proceedings (see paragraph 14 above), the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, at its 1294th session, examined the status of execution of the Court’s judgment of 25 June 2013 (see paragraph 6 above) and adopted Decision CM/Del/Dec(2017)1294/H46-21, the relevant parts of which are set out below. To date, the Committee of Ministers has not concluded its supervision of the execution of the judgment under Article 46 § 2 of the Convention, as the general measures to be taken in relation to a larger group of similar cases are still pending.
“Status of Execution:
... The Romanian authorities have regularly submitted information on the execution of these judgments, most recently in an action plan of 24 July 2017 ().
Individual measures:
2) Gheorghe Cobzaru: After the European Court’s judgment was delivered, the prosecutor’s office continued the investigation into the fatal shooting of the applicant’s son and took several investigative steps. In particular, it requested a new ballistics expert report and conducted a reconstruction of the events and new hearings of the perpetrator, witnesses and the civil party. In June 2015 the prosecutor’s office decided to terminate the investigation, finding that the officer who had fired the shot had acted in accordance with the domestic legal framework in force at the material time. This decision was upheld by the national courts, to which the applicant referred the matter...
Decisions
“As regards individual measures
...
noted, in view of the information provided by the authorities, that no individual measure is now possible in the case[s] of Gheorghe Cobzaru, ...
As regards general measures
noted with interest the legislative amendments brought in 2016 to regulate more strictly the use of firearms by the police in situations similar to those at the origin of the case[s] of (...) Gheorghe Cobzaru (...); took note also of the regulation adopted in 2009 on the operation of special intervention units, which appears capable of ensuring that the deployment of these units is duly justified;
called on the authorities to update the practical instructions given to police officers on the application of the legislative framework governing the use of firearms in line with the provisions introduced in 2016 and to inform the Committee of the measures taken or envisaged to ensure that law enforcement operations are planned so as to avoid, as far as possible, the use of lethal force;
noting with interest the measures adopted by the General Prosecutor’s Office to guarantee the effectiveness of criminal investigations, encouraged the authorities to extend their application to all investigations concerning the use of firearms by the police and to indicate whether additional measures have been taken or are envisaged to guarantee the effective judicial review of these investigations.”
Article 21 § 1 of the Romanian Criminal Code sets out one of the grounds of justification which remove an offence from the criminal sphere. It reads as follows:
“Article 21 - Exercising a right or fulfilling an obligation
(1) An act proscribed by the criminal law shall be justified when it is committed in the exercise of a right conferred by law or an obligation mandated by law, in compliance with the conditions and limitations set out by the law.”
The relevant domestic law concerning the use of firearms and the organisation of the Romanian police force is described in the principal judgment, paragraphs 32-35.