The case originated in an application (no. 4860/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mrs Julija Leparskienė (“the applicant”), on 5 November 2001.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Andrikis, a lawyer practising in . The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mrs D. Jočienė and Ms E. Baltutytė.
Relying on Article 2 of the Convention, the applicant complained that a police officer had unlawfully deprived her son of his life and that the State had failed to punish him for it adequately. She further maintained that she had been afforded no adequate legal remedy to obtain redress in respect of her son’s death.
The application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). The Government designated John Hedigan, the judge elected in respect of , to sit as a national judge in this case. As John Hedigan left the Court, the Government appointed Ineta Ziemele, the judge elected in respect of Latvia, to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1)
By a decision of 15 November 2007 the Court declared the application admissible.
The applicant and the Government each submitted further written observations (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the parties replied in writing to each other’s observations.
On 10 May 2001 police officer T.B. and another policeman were attempting to stop a vehicle being driven by the applicant’s fifteen-year old son, Justinas Leparskis. Three other persons were in the car with the applicant’s son. As the applicant’s son did not stop, T.B. fired two warning shots. He then fired a shot towards the wheels of the car from a distance of approximately forty metres. The applicant’s son was severely injured as that shot was misfired.
The applicant’s son was hospitalised in a coma.
On 10 May 2001 a prosecutor instituted a criminal investigation into the incident. T.B. was suspected of exceeding official duties (Article 287 of the Criminal Code as then in force).
According to the Government, on the same day an initial on-site inspection was carried out and witnesses were questioned.
On 14 May 2001 a forensic medical expert report was ordered to establish how severely J. Leparskis was injured. The report was received on 20 July 2001. On 15 May 2001 police officer T.B. was questioned and his service gun and four bullets were seized; on 16 May the bullet extracted from the head of J. Leparskis was seized from the hospital. On 21 May the authorities ordered the forensic ballistic analysis; it was concluded on 19 September 2001 and established that the bullet extracted from the head of J. Leparskis could have been fired from T.B.’s service gun.
On 27 July 2001 the applicant’s son died without coming out of the coma.
According to the Government, on 27 July 2001 a supplementary forensic expert report was ordered. The report was received the next day. It concluded that J. Leparskis had died from complications caused by the gunshot wound to his head.
On an unspecified date criminal proceedings for exceeding official duties and manslaughter were brought against T.B.
On 27 September 2001 the prosecutor recognised the applicant as a victim in the criminal case.
On 14 March 2003 the Pakruojis District Court found T.B. guilty of manslaughter (Article 109 of the Criminal Code as then in force) and exceeding official duties (Article 287). In particular, it was found that T.B. had fired the three shots without any absolute necessity, in breach of the relevant provisions of the Police Activities Act and various ministerial instructions. The court observed that T.B. had used the gun in the absence of a real threat to the life of a police officer or third persons, and without having made any attempts to verify the identity and the age of the driver of the vehicle. In addition, it was observed that T.B. had not given the applicant’s son any time to react after the two warning shots and had immediately fired the third shot from a rather long distance. T.B. was thus found to be responsible for recklessly depriving the applicant’s son of his life. He was sentenced to one year and nine months’ imprisonment, fined 1,250 Lithuanian litai (LTL, approximately 361.48 euros (EUR)) and barred from employment with law enforcement authorities for a period of five years. The court also awarded the applicant pecuniary damages against the Ministry of Interior in the amount of LTL 5,216.30 (approximately EUR 1,508.47) for funeral expenses. The court did not examine the applicant’s claim for non-pecuniary damage, having ruled that she was entitled to satisfaction of that claim in separate civil proceedings.
On 4 June 2003 the Šiauliai Regional Court reclassified the charge of exceeding official duties (Article 287 of the Criminal Code in force
On 20 June 2003, upon entry into force of the above judgment, T.B. was dismissed from his job in the police.
The applicant appealed, claiming, inter alia, that T.B. should have been punished for murder. In this respect the applicant stated that T.B.’s acts should have been characterised by indirect intent rather than recklessness, as he had executed the criminal acts in a dangerous manner, without any effort on his part to protect the lives of other persons. She also claimed non-pecuniary damages in the amount of LTL 1,000,000.
On 28 October 2003 the Supreme Court quashed the above judgment, returning the case for a fresh examination at appeal instance. The Supreme Court ruled in particular that the lower courts had failed to answer the applicant’s arguments under Article 6 of the Convention about the effectiveness of the investigation into the death in view of the allegedly mild sentence imposed on T.B. The Supreme Court noted that these complaints might also give rise to issues under Article 2 of the Convention. It was observed however that the applicant’s claim for
On 12 January 2004 the Šiauliai  again found T.B. guilty of manslaughter (under Article 109 § 2 of the old Criminal Code) and abuse of office (Article 228 § 1 of the new Criminal Code). He was given a sentence of two years and six months’ imprisonment. The execution of the sentence was suspended for three years. The applicant’s claim of LTL 5,216.30 in reimbursement of pecuniary damage in relation to the funeral of her son was upheld. The court also confirmed that she had a right to an award in respect of non-pecuniary damage, but left the sum to be determined by way of a separate set of civil proceedings. The court further noted:
“The circumstances of the incident have been fully clarified and the evidence rightly assessed. The evidence shows that [T.B.] used his firearm ... with the aim of stopping the vehicle the driver of which had not complied with the lawful requirement to stop; at the moment when [T.B.] used his gun there was no danger to life or limb for him or anyone else, as the car had already driven some forty metres from the point where it had been stopped; furthermore the policemen were not precluded from chasing the offender in the police car, in order to stop him without recourse to firearms. (...) [T.B.] endangered the life of the car passengers, exceeded his official duties and consciously acted in defiance of his duty of care, set out in Article 25 of the Police Activities Act ... which defines the conditions for using firearms as an exceptional measure of coercion. (...)
By contrast, there is no indication that [T.B.] breached Article 25 § 4 of the Police Activities Act, as he had fired his shots at the tyres of the car which had already moved away from the people. Nor is there any evidence that [T.B.] knew about the presence of the minors in the car, that he aimed at causing the death of the car driver or was indifferent to the fact that he might cause it.
[T.B.] had been familiar with all the normative acts regarding his duties, inter alia those determining the use of [firearms]; he had undergone shooting training. However, [T.B.] irresponsibly overestimated his skills and acted unlawfully, aiming at the tyres of the car which was swiftly moving away. Such actions were correctly classified as manslaughter.”
The court found no procedural irregularities in the investigation or trial. As to the alleged bias on the part of the judges, it noted that the applicant had not requested the withdrawal of a particular judge. To the extent that the applicant complained of the excessive length of the proceedings, the Šiauliai Regional Court considered that she had not indicated any substantial periods of inaction by the courts, and that her complaint about the alleged delay in the pre-trial investigation could not be a ground for quashing the lower court decisions, as this could only further prolong the proceedings. It was concluded that these, as well as other complaints of the applicant under Articles 2 and 6 of the Convention, were better suited for examination by way of civil proceedings for non-pecuniary damages.
On 13 February 2004 the applicant submitted a cassation appeal against this judgment. By reference to Articles 2 and 6 of the Convention, the applicant reiterated that the proceedings had lasted too long, that the courts had not been impartial, that they had wrongly established the evidence, that T.B. should have been found guilty of murder, that his punishment had been totally inadequate, and that her claim for non-pecuniary damage should have been allowed by the criminal courts.
On 1 June 2004 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s cassation appeal. The court ruled that the proceedings had been fair and impartial in compliance with the requirements of Article 6 of the Convention in that the applicant had been provided with all procedural guarantees. Her claims for non-pecuniary damages were duly left to be decided by way of civil proceedings as the criminal procedure rules applicable at the material time provided only for assessment of the pecuniary damage (Article 65 of the old Code of Criminal Procedure). The Supreme Court opined that the length of the proceedings at the appellate instance was justified by the legal and factual complexity of the case. Finally, regarding the severity of the punishment imposed on T.B. the court stated:
“The general grounds for imposition of punishment provided for in Article 54 of the Criminal Code require a court to impose a punishment within the limits provided for in the sanction of an article of the criminal law which enshrines liability for the criminal act; it also requires it to take into consideration the extent to which the activity was dangerous, as well as its motivation and objectives, the form of guilt, the personality of the accused, and the circumstances relieving or aggravating the liability. The [lower] court was following the provisions enshrined in the said norm and did not make a mistake; the court, upon taking into consideration the circumstances positively characterising the personality of the convicted person, reasonably imposed a punishment near the medium of the punishment provided for in the sanction for negligent deprivation of life (...). By suspending the sentence of imprisonment for the negligent crime committed by the convicted person the court was following the rules provided for in Article 75 of the Criminal Code. The punishment imposed is relevant to its purpose (...) and does not contradict the principle of justice. Therefore, there is no ground to conclude that in the present criminal case while imposing punishment on the convicted person criminal law was not applied properly.”
Article 109 § 2 of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, provided that the act of manslaughter, caused by conscious failure to observe the safety rules (nužudymas dėl neatsargumo, padarytas  sąmoningo atsargumo taisyklių nesilaikymo), should be punished by imprisonment of up to five years. Article 287 of the Code provided for the criminal offence of exceeding official duties (tarnybos pareigų viršijimas).
Article 75 of the new Criminal Code, which entered into force on 1 May 2003, allows a court to suspend the execution of the sentence for up to three years if a person who has committed a negligent crime has been sentenced to up to six years of imprisonment. Article 228 § 1 of the Code provides for criminal liability for acts of abuse of office (piktnaudžiavimas), which is punishable by, as alternatives, a ban on working in a certain sphere, a fine, arrest or deprivation of liberty of up to four years.
Article 30 of the Constitution stipulates that “a person whose constitutional rights or freedoms are violated shall have the right to apply to court.”
Article 65 of the old Code of Criminal Procedure (in force until
The Law of 29 October 2002 on the Procedure for Coming into Force and Implementation of the Criminal Code stipulated that the examination of cases in which the trial had already been commenced at the time of entry into force of the new Code of Criminal Procedure was to be completed in accordance with the rules of the old Code of Criminal Procedure, unless the court decided a contrario.
Article 109 of the new Code of Criminal Procedure (in force after 1 May 2003) provides that a person who has sustained pecuniary and/or non-pecuniary damage because of a crime is entitled to lodge a civil claim in the criminal proceedings. The court is to adjudicate such a civil claim together with the criminal case. According to Article 115 § 2 of the Code, in exceptional cases, when it is impossible to assess the amount of the civil claim without adjournment of the criminal case or without obtaining additional material, the court, when rendering the judgment, may grant the plaintiff the right to satisfaction of the claim and leave the question of the amount of that claim to be resolved in separate civil proceedings.
According to Article 23 § 1 of the Police Activities Act of 17 October 2000, a police officer is entitled to use force, including firearms, only where preliminary measures such as attempts to persuade or the use of “psychological force” such as warning shots have not been effective. He or she must select the means of coercion having regard to the particular circumstances, the type of offence at hand and the individual features of the offender. A police officer must try to avoid serious consequences in using such force.
Article 23 § 5 of the above Act stipulates that before using a firearm a police officer must warn the person about his/her intention, to enable him or her to fulfil lawful requirements, except in cases when delaying the use of a firearm poses a threat to the life or limb of the police officer or another person, or when such a warning is impossible.
In accordance with Article 23 § 8, the prosecutor is immediately informed about use of force by a police officer that caused death or injury. Pursuant to Article 23 § 9, police officers must undergo special training and be periodically assessed as to whether they are able to act in situations involving the use of firearms.
Article 25 of the Police Activities Act stipulates:
“1. When other coercive measures are ineffective, the police officer shall have the right to use a firearm as an extraordinary measure.
The police officer shall have the right to use a firearm against persons in the following cases:
1) when defending himself or another person from an actual or intended criminal attempt which poses a direct threat to life or limb;
2) when attempting to arrest a person who has committed a criminal act and who actively evades arrest, if it is impossible to arrest him/her in any other way, as well as in cases when the person refuses to comply with lawful instructions to put down a weapon or another thing with which it is possible to injure an individual, if a threat is posed to the life or limb of the police officer or another individual and it is impossible to disarm him/her in any other way. ...
The police officer shall have the right to use a firearm against a vehicle ... .
It shall be prohibited to use a firearm in public gathering places, if it endangers other people; against pregnant women, as well as against persons who are visibly disabled, and against minors, if the police officer knows their age or their appearance corresponds to their age, except in cases when the said persons resist in a manner dangerous to human life or limb ... ”.