The case originated in an application (no. 46043/14) against the French Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four French nationals, Mr Pierre Lambert, Mrs Viviane Lambert, Mr David Philippon and Mrs Anne Tuarze (“the applicants”), on 23 June 2014.
The applicants were represented by Mr J. Paillot, a lawyer practising in Strasbourg, and Mr J. Triomphe, a lawyer practising in Paris. The French Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Alabrune, Director of Legal Affairs at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Development.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the withdrawal of Vincent Lambert’s artificial nutrition and hydration would be in breach of the State’s obligations under Article 2 of the Convention, that it would constitute ill-treatment amounting to torture within the meaning of Article 3 of the Convention and would infringe his physical integrity, in breach of Article 8 of the Convention.
The application was assigned to the Fifth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 24 June 2014 the relevant Chamber decided to apply Rule 39, to give notice of the application to the Government and to grant it priority.
On 4 November 2014 a Chamber of the Fifth Section composed of Mark Villiger, President, Angelika Nußberger, Boštjan M. Zupančič, Vincent A. De Gaetano, André Potocki, Helena Jäderblom and Aleš Pejchal, judges, and Stephen Phillips, Section Registrar, relinquished jurisdiction in favour of the Grand Chamber, neither of the parties having objected to relinquishment (Article 30 of the Convention and Rule 72).
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicants and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the case.
Observations were also received from Rachel Lambert, François Lambert and MarieGeneviève Lambert, the wife, nephew and half-sister respectively of Vincent Lambert, and from the National Union of Associations of Head Injury and Brain Damage Victims’ Families, the association Amréso-Bethel and the Human Rights Clinic of the International Institute of Human Rights, to all of whom the President had given leave to intervene as third parties in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 (a)). Rachel Lambert, François Lambert and MarieGeneviève Lambert were also given leave to take part in the hearing.
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 7 January 2015 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The applicants, with the exception of the first applicant, also attended, as did Rachel Lambert, François Lambert and Marie-Geneviève Lambert, third-party interveners.
The Court heard addresses by Mr Alabrune, Mr Paillot, Mr Triomphe, Mr Munier-Apaire and Mr Pettiti, as well as the answers given by Mr Alabrune and Mr Paillot to the questions put by one of the judges.
The applicants, who are all French nationals, are Mr Pierre Lambert and his wife Mrs Viviane Lambert, who were born in 1929 and 1945 respectively and live in Reims, Mr David Philippon, who was born in 1971 and lives in Mourmelon, and Mrs Anne Tuarze, who was born in 1978 and lives in Milizac. They are the parents, a half-brother and a sister respectively of Vincent Lambert, who was born on 20 September 1976.
Vincent Lambert sustained serious head injuries in a road-traffic accident on 29 September 2008, which left him tetraplegic and in a state of complete dependency. According to the expert medical report ordered by the Conseil d’État on 14 February 2014, he is in a chronic vegetative state (see paragraph 40 below).
From September 2008 to March 2009 he was hospitalised in the resuscitation wing, and subsequently the neurology ward, of ChâlonsenChampagne Hospital. From March to June 2009 he was cared for in the heliotherapy centre in BercksurMer, before being moved on 23 June 2009 to the unit in Reims University Hospital providing follow-up and rehabilitative care to patients in a vegetative or minimally conscious state, where he remains to date. The unit accommodates eight patients. Vincent Lambert receives artificial nutrition and hydration which is administered enterally, that is, via a gastric tube.
In July 2011 Vincent Lambert was assessed by a specialised unit of Liège University Hospital, the Coma Science Group, which concluded that he was in a chronic neuro-vegetative state characterised as “minimally conscious plus”. In line with the recommendations of the Coma Science Group he received daily sessions of physiotherapy from September 2011 to the end of October 2012, which yielded no results. He also received eighty-seven speech and language therapy sessions between March and September 2012, in an unsuccessful attempt to establish a code of communication. Attempts were also made to sit the patient in a wheelchair.
As Vincent Lambert’s carers had observed increasing signs in 2012 of what they believed to be resistance on his part to daily care, the medical team initiated in early 2013 the collective procedure provided for by the Law of 22 April 2005 on patients’ rights and end-of-life issues (the so-called “Leonetti Act” – see paragraph 54 below). Rachel Lambert, the patient’s wife, was involved in the procedure.
The procedure resulted in a decision by Dr Kariger, the doctor in charge of Vincent Lambert and head of the department in which he is hospitalised, to withdraw the patient’s nutrition and reduce his hydration. The decision was put into effect on 10 April 2013.
On 9 May 2013 the applicants applied to the urgent-applications judge of the ChâlonsenChampagne Administrative Court on the basis of Article L. 521-2 of the Administrative Courts Code (urgent application for protection of a fundamental freedom (référé liberté)), seeking an injunction ordering the hospital, subject to a coercive fine, to resume feeding and hydrating Vincent Lambert normally and to provide him with whatever care his condition required.
In an order dated 11 May 2013, the urgent-applications judge granted their requests. The judge held that, since no advance directives had been drawn up by Vincent Lambert, and in the absence of a person of trust within the meaning of the relevant provisions of the Public Health Code, the collective procedure should be continued with his family, despite the fact that the latter was divided as to what should become of the patient. The judge noted that, while Vincent Lambert’s wife had been involved in the procedure, it was clear from examination of the case that his parents had not been informed that it had been applied, and that the decision to withdraw nutrition and limit hydration, the nature of and reasons for which had not been disclosed to them, had not respected their wishes.
The judge held accordingly that these procedural shortcomings amounted to a serious and manifestly unlawful breach of a fundamental freedom, namely the right to respect for life, and ordered the hospital to resume feeding and hydrating Vincent Lambert normally and to provide him with whatever care his condition required.
In September 2013 a fresh collective procedure was initiated. Dr Kariger consulted six doctors, including three from outside the hospital (a neurologist, a cardiologist and an anaesthetist with experience in palliative medicine) chosen by Vincent Lambert’s parents, his wife and the medical team respectively. He also had regard to a written contribution from a doctor in charge of a specialised extended-care facility within a nursing home.
Dr Kariger also convened two meetings with the family, on 27 September and 16 November 2013, which were attended by Vincent Lambert’s wife and parents and his eight siblings. Rachel Lambert and six of the eight brothers and sisters spoke in favour of discontinuing artificial nutrition and hydration, while the applicants were in favour of continuing it.
On 9 December 2013 Dr Kariger called a meeting of all the doctors and almost all the members of the care team. Following that meeting Dr Kariger and five of the six doctors consulted stated that they were in favour of withdrawing treatment.
On completion of the consultation procedure Dr Kariger announced on 11 January 2014 his intention to discontinue artificial nutrition and hydration on 13 January, subject to an application to the administrative court. His decision, comprising a reasoned thirteen-page report, a sevenpage summary of which was read out to the family, observed in particular that Vincent Lambert’s condition was characterised by irreversible brain damage and that the treatment appeared to be futile and disproportionate and to have no other effect than to sustain life artificially. According to the report, the doctor had no doubt that Vincent Lambert had not wished, before his accident, to live under such conditions. Dr Kariger concluded that prolonging the patient’s life by continuing his artificial nutrition and hydration amounted to unreasonable obstinacy.
On 13 January 2014 the applicants made a further urgent application to the ChâlonsenChampagne Administrative Court for protection of a fundamental freedom under Article L. 521-2 of the Administrative Courts Code, seeking an injunction prohibiting the hospital and the doctor concerned from withdrawing Vincent Lambert’s nutrition and hydration, and an order for his immediate transfer to a specialised extended-care facility in Oberhausbergen run by the association AmrésoBethel (see paragraph 8 above). Rachel Lambert and François Lambert, Vincent Lambert’s nephew, intervened in the proceedings as third parties.
The Administrative Court, sitting as a full court of nine judges, held a hearing on 15 January 2014. In a judgment of 16 January 2014, it suspended the implementation of Dr Kariger’s decision of 11 January 2014.
The Administrative Court began by observing that Article 2 of the Convention did not prevent States from making provisions for individuals to object to potentially life-prolonging treatment, or for a doctor in charge of a patient who was unable to express his or her wishes and whose treatment the doctor considered, after implementing a series of safeguards, to amount to unreasonable obstinacy, to withdraw that treatment, subject to supervision by the Medical Council, the hospital’s ethics committee, where applicable, and the administrative and criminal courts.
The Administrative Court went on to find that it was clear from the relevant provisions of the Public Health Code, as amended following the Leonetti Act and as elucidated by the parliamentary proceedings, that artificial enteral nutrition and hydration – which were subject, like medication, to the distribution monopoly held by pharmacies, were designed to supply specific nutrients to patients with impaired functions and which required recourse to invasive techniques to administer them – constituted a form of treatment.
Observing that Dr Kariger’s decision had been based on the wish apparently expressed by Vincent Lambert not to be kept alive in a highly dependent state, and that the latter had not drawn up any advance directives or designated a person of trust, the Administrative Court found that the views he had confided to his wife and one of his brothers had been those of a healthy individual who had not been faced with the immediate consequences of his wishes, and had not constituted the formal manifestation of an express wish, irrespective of his professional experience with patients in a similar situation. The court further found that the fact that Vincent Lambert had had a conflictual relationship with his parents, since he did not share their moral values and religious commitment, did not mean that he could be considered to have expressed a clear wish to refuse all forms of treatment, and added that no unequivocal conclusion as to his desire or otherwise to be kept alive could be drawn from his apparent resistance to the care provided. The Administrative Court held that Dr Kariger had incorrectly assessed Vincent Lambert’s wishes.
The Administrative Court also noted that, according to the report drawn up in 2011 by Liège University Hospital (see paragraph 13 above), Vincent Lambert was in a minimally conscious state, implying the continuing presence of emotional perception and the existence of possible responses to his surroundings. Accordingly, the administering of artificial nutrition and hydration was not aimed at keeping him alive artificially. Lastly, the court considered that, as long as the treatment did not cause any stress or suffering, it could not be characterised as futile or disproportionate. It therefore held that Dr Kariger’s decision had constituted a serious and manifestly unlawful breach of Vincent Lambert’s right to life. It issued an order suspending the implementation of the decision while rejecting the request for the patient to be transferred to the specialised extended-care facility in Oberhausbergen.
In three applications lodged on 31 January 2014, Rachel Lambert, François Lambert and Reims University Hospital appealed against that judgment to the urgent-applications judge of the Conseil d’État. The applicants lodged a cross-appeal, requesting Vincent Lambert’s immediate transfer to the specialised extended-care facility. The National Union of Associations of Head Injury and Brain Damage Victims’ Families (UNAFTC, see paragraph 8 above) sought leave to intervene as a third party.
At the hearing on the urgent application held on 6 February 2014, the President of the Judicial Division of the Conseil d’État decided to refer the case to the full court, sitting as a seventeen-member Judicial Assembly.
The hearing before the full court took place on 13 February 2014. In his submissions to the Conseil d’État, the public rapporteur cited, inter alia, the remarks made by the Minister of Health to the members of the Senate examining the bill known as the “Leonetti Bill”:
“While the act of withdrawing treatment ... results in death, the intention behind the act [is not to kill; it is] to allow death to resume its natural course and to relieve suffering. This is particularly important for care staff, whose role is not to take life.”
The Conseil d’État delivered its ruling on 14 February 2014. After joining the applications and granting UNAFTC leave to intervene, the Conseil d’État defined in the following terms the role of the urgentapplications judge called upon to rule on the basis of Article L. 5212 of the Administrative Courts Code.
“Under [Article L. 521-2], the urgent-applications judge of the administrative court, when hearing an application of this kind justified by particular urgency, may order any measures necessary to safeguard a fundamental freedom allegedly breached in a serious and manifestly unlawful manner by an administrative authority. These legislative provisions confer on the urgent-applications judge, who normally decides alone and who orders measures of an interim nature in accordance with Article L. 511-1 of the Administrative Courts Code, the power to order, without delay and on the basis of a ‘plain and obvious’ test, the necessary measures to protect fundamental freedoms.
However, the urgent-applications judge must exercise his or her powers in a particular way when hearing an application under Article L. 521-2 ... concerning a decision taken by a doctor on the basis of the Public Health Code which would result in treatment being discontinued or withheld on grounds of unreasonable obstinacy and the implementation of which would cause irreversible damage to life. In such circumstances the judge, sitting where applicable as a member of a bench of judges, must take the necessary protective measures to prevent the decision in question from being implemented where it may not be covered by one of the situations provided for by law, while striking a balance between the fundamental freedoms in issue, namely the right to respect for life and the patient’s right to consent to medical treatment and not to undergo treatment that is the result of unreasonable obstinacy. In such a case, the urgentapplications judge or the bench to which he or she has referred the case may, as appropriate, after temporarily suspending the implementation of the measure and before ruling on the application, order an expert medical report and, under Article R. 625-3 of the Administrative Courts Code, seek the opinion of any person whose expertise or knowledge are apt to usefully inform the court’s decision.”
The Conseil d’État found that it was clear from the very wording of the relevant provisions of the Public Health Code (Articles L. 11105, L. 11114 and R. 412737) and from the parliamentary proceedings that the provisions in question were general in scope and applied to Vincent Lambert just as they did to all users of the health service. The Conseil d’État stated as follows.
“It is clear from these provisions that each individual must receive the care most appropriate to his or her condition and that the preventive or exploratory acts carried out and the care administered must not subject the patient to disproportionate risks in relation to the anticipated benefits. Such acts must not be continued with unreasonable obstinacy and may be discontinued or withheld where they appear to be futile or disproportionate or to have no other effect than to sustain life artificially, whether or not the patient is in an end-of-life situation. Where the patient is unable to express his or her wishes, any decision to limit or withdraw treatment on the ground that continuing it would amount to unreasonable obstinacy may not be taken by the doctor, where such a measure is liable to endanger the life of the patient, without the collective procedure defined in the Code of Medical Ethics and the rules on consultation laid down in the Public Health Code having been followed. If the doctor takes such a decision he or she must in any event preserve the patient’s dignity and dispense palliative care.
Furthermore, it is clear from the provisions of Articles L. 1110-5 and L. 1111-4 of the Public Health Code, as elucidated by the parliamentary proceedings prior to the passing of the Law of 22 April 2005, that the legislature intended to include among the forms of treatment that may be limited or withdrawn on grounds of unreasonable obstinacy all acts which seek to maintain the patient’s vital functions artificially. Artificial nutrition and hydration fall into this category of acts and may accordingly be withdrawn where continuing them would amount to unreasonable obstinacy.”
The Conseil d’État went on to find that its task was to satisfy itself, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, that the statutory conditions governing any decision to withdraw treatment whose continuation would amount to unreasonable obstinacy had been met. To that end it needed to have the fullest information possible at its disposal, in particular concerning Vincent Lambert’s state of health. Accordingly, it considered it necessary before ruling on the application to order an expert medical report to be prepared by practitioners with recognised expertise in neuroscience. The experts – acting on an independent and collective basis, after examining the patient, meeting the medical team and the care staff and familiarising themselves with the patient’s entire medical file – were to give their opinion on Vincent Lambert’s current condition and provide the Conseil d’État with all relevant information as to the prospect of any change.
The Conseil d’État decided to entrust the expert report to a panel of three doctors appointed by the President of the Judicial Division on proposals from the President of the National Medical Academy, the Chair of the National Ethics Advisory Committee and the President of the National Medical Council respectively. The remit of the panel of experts, which was to report within two months of its formation, read as follows.
“(i)  To describe Mr. Lambert’s current clinical condition and how it has changed since the review carried out in July 2011 by the Coma Science Group of Liège University Hospital;
(ii)  To express an opinion as to whether the patient’s brain damage is irreversible and as to the clinical prognosis;
(iii)  To determine whether the patient is capable of communicating, by whatever means, with those around him;
(iv)  To assess whether there are any signs to suggest at the present time that Mr Lambert reacts to the care being dispensed to him and, if so, whether those reactions can be interpreted as a rejection of that care, as suffering, as a desire for the life-sustaining treatment to be withdrawn or, on the contrary, as a desire for the treatment to be continued.”
The Conseil d’État also considered it necessary, in view of the scale and the difficulty of the scientific, ethical and deontological issues raised by the case and in accordance with Article R. 625-3 of the Administrative Courts Code, to request the National Medical Academy, the National Ethics Advisory Committee and the National Medical Council, together with Mr Jean Leonetti, the rapporteur for the Law of 22 April 2005, to submit general written observations by the end of April 2014 designed to clarify for it the application of the concepts of unreasonable obstinacy and sustaining life artificially for the purposes of Article L. 1110-5, with particular regard to individuals who, like Vincent Lambert, were in a minimally conscious state.
Lastly, the Conseil d’État rejected the applicants’ request for Vincent Lambert to be transferred to a specialised extended-care facility (see paragraph 29 above).
The experts examined Vincent Lambert on nine occasions. They familiarised themselves with the entire medical file, and in particular the report of the Coma Science Group in Liège (see paragraph 13 above), the treatment file and the administrative file, and had access to all the imaging tests. They also consulted all the items in the judicial case file of relevance for their expert report. In addition, between 24 March and 23 April 2014, they met all the parties (the family, the medical and care team, the medical consultants and representatives of UNAFTC and the hospital) and carried out a series of tests on Vincent Lambert.
On 5 May 2014 the experts sent their preliminary report to the parties for comments. Their final report, submitted on 26 May 2014, provided the following replies to the questions asked by the Conseil d’État.
The experts found that Vincent Lambert’s clinical condition corresponded to a vegetative state, with no signs indicating a minimally conscious state. Furthermore, they stressed that he had difficulty swallowing and had seriously impaired motor functions of all four limbs, with significant retraction of the tendons. They noted that his state of consciousness had deteriorated since the assessment carried out in Liège in 2011.
The experts pointed out that the two main factors to be taken into account in assessing whether or not brain damage was irreversible were, firstly, the length of time since the accident which had caused the damage and, secondly, the nature of the damage. In the present case they noted that five and a half years had passed since the initial head injury and that the imaging tests showed severe cerebral atrophy testifying to permanent neuron loss, near-total destruction of strategic regions such as both parts of the thalamus and the upper part of the brain stem, and serious damage to the communication pathways in the brain. They concluded that the brain damage was irreversible. They added that the lengthy period of progression, the patient’s clinical deterioration since July 2011, his current vegetative state, the destructive nature and extent of the brain damage and the results of the functional tests, coupled with the severity of the motor impairment of all four limbs, pointed to a poor clinical prognosis.
In the light of the tests carried out, and particularly in view of the fact that the course of speech and language therapy carried out in 2012 had not succeeded in establishing a code of communication, the experts concluded that Vincent Lambert was not capable of establishing functional communication with those around him.
The experts observed that Vincent Lambert reacted to the care provided and to painful stimuli, but concluded that these were nonconscious responses. In their view, it was not possible to interpret them as conscious awareness of suffering or as the expression of any intent or wish with regard to the withdrawal or continuation of treatment.
On 22 and 29 April and 5 May 2014 the Conseil d’État received the general observations of the National Medical Council, Mr Jean Leonetti, rapporteur for the Law of 22 April 2005, the National Medical Academy and the National Ethics Advisory Committee.
The National Medical Council made clear in particular that, in using the expression “no other effect than to sustain life artificially” in Article L. 11105 of the Public Health Code, the legislature had sought to address the situation of patients who not only were being kept alive solely by the use of methods and techniques replacing key vital functions, but also, and above all, whose cognitive and relational functions were profoundly and irreversibly impaired. It emphasised the importance of the notion of temporality, stressing that where a pathological condition had become chronic, resulting in the person’s physiological deterioration and the loss of his or her cognitive and relational faculties, obstinacy in administering treatment could be regarded as unreasonable if no signs of improvement were apparent.
Mr Leonetti stressed that the Law of 22 April 2005 was applicable to patients who had brain damage and thus suffered from a serious condition which, in the advanced stages, was incurable, but who were not necessarily “at the end of life”. Accordingly, the legislature had referred in its title to “patients’ rights and endoflife issues” rather than “patients’ rights in endoflife situations”. He outlined the criteria for unreasonable obstinacy and the factors used to assess it and stated that the reference to treatment having “no other effect than to sustain life artificially”, which was stricter than the wording originally envisaged (namely, treatment “which prolongs life artificially”) was more restrictive and referred to artificially sustaining life “in the purely biological sense, in circumstances where, firstly, the patient has major irreversible brain damage and, secondly, his or her condition offers no prospect of a return to awareness of self or relationships with others”. He pointed out that the Law of 22 April 2005 gave the doctor sole responsibility for the decision to withdraw treatment and that it had been decided not to pass that responsibility on to the family, in order to avoid any feelings of guilt and to ensure that the person who took the decision was identified.
The National Medical Academy reiterated the fundamental prohibition barring doctors from deliberately taking another’s life, which formed the basis for the relationship of trust between doctor and patient. The Academy reiterated its long-standing position according to which the Leonetti Act was applicable not only to the various “end-of-life” situations, but also to situations raising the very difficult ethical issue of the “ending of life” in the case of patients in “survival” mode, in a minimally conscious or chronic vegetative state.
The National Ethics Advisory Committee conducted an indepth analysis of the difficulties surrounding the notions of unreasonable obstinacy, treatment and sustaining life artificially, summarised the medical data concerning minimally conscious states, and addressed the ethical issues arising out of such situations. It recommended, in particular, a process of reflection aimed at ensuring that the collective discussions led to a genuine collective decision-making process and that, where no consensus could be reached, there was a possibility of mediation.
A hearing took place on 20 June 2014 before the Conseil d’État. In his submissions the public rapporteur stressed, in particular, the following:
 “... [T]he legislature did not wish to impose on those in the caring professions the burden of bridging the gap which exists between allowing death to take its course when it can no longer be prevented and actively causing death by administering a lethal substance. By discontinuing treatment, a doctor is not taking the patient’s life, but is resolving to withdraw when there is nothing more to be done.”
The Conseil d’État delivered its judgment on 24 June 2014. After granting leave to MarieGeneviève Lambert, Vincent Lambert’s half-sister, to intervene as a third party, and reiterating the relevant provisions of domestic law as commented on and elucidated in the general observations received, the Conseil d’État examined in turn the applicants’ arguments based on the Convention and on domestic law.
On the first point the Conseil d’État reiterated that, where the urgentapplications judge was called on to hear an application under Article L. 521-2 of the Administrative Courts Code (urgent application for protection of a fundamental freedom) concerning a decision taken by a doctor under the Public Health Code which would result in treatment being discontinued or withheld on the ground of unreasonable obstinacy, and implementation of that decision would cause irreversible damage to life, the judge was required to examine any claim that the provisions in question were incompatible with the Convention (see paragraph 32 above).
In the case before it the Conseil d’État replied in the following terms to the arguments based on Articles 2 and 8 of the Convention.
“Firstly, the disputed provisions of the Public Health Code defined a legal framework reaffirming the right of all persons to receive the most appropriate care, the right to respect for their wish to refuse any treatment and the right not to undergo medical treatment resulting from unreasonable obstinacy. Those provisions do not allow a doctor to take a life-threatening decision to limit or withdraw the treatment of a person incapable of expressing his or her wishes, except on the dual, strict condition that continuation of that treatment would amount to unreasonable obstinacy and that the requisite safeguards are observed, namely that account is taken of any wishes expressed by the patient and that at least one other doctor and the care team are consulted, as well as the person of trust, the family or another person close to the patient. Any such decision by a doctor is open to appeal before the courts in order to review compliance with the conditions laid down by law.
Hence the disputed provisions of the Public Health Code, taken together, in view of their purpose and the conditions attaching to their implementation, cannot be said to be incompatible with the requirements of Article 2 of the Convention ..., or with those of Article 8 ...”
The Conseil d’État also rejected the applicants’ arguments based on Articles 6 and 7 of the Convention, finding that the role entrusted to the doctor under the provisions of the Public Health Code was not incompatible with the duty of impartiality flowing from Article 6, and that Article 7, which applied to criminal convictions, was not relevant to the case before it.
Regarding the application of the relevant provisions of the Public Health Code, the Conseil d’État held as follows.
“Although artificial nutrition and hydration are among the forms of treatment which may be withdrawn in cases where their continuation would amount to unreasonable obstinacy, the sole fact that a person is in an irreversible state of unconsciousness or, a fortiori, has lost his or her autonomy irreversibly and is thus dependent on such a form of nutrition and hydration, does not by itself amount to a situation in which the continuation of treatment would appear unjustified on grounds of unreasonable obstinacy.
In assessing whether the conditions for the withdrawal of artificial nutrition and hydration are met in the case of a patient with severe brain damage, however caused, who is in a vegetative or minimally conscious state and is thus unable to express his or her wishes, and who depends on such nutrition and hydration as a means of life support, the doctor in charge of the patient must base his or her decision on a range of medical and non-medical factors whose relative weight cannot be determined in advance but will depend on the circumstances of each patient, so that the doctor must assess each situation on its own merits. In addition to the medical factors – which must cover a sufficiently long period, be assessed collectively and relate in particular to the patient’s current condition, the change in that condition since the accident or illness occurred, his or her degree of suffering and the clinical prognosis – the doctor must attach particular importance to any wishes the patient may have expressed previously, whatever their form or tenor. In that regard, where such wishes remain unknown, they cannot be assumed to consist in a refusal by the patient to be kept alive in the current conditions. The doctor must also take into account the views of the person of trust, where the patient has designated such a person, of the members of the patient’s family or, failing this, of another person close to the patient, while seeking to establish a consensus. In assessing the patient’s particular situation, the doctor must be guided primarily by a concern to act with maximum beneficence towards the patient...”
The Conseil d’État went on to find that it was its task, in the light of all the circumstances of the case and the evidence produced in the course of the adversarial proceedings before it, in particular the expert medical report, to ascertain whether the decision taken by Dr Kariger on 11 January 2014 had complied with the statutory conditions imposed on any decision to withdraw treatment whose continuation would amount to unreasonable obstinacy.
In that connection the Conseil d’État ruled as follows.
“Firstly, it is clear from the examination of the case that the collective procedure conducted by Dr Kariger ..., prior to the taking of the decision of 11 January 2014, was carried out in accordance with the requirements of Article R. 4127-37 of the Public Health Code and involved the consultation of six doctors, although that Article simply requires that the opinion of one doctor and, where appropriate, of a second be sought. Dr Kariger was not legally bound to allow the meeting of 9 December 2013 to be attended by a second doctor designated by Mr Lambert’s parents in addition to the one they had already designated. Nor does it appear from the examination of the case that some members of the care team were deliberately excluded from that meeting. Furthermore, Dr Kariger was entitled to speak with Mr François Lambert, the patient’s nephew. The fact that Dr Kariger opposed a request for him to withdraw from Mr Lambert’s case and for the patient to be transferred to another establishment, and the fact that he expressed his views publicly, do not amount, having regard to all the circumstances of the present case, to a failure to comply with the obligations implicit in the principle of impartiality, which Dr Kariger respected. Accordingly, contrary to what was argued before the Châlons-en-Champagne Administrative Court, the procedure preceding the adoption of the decision of 11 January 2014 was not tainted by any irregularity.
Secondly, the experts’ findings indicate that ‘Mr Lambert’s current clinical condition corresponds to a vegetative state’, with ‘swallowing difficulties, severe motor impairment of all four limbs, some signs of dysfunction of the brainstem’ and ‘continued ability to breathe unaided’. The results of the tests carried out from 7 to 11 April 2014 to assess the patient’s brain structure and function ... were found to be consistent with such a vegetative state. The experts found that the clinical progression, characterised by the disappearance of the fluctuations in Mr Lambert’s state of consciousness recorded during the assessment carried out in July 2011 by the Coma Science Group at Liège University Hospital and by the failure of the active therapies recommended at the time of that assessment, were suggestive of ‘a deterioration in the [patient’s] state of consciousness since that time’.
Furthermore, according to the findings set out in the experts’ report, the exploratory tests which were carried out revealed serious and extensive brain damage, as evidenced in particular by ‘severe impairment of the structure and metabolism of the sub-cortical regions of crucial importance for cognitive function’ and ‘major structural dysfunction of the communication pathways between the regions of the brain involved in consciousness’. The severity of the cerebral atrophy and of the damage observed, coupled with the five-and-a-half-year period that had elapsed since the initial accident, led the experts to conclude that the brain damage was irreversible.
Furthermore, the experts concluded that ‘the lengthy period of progression, the patient’s clinical deterioration since 2011, his current vegetative state, the destructive nature and the extent of the brain damage, the results of the functional tests and the severity of the motor impairment of all four limbs’ pointed to a ‘poor clinical prognosis’.
Lastly, while noting that Mr Lambert was capable of reacting to the care administered and to certain stimuli, the experts indicated that the characteristics of those reactions suggested that they were non-conscious responses. The experts did not consider it possible to interpret these behavioural reactions as evidence of ‘conscious awareness of suffering’ or as the expression of any intent or wish with regard to the withdrawal or continuation of the treatment keeping the patient alive.
These findings, which the experts reached unanimously following a collective assessment in the course of which the patient was examined on nine separate occasions, thorough cerebral tests were performed, meetings were held with the medical team and care staff involved and the entire file was examined, confirm the conclusions drawn by Dr Kariger as to the irreversible nature of the damage and Mr Lambert’s clinical prognosis. The exchanges which took place in the adversarial proceedings before the Conseil d’État subsequent to submission of the experts’ report do nothing to invalidate the experts’ conclusions. While it can be seen from the experts’ report, as just indicated, that Mr Lambert’s reactions to care are not capable of interpretation and thus cannot be regarded as expressing a wish as to the withdrawal of treatment, Dr Kariger in fact indicated in the impugned decision that the behaviour concerned was open to various interpretations, all of which needed to be treated with great caution, and did not include this aspect in the reasons for his decision.
Thirdly, the provisions of the Public Health Code allow account to be taken of a patient’s wishes expressed in a form other than advance directives. It is apparent from the examination of the case, and in particular from the testimony of Mrs Rachel Lambert, that she and her husband, both nurses, had often discussed their respective professional experiences in dealing with patients under resuscitation and those with multiple disabilities, and that Mr Lambert had on several such occasions clearly voiced the wish not to be kept alive artificially if he were to find himself in a highly dependent state. The tenor of those remarks, reported by Mrs Rachel Lambert in precise detail and with the corresponding dates, was confirmed by one of Mr Lambert’s brothers. While these remarks were not made in the presence of Mr Lambert’s parents, the latter did not claim that their son could not have made them or that he would have expressed wishes to the contrary, and several of Mr Lambert’s siblings stated that the remarks concerned were in keeping with their brother’s personality, past experience and personal opinions. Accordingly, in stating among the reasons for the decision at issue his certainty that Mr Lambert did not wish, before his accident, to live under such conditions, Dr Kariger cannot be regarded as having incorrectly interpreted the wishes expressed by the patient before his accident.
Fourthly, the doctor in charge of the patient is required, under the provisions of the Public Health Code, to obtain the views of the patient’s family before taking any decision to withdraw treatment. Dr Kariger complied with this requirement in consulting Mr Lambert’s wife, parents and siblings in the course of the two meetings referred to earlier. While Mr Lambert’s parents and some of his brothers and sisters opposed the discontinuing of treatment, Mr Lambert’s wife and his other siblings stated their support for the proposal to withdraw treatment. Dr Kariger took these different opinions into account. In the circumstances of the case, he concluded that the fact that the members of the family were not unanimous as to what decision should be taken did not constitute an impediment to his decision.
It follows from all the above considerations that the various conditions imposed by the law before any decision can be taken by the doctor in charge of the patient to withdraw treatment which has no effect other than to sustain life artificially, and whose continuation would thus amount to unreasonable obstinacy, may be regarded, in the case of Mr Vincent Lambert and in the light of the adversarial proceedings before the Conseil d’État, as having been met. Accordingly, the decision taken by Dr Kariger on 11 January 2014 to withdraw the artificial nutrition and hydration of Mr Vincent Lambert cannot be held to be unlawful.”
Accordingly, the Conseil d’État set aside the Administrative Court’s judgment and dismissed the applicants’ claims.
Under Article L. 11101 of the Public Health Code (“the Code”), all available means must be used to secure to each individual the fundamental right to protection of health. Article L. 11102 of the Code provides that the patient has the right to respect for his or her dignity, while Article L. 11109 guarantees to everyone whose condition requires it the right to palliative care. This is defined in Article L. 111010 as active and ongoing care intended to relieve pain, ease psychological suffering, preserve the patient’s dignity and support those close to him or her.
The Law of 22 April 2005 on patients’ rights and endoflife issues, known as the “Leonetti Act” after its rapporteur, Mr Jean Leonetti (see paragraph 44 above), amended a number of Articles of the Code.
The Act was passed following the work of a parliamentary commission chaired by Mr Leonetti and tasked with exploring the full range of endoflife issues and considering possible legislative or regulatory amendments. In the course of its work the parliamentary commission heard evidence from a great many individuals. It submitted its report on 30 June 2004. The Act was passed unanimously by the National Assembly on 30 November 2004 and by the Senate on 12 April 2005.
The Act does not authorise either euthanasia or assisted suicide. It allows doctors, in accordance with a prescribed procedure, to discontinue treatment only if continuing it would demonstrate unreasonable obstinacy (in other words, if it would mean taking it to unreasonable lengths (acharnement thérapeutique)).
The relevant Articles of the Code, as amended by the Act, read as follows.
“Every individual, regard being had to his or her state of health and the urgency of the treatment required, shall be entitled to receive the most appropriate care and to be given the safest treatment known to medical science at the time to be effective. Preventive or exploratory acts or care must not, as far as medical science can guarantee, subject the patient to disproportionate risks in relation to the anticipated benefits.
Such acts must not be continued with unreasonable obstinacy. Where they appear to be futile or disproportionate or to have no other effect than to sustain life artificially, they may be discontinued or withheld. In such cases, the doctor shall preserve the dignity of the dying patient and ensure his or her quality of life by dispensing the care referred to in Article L. 1110-10 ...
Everyone shall be entitled to receive care intended to relieve pain. That pain must in all cases be prevented, assessed, taken into account and treated.
Health-care professionals shall take all the measures available to them to allow each individual to live a life of dignity until his or her death ...”
“Each individual shall, together with the health-care professional and in the light of the information provided and the recommendations made by the latter, take the decisions concerning his or her own health.
The doctor must respect the individual’s wishes after informing him or her of the consequences of the choices made ...
No medical act or treatment may be administered without the free and informed consent of the patient, which may be withdrawn at any time.
Where the individual is unable to express his or her wishes, no intervention or examination may be carried out, except in cases of urgency or impossibility, without the person of trust referred to in Article L. 1111-6, the family or, failing this, a person close to the patient having been consulted.
Where the individual is unable to express his or her wishes, no decision to limit or withdraw treatment, where such a measure would endanger the patient’s life, may be taken without the collective procedure defined in the Code of Medical Ethics having been followed and without the person of trust referred to in Article L. 1111-6, the family or, failing this, a person close to the patient having been consulted, and without any advance directives issued by the patient having been examined. The decision to limit or withdraw treatment, together with the reasons for it, shall be recorded in the patient’s file ...”
“All adults may designate a person of trust, who may be a relative, another person close to the adult, or his or her usual doctor, and who will be consulted in the event that the patient is unable to express his or her wishes and to receive the necessary information for that purpose. The designation shall be made in writing and may be revoked at any time. Should the patient so wish, the person of trust may provide support and attend medical consultations with the patient in order to assist him or her in making decisions.
Whenever he or she is admitted to a health-care establishment, the patient shall be offered the possibility of designating a person of trust in the conditions laid down in the preceding paragraph. The designation shall be valid for the duration of the patient’s hospitalisation, unless he or she decides otherwise ...”
“All adults may draw up advance directives in case they should become unable to express their wishes. These shall indicate the wishes of the individual concerned as regards the conditions in which treatment may be limited or withdrawn in an endoflife situation. They may be revoked at any time.
Provided they were drawn up less than three years before the individual became unconscious, the doctor shall take them into account in any decision to carry out examinations, interventions or treatment in respect of the person concerned ...”
The collective procedure provided for in the fifth paragraph of Article L. 11114 of the Code is described in detail in Article R. 412737, which forms part of the Code of Medical Ethics and reads as follows:
“I.  The doctor shall at all times endeavour to alleviate suffering by the means most appropriate to the patient’s condition, and provide moral support. He or she shall refrain from any unreasonable obstinacy in carrying out examinations or treatment and may decide to withhold or discontinue treatment which appears futile or disproportionate or the only purpose or effect of which is to sustain life artificially.
In the cases contemplated in the fifth paragraph of Article L. 1111-4 and the first paragraph of Article L. 1111-13, the decision to limit or withdraw the treatment administered may not be taken unless a collective procedure has first been implemented. The doctor may set the collective procedure in motion on his or her own initiative. He or she shall be required to do so in the light of any advance directives given by the patient and submitted by one of the persons in possession of them mentioned in Article R. 1111-19, or at the request of the person of trust, the family or, failing this, another person close to the patient. The persons in possession of the patient’s advance directives, the person of trust, the family or, where appropriate, another person close to the patient shall be informed as soon as the decision has been taken to implement the collective procedure.
The decision to limit or withdraw treatment shall be taken by the doctor in charge of the patient, after consultation with the care team where this exists, and on the basis of the reasoned opinion of at least one doctor acting as a consultant. There must be no hierarchical link between the doctor in charge of the patient and the consultant. The reasoned opinion of a second consultant shall be sought by these doctors if either of them considers it necessary.
The decision to limit or withdraw treatment shall take into account any wishes previously expressed by the patient, in particular in the form of advance directives, if drawn up, the views of the person of trust the patient may have designated and those of the family or, failing this, of another person close to the patient. ...
Reasons shall be given for any decision to limit or withdraw treatment. The opinions received, the nature and tenor of the consultations held within the care team and the reasons for the decision shall be recorded in the patient’s file. The person of trust, if one has been designated, the family or, failing this, another person close to the patient, shall be informed of the nature of and the reasons for the decision to limit or withdraw treatment.
Where it has been decided to limit or withdraw treatment under Article L. 11105 and Article L. 1111-4 or L. 1111-13, in the circumstances provided for in points I and II of the present Article, the doctor, even if the patient’s suffering cannot be assessed on account of his or her cerebral state, shall put in place the necessary treatment, in particular pain relief and sedation, to support the patient in accordance with the principles and conditions laid down in Article R. 4127-38. He or she shall also ensure that the persons close to the patient are informed of the situation and receive the support they require.”
Article R. 4127-38 of the Code provides:
“The doctor must support the dying person until the moment of death, ensure, through appropriate treatment and measures, the quality of life as it nears its end, preserve the patient’s dignity, and comfort those close to him or her.
Doctors do not have the right to take life intentionally.”
Two members of Parliament (Mr Leonetti and Mr Claeys) tabled a bill before the National Assembly on 21 January 2015 proposing in particular the following amendments to the Law of 22 April 2005:
–  section 2 of the bill specifies that artificial nutrition and hydration constitute a form of treatment;
–  advance directives are to be binding on the doctor and there will no longer be a time-limit on their validity (they are currently valid for three years), their drafting will be subject to a prescribed procedure and they will be more accessible. Where there are no advance directives, the role of the person of trust is spelled out (the latter’s task is to express the patient’s wishes, and his or her testimony takes precedence over any other);
–  the bill expressly acknowledges that every individual has “the right to refuse or not to undergo any treatment” and that the doctor cannot insist on continuing with it (previous wording). Nevertheless, the doctor must continue to provide support to the patient, particularly in the form of palliative care;
–  the right not to suffer is recognised (the doctor must put in place all available pain relief and sedation to deal with suffering in the advanced or terminal stages, even if these may have the effect of shortening the time left to live);
–  the right of patients in the terminal stages to deep, continuous sedation until death is also recognised: the withdrawal of treatment (including artificial nutrition and hydration) must always be accompanied by sedation. Where the patient is incapable of expressing his or her wishes the bill provides – subject to account being taken of the patient’s wishes and in accordance with a collective procedure – that the doctor is required to discontinue or withhold treatment which “has no other effect than to sustain life artificially” (in the current wording, the doctor may discontinue such treatment). If these criteria are met, the patient has the right to deep, continuous sedation until death occurs.
The bill was adopted on 17 March 2015 by the National Assembly and is currently being examined in the Senate.
Article L. 5212 of the Administrative Courts Code, concerning urgent applications for protection of a fundamental freedom, reads as follows:
“Where such an application is submitted to him or her as an urgent matter, the urgent-applications judge may order whatever measures are necessary to protect a fundamental freedom which has allegedly been breached in a serious and manifestly unlawful manner by a public-law entity or an organisation governed by private law responsible for managing a public service, in the exercise of their powers. The urgentapplications judge shall rule within forty-eight hours.”
Article R. 6253 of the same Code provides:
“The bench examining the case may call on any person whose expertise or knowledge might usefully inform its determination of the case to submit general observations on the points in issue.
The opinion shall be submitted in writing. It shall be communicated to the parties ...”
The Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine (known as the Oviedo Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine), which was adopted in 1997 and entered into force on 1 December 1999, has been ratified by twentynine of the Council of Europe member States. Its relevant provisions read as follows:
“Parties to this Convention shall protect the dignity and identity of all human beings and guarantee everyone, without discrimination, respect for their integrity and other rights and fundamental freedoms with regard to the application of biology and medicine. ...”
“An intervention in the health field may only be carried out after the person concerned has given free and informed consent to it.
This person shall beforehand be given appropriate information as to the purpose and nature of the intervention as well as on its consequences and risks.
The person concerned may freely withdraw consent at any time.”
“1.  Subject to Articles 17 and 20 below, an intervention may only be carried out on a person who does not have the capacity to consent, for his or her direct benefit.
...
Where, according to law, an adult does not have the capacity to consent to an intervention because of a mental disability, a disease or for similar reasons, the intervention may only be carried out with the authorisation of his or her representative or an authority or a person or body provided for by law.
The individual concerned shall as far as possible take part in the authorisation procedure.
The representative, the authority, the person or the body mentioned in paragraphs 2 and 3 above shall be given, under the same conditions, the information referred to in Article 5.
The authorisation referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 above may be withdrawn at any time in the best interests of the person concerned.”
“The previously expressed wishes relating to a medical intervention by a patient who is not, at the time of the intervention, in a state to express his or her wishes shall be taken into account.”
This Guide was drawn up by the Committee on Bioethics of the Council of Europe in the course of its work on patients’ rights and with the intention of facilitating the implementation of the principles enshrined in the Oviedo Convention.
Its aims are to propose reference points for the implementation of the decision-making process regarding medical treatment in end-of-life situations, to bring together both normative and ethical reference works and elements relating to good medical practice which may be useful to health-care professionals dealing with the implementation of the decisionmaking process, and to contribute, through the clarification it provides, to the overall discussion on the subject.
The Guide cites as the ethical and legal frames of reference for the decision-making process the principles of autonomy (free, informed and prior consent of the patient), beneficence and non-maleficence, and justice (equitable access to health care). It specifies that doctors must not dispense treatment which is needless or disproportionate in view of the risks and constraints it entails. They must provide patients with treatment that is proportionate and suited to their situation. They also have a duty to take care of their patients, ease their suffering and provide them with support.
Treatment covers interventions which aim to improve a patient’s state of health by acting on the causes of the illness, but also interventions which have no bearing on the aetiology of the illness but act on the symptoms, or which are responses to an organ dysfunction. Under the heading “Disputed issues”, the Guide states as follows.
“The question of limiting, withdrawing or withholding artificial hydration and nutrition
Food and drink given to patients who are still able to eat and drink themselves are external contributions meeting physiological needs, which should always be satisfied. They are essential elements of care which should be provided unless the patient refuses them.
Artificial nutrition and hydration are given to a patient following a medical indication and imply choices concerning medical procedures and devices (perfusion, feeding tubes).
Artificial nutrition and hydration are regarded in a number of countries as forms of treatment, which may therefore be limited or withdrawn in the circumstances and in accordance with the guarantees stipulated for limitation or withdrawal of treatment (refusal of treatment expressed by the patient, refusal of unreasonable obstinacy or disproportionate treatment assessed by the care team and accepted in the framework of a collective procedure). The considerations to be taken into account in this regard are the wishes of the patient and the appropriate nature of the treatment in the situation in question.
In other countries, however, it is considered that artificial nutrition and hydration do not constitute treatment which can be limited or withdrawn, but a form of care meeting the individual’s basic needs, which cannot be withdrawn unless the patient, in the terminal phase of an end-of-life situation, has expressed a wish to that effect.
The question of the appropriate nature, in medical terms, of artificial nutrition and hydration in the terminal phase is itself a matter of debate. Some take the view that implementing or continuing artificial hydration and nutrition are necessary for the comfort of a patient in an end-of-life situation. For others, the benefit of artificial hydration and nutrition for the patient in the terminal phase, taking into account research in palliative care, is questionable.”
The Guide concerns the decision-making process regarding medical treatment as it applies to endoflife situations (including its implementation, modification, adaptation, limitation or withdrawal). It does not address the issues of euthanasia or assisted suicide, which some national legislations authorise.
While other parties are involved in the decision-making process, the Guide stresses that the principal party is the patient himself or herself. When the patient cannot or can no longer take part in making decisions, they will be taken by a third party according to the procedures laid down in the relevant national legislation. However, the patient should nonetheless be involved in the decision-making process by means of any previously expressed wishes. The Guide lists the various forms these may take: the patient may have confided his or her intentions orally to a family member, a close friend or a person of trust designated as such; or they may be set down formally, in advance directives or a living will or as powers granted to another person, sometimes referred to as powers of future protection (mandat de protection future).
Other persons involved in the decision-making process may include the patient’s legal representative or a person granted a power of attorney, family members and close friends, and the carers. The Guide stresses that doctors have a vital, not to say primary, role because of their ability to appraise the patient’s situation from a medical viewpoint. Where patients are not, or are no longer, able to express their wishes, doctors are the people who, in the context of the collective decision-making process, having involved all the health-care professionals concerned, will take the clinical decision guided by the best interests of the patient. To this end, they will have taken note of all the relevant elements (consultation of family members, close friends, the person of trust, and so on) and taken into account any previously expressed wishes. In some systems the decision is taken by a third party, but in all cases doctors are the ones to ensure that the decision-making process is properly conducted.
The Guide reiterates that the patient should always be at the centre of any decision-making process, which takes on a collective dimension when the patient is no longer willing or able to participate in it directly. The Guide identifies three main stages in the decision-making process: an individual stage (each party forms his or her arguments on the basis of the information gathered), a collective stage (the various parties take part in exchanges and discussions) and a concluding stage (when the actual decision is taken).
The Guide points out that sometimes, where positions diverge significantly or the question is highly complex or specific, there may be a need to make provision to consult third parties either to contribute to the debate, to overcome a problem or to resolve a conflict. The consultation of a clinical ethics committee may, for example, be appropriate. At the end of the collective discussion, agreement must be reached. A conclusion must be drawn and validated collectively and then formalised in writing.
If the decision is taken by the doctor, it should be taken on the basis of the conclusions of the collective discussion and be announced, as appropriate, to the patient, the person of trust and/or the entourage of the patient, the care team and the third parties concerned who have taken part in the process. The decision should also be formalised (in the form of a written summary of the reasons) and kept in an identified place.
The Guide highlights the disputed nature of the use of deep sedation in the terminal phase, which may have the effect of shortening the time left to live. Lastly, it suggests an evaluation of the decision-making process after its application.
In Recommendation CM/Rec(2009)11 on principles concerning continuing powers of attorney and advance directives for incapacity, the Committee of Ministers recommended to member States that they promote these practices, and defined a number of principles to assist member States in regulating them.
In Recommendation 1418 (1999) on protection of the human rights and dignity of the terminally ill and the dying, the Parliamentary Assembly recommended to the Committee of Ministers that it encourage the member States to respect and protect the dignity of terminally ill or dying persons in all respects, including their right to self-determination, while taking the necessary measures:
(i)  to ensure that patients’ advance directives or living wills refusing specific medical treatments are observed, where the patients are no longer able to express their wishes;
(ii)  to ensure that  notwithstanding the physician’s ultimate therapeutic responsibility  the wishes they have expressed with regard to particular forms of treatment are taken into account, provided this does not violate their human dignity.
Parliamentary Assembly Resolution 1859 (2012) entitled “Protecting human rights and dignity by taking into account previously expressed wishes of patients” reiterates the principles of personal autonomy and consent enshrined in the Oviedo Convention (see paragraph 59 above), according to which no one can be compelled to undergo any medical treatment against his or her will. The Resolution lays down guidelines for national parliaments in relation to advance directives, living wills and continuing powers of attorney.
According to the information available to the Court concerning thirty-nine of the forty-seven Council of Europe member States, no consensus exists in practice in favour of authorising the withdrawal of treatment designed only to prolong life artificially. In the majority of countries, treatment may be withdrawn subject to certain conditions. In other countries the legislation prohibits withdrawal or is silent on the subject.
In those countries which permit it, this possibility is provided for either in legislation or in non-binding instruments, most often in a code of medical ethics. In Italy, in the absence of a legal framework, the withdrawal of treatment has been recognised in the courts’ case-law.
Although the detailed arrangements for the withdrawal of treatment vary from one country to another, there is consensus as to the paramount importance of the patient’s wishes in the decision-making process. As the principle of consent to medical care is one of the aspects of the right to respect for private life, States have put in place different procedures to ensure that consent is expressed or to verify its existence.
All the legislation allowing treatment to be withdrawn makes provision for patients to issue advance directives. In the absence of such directives, the decision lies with a third party, whether it be the doctor treating the patient, persons close to the patient or his or her legal representative, or even the courts. In all cases, the involvement of those close to the patient is possible, although the legislation does not choose between them in the event of disagreement. However, some countries operate a hierarchy among persons close to the patient and give priority to the spouse’s wishes.
In addition to the requirement to seek the patient’s consent, the withdrawal of treatment is also subject to other conditions. Depending on the country, the patient must be dying or be suffering from a condition with serious and irreversible medical consequences, the treatment must no longer be in the patient’s best interests, it must be futile, or withdrawal must be preceded by an observation phase of sufficient duration and by a review of the patient’s condition.
The Human Rights Clinic, third-party intervener (see paragraph 8 above), presented an overview of national legislation and practice concerning active and passive euthanasia and assisted suicide in Europe and America.
The survey concludes that no consensus currently exists among the member States of the Council of Europe, or in the other countries surveyed, regarding the authorisation of assisted suicide or euthanasia.
However, there is consensus on the need for passive euthanasia to be tightly regulated in those countries which permit it. In that connection each country lays down criteria in its legislation for determining the point at which euthanasia may be performed, in the light of the patient’s condition and in order to make sure that he or she has consented to the measure. Nevertheless, these criteria vary appreciably from one country to another.