The case originated in an application (no. 1231/11) against the Kingdom of Sweden lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Iraqi national (“the applicant”) on 28 November 2010. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms  R. Fardnicklasson, a lawyer practising in Gothenburg. The Swedish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms G. Isaksson, of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that his deportation to Iraq would involve a violation of Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention.
On 10 February 2011 the President of the Section decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Government that the applicant should not be deported to Iraq until further notice.
On 8 November 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant, who was born in 1985, is a Sunni Muslim from Mosul.
The applicant arrived in Sweden on 21 December 2007 and applied for asylum the same day. He stated in essence the following in support of his application. Following the fall of the Saddam Hussein regime, he had served in the new Iraqi army, which he had joined in October 2003 and which had involved work with the American troops. As a consequence of his military service, he claimed that he had been subjected to threats and ill-treatment. At the end of 2004, terrorists had thrown a grenade at him and his colleagues and he had injured his foot. In March 2006, when his unit had guarded a recruitment session at a military base, two suicide bombers had detonated bombs that killed 25 Iraqi soldiers and 5 Americans. One of the bombs had detonated close to the applicant and he had been severely injured. He had been hospitalised for approximately two and a half months. He had ended his military service in March 2006, after this incident. Upon release from hospital he had moved to Mosul to live with his family for one year. In June 2007, while he had been with his sister in the front yard, a car had approached them and opened fire on them. His sister had been hit by four shots and had become paralysed. The applicant himself had been hit once in the shooting and had again been taken to hospital for care. While still in hospital, he had been told by his brother that a letter had been left for him at his house containing death threats against him. When he had left the hospital, he had gone into hiding for five months at a friend’s house in Mosul before leaving Iraq. The applicant also referred to the injuries he had sustained and submitted photographs and extracts from medical journals.
On 12 March 2009 the Migration Board (Migrationsverket) rejected the application and ordered the applicant’s deportation to Iraq. The Board first accepted that the documentation supplied by the applicant showed that he had served in the Iraqi army and that he had been shot at and had, as a consequence, sustained serious injuries. It went on to note that the incidents in late 2004 and March 2006 had been connected to the applicant’s military service and had not been directed at him personally. He had not received any personal threats or been subjected to ill-treatment while serving in the army or during a period of 15 months after he had left the army. Having regard to this 15-month period without incidents and noting that the applicant did not know who had shot at him and his sister or the reason for the June 2007 attack, the Board considered that the shooting was connected to the difficult security situation at the time rather than the applicant’s previous military service. Further, the applicant had remained in Mosul for five months after the threatening letter had been received without anything happening to him. Moreover, the applicant had been in contact with his family since he had left Iraq and had been informed that they had not been subjected to threats or ill-treatment after his departure. Nor was there any indication that the applicant was being searched for in Iraq. In conclusion, he had failed to make plausible that he would be at risk of persecution or ill-treatment if he were to return to Iraq. Furthermore, his state of health was not such that it gave reason to grant him a residence permit, as a return to Iraq was not deemed to cause any danger to his life or health.
The applicant appealed, stating that he was convinced that he would be killed if returned to Iraq. He further claimed that he had injuries which required medical treatment unavailable in his country of origin. He had infections and low blood circulation in his legs. Further, because of his injuries and the other circumstances invoked, he was in a very bad mental state. He submitted a medical certificate issued by M. Eves, chief physician at Lindesberg Hospital, according to which he had been injured many years before in his home country, had a remaining handicap with recurring numbness and ulcerations in his foot and received treatment for infections. He also had large scars on his left leg after substantial soft tissue injuries.
On 9 February 2009 the Migration Court (Migrationsdomstolen) upheld the decision of the Board, agreeing generally with its conclusions. In regard to the applicant’s state of health, the court found that it was not sufficient for the grant of a residence permit. It noted that he had been injured several years before and that he had received treatment for his injuries in Iraq.
In March 2010 the applicant left Sweden and applied for asylum in Germany. He was transferred back to Sweden in April 2010, in accordance with the provisions of the Dublin Regulation.
On 22 April 2010 the Migration Court of Appeal (Migrations-överdomstolen) refused the applicant leave to appeal.
Subsequently, the applicant claimed that there were impediments to the enforcement of his deportation order, reiterating the claims he had made previously. He submitted another medical certificate dated 6 August 2010, issued by M. Eves. It stated that the applicant was under treatment for injuries to his left leg. The injuries did not require urgent treatment, but there was a need of future care.
On 1 October 2010 the Migration Board rejected the petition, finding that no new circumstances justifying a reconsideration had been presented. It does not appear that any appeal was made against this decision.
The basic provisions applicable in the present case, concerning the right of aliens to enter and to remain in Sweden, are laid down in the Aliens Act (Utlänningslagen, 2005:716).
An alien who is considered to be a refugee or otherwise in need of protection is, with certain exceptions, entitled to a residence permit in Sweden (Chapter 5, section 1 of the Act). The term “refugee” refers to an alien who is outside the country of his or her nationality owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted on grounds of race, nationality, religious or political beliefs, or on grounds of gender, sexual orientation or other membership of a particular social group and who is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country (Chapter 4, section 1). This applies irrespective of whether the persecution is at the hands of the authorities of the country or if those authorities cannot be expected to offer protection against persecution by private individuals. By “an alien otherwise in need of protection” is meant, inter alia, a person who has left the country of his or her nationality because of a well-founded fear of being sentenced to death or receiving corporal punishment, or of being subjected to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Chapter 4, section 2).
Moreover, if a residence permit cannot be granted on the above grounds, such a permit may be issued to an alien if, after an overall assessment of his or her situation, there are such particularly distressing circumstances (synnerligen ömmande omständigheter) to allow him or her to remain in Sweden (Chapter 5, section 6). Special consideration should be given, inter alia, to the alien’s health status. According to the preparatory works (Government Bill 2004/05:170, pp. 190-191), life-threatening physical or mental illness for which no treatment can be given in the alien’s home country could constitute a reason for the grant of a residence permit.
As regards the enforcement of a deportation or expulsion order, account has to be taken of the risk of capital punishment or torture and other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. According to a special provision on impediments to enforcement, an alien must not be sent to a country where there are reasonable grounds for believing that he or she would be in danger of suffering capital or corporal punishment or of being subjected to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Chapter 12, section 1). In addition, an alien must not, in principle, be sent to a country where he or she risks persecution (Chapter 12, section 2).
Under certain conditions, an alien may be granted a residence permit even if a deportation or expulsion order has acquired legal force. This is the case where new circumstances have emerged which indicate that there are reasonable grounds for believing, inter alia, that an enforcement would put the alien in danger of being subjected to capital or corporal punishment, torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or there are medical or other special reasons why the order should not be enforced (Chapter 12, section 18). If a residence permit cannot be granted under these criteria, the Migration Board may instead decide to re-examine the matter. Such a re-examination shall be carried out where it may be assumed, on the basis of new circumstances invoked by the alien, that there are lasting impediments to enforcement of the nature referred to in Chapter 12, sections 1 and 2, and these circumstances could not have been invoked previously or the alien shows that he or she has a valid excuse for not having done so. Should the applicable conditions not have been met, the Migration Board shall decide not to grant a re-examination (Chapter 12, section 19).
Matters concerning the right of aliens to enter and remain in Sweden are dealt with by three instances: the Migration Board, the Migration Court and the Migration Court of Appeal.
On 31 May 2012 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) issued the latest Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Iraq (hereafter “the UNHCR Guidelines”). They contain the following account (at p. 8):
“[A]rmed groups opposed to the Iraqi Government remain active and capable of disrupting the security environment with regular mass casualty attacks, often directed at Shi’ite civilians, reportedly aiming to reinvigorate sectarian violence. Armed groups are also thought to be responsible for targeted attacks on government and security officials, politicians, tribal and religious leaders, and members of religious and ethnic minorities, among others. Occasionally, local cells manage to coordinate attacks across the country. The number of civilian casualties, though less than at the peak of violence in 2006 and 2007, remains nonetheless significant with around 4,000 civilians killed in both 2010 and 2011, respectively. At least 464 civilians were killed in January 2012, in what appeared to be a surge in mass casualty attacks. Shi’ite civilians have been the most affected. After a short lull in violence, several major attacks across central Iraq were again reported in late February, March and April 2012.
These casualty figures are indicative of the significant risks still faced by Iraqi civilians. The number of civilian deaths from suicide attacks and car bombs decreased in 2011 compared to previous years, to an average of 6.6 per day. While these attacks still account for the highest number of civilian deaths each month, the number of civilians killed from gunfire/executions rose to an average of 4.6 per day in 2011. This suggests that an increasing number of Iraqis, especially government and security officials, are being individually targeted. Violence is mostly concentrated in the predominantly Sunni or mixed central governorates of Al-Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Ninewa, Kirkuk, and Salah Al-Din, but occasionally moves into the mainly Shi’ite governorates further south. Armed Sunni groups such as Al-Qa’eda in Iraq and Ansar Al-Islam are thought to be responsible for most of the violence. Shi’ite armed groups have to a large extent been integrated into the ISF [Iraqi security forces] and the political process, though they reportedly maintain their independent military capabilities and at times threaten to use it to further their political agendas. Armed groups target civilians on the basis of their (imputed) political views, religion, ethnicity, social status or a combination of reasons. As a result of the weak law enforcement and justice system, persons at risk of persecution are reportedly unable to find protection or judicial redress. Observers mention undue political influence, the lack of trained legal professionals and corruption as further obstacles to the administration of justice, including in the Kurdistan Region. Legal professionals continue to work in a very difficult security environment, and remain a target of armed groups. Crime is widespread and some armed groups reportedly engage in extortion, kidnappings and armed robberies to fund their other, politically – or religiously, or ideologically – motivated activities, conflating acts of persecution and criminality. Consequently, the line between persecution and criminality appears to be increasingly blurred.”
In its Report on Human Rights in Iraq: July – December 2012, published in June 2013, the Human Rights Office of the United Nations Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) gave, inter alia, the following summary (at p. vii):
“Violence and armed violence continued to take their toll on civilians in Iraq. According to the Government of Iraq, 1,704 civilians were killed and 6,651 were injured in the second half of 2012, resulting in a total of 3,102 killed and 12,146 injured for 2012. According to UNAMI, 1,892 civilians were killed and 6,719 were injured in the last six months of 2012, resulting in a total of at least 3,238 civilians who were killed and 10,379 who were injured for the year. These figures indicate that the trend of recent years of a reduction in the numbers of civilian casualties has reversed and that the impact of violence on civilians looks set to increase in the near to medium future. Terrorists and armed groups continued to favour asymmetric tactics that deliberately target civilians or were carried out heedless of the impact on civilians.
Political instability and regional developments continued to impact negatively on the security situation in Iraq, with its concomitant toll on civilians. Although the Government takes the impact of violence on civilians extremely seriously and has taken measures to enhance security, more needs to be done to ensure the proper coordination of financial, medical and other forms of support for the victims of violence.”
The UK Border Agency Iraq Operational Guidance Note of December 2012 describes the general security situation thus (at pp. 21-22):
“3.6.2  The security situation in Iraq continues to affect the civilian population, who face ongoing acts of violence perpetrated by armed opposition groups and criminal gangs. In particular, armed groups continue to employ tactics that deliberately target crowded public areas and kill and maim civilians indiscriminately. While some attacks appear to be sectarian in nature, frequently targeting religious gatherings or residential areas, others seem random, aimed at creating fear and terror in the population at large and casting doubt over the ability of the Government and Iraqi security forces to stem the violence. Assassinations also persist across the country, targeting, inter alia, Government employees, tribal and community leaders, members of the judiciary and associated persons.
6.3  Apparently making use of the political wrangling which has followed the elections for Iraq’s Council of Representatives (CoR) held on 7 March 2010, armed Sunni groups (such as Al-Qaeda in Iraq) have stepped up attacks since December 2011. These attacks have been carried out primarily against Shi’ite civilians in what appears to be an effort to stir sectarian tensions and undermine confidence in the ISF and, ultimately, the Iraqi Government. The political stalemate also comes at an uncertain period in the wider region: the repercussions of ongoing unrest and tensions in Syria and Iran, with which Iraq shares porous borders and political and economic ties, are not yet known. Iraq’s political difficulties have also reportedly increased tensions with neighbouring Turkey.”
In a country guidance determination, HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC), delivered on 13 November 2012, the UK Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) reached, inter alia, the following conclusions (at p. 2):
“ii. As regards the current situation, the evidence does not establish that the degree of indiscriminate violence characterising the current armed conflict taking place in the five central governorates in Iraq, namely Baghdad, Diyala, Tameen (Kirkuk), Ninewah, Salah Al-Din, is at such a high level that substantial grounds have been shown for believing that any civilian returned there would solely on account of his presence there face a real risk of being subject to that threat.
Nor does the evidence establish that there is a real risk of serious harm under Article 15(c) [of the Refugee Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC] for civilians who are Sunni or Shi’a or Kurds or have former Ba’ath Party connections: these characteristics do not in themselves amount to “enhanced risk categories” under Article 15(c)’s “sliding scale” ...”
The UNHCR Guidelines contain the following account in regard to former members of the Iraqi security forces (ISF) (at p. 15):
“... [I]n 2010 and 2011 armed groups increased attacks against the ISF in an apparent effort to destabilize the country and undermine confidence in the ability of the Iraqi Government to provide security. Iraqi soldiers and policemen are killed on a daily basis. This trend is expected to continue following the USF-I [United States Forces in Iraq]’s withdrawal from Iraq in December 2011. Members of the Iraqi Police are often particularly targeted: they do not have heavy weapons and equipment and receive less training than the Iraqi Army, and are accordly reportedly considered the weakest element of the ISF. In 2011, according to Iraqi Government statistics, about 40 per cent of Iraqis killed were ISF members, including 609 Iraqi police and 458 soldiers.
ISF patrols, convoys, checkpoints, army bases and police stations are subject to daily attacks, mainly by roadside bombs and gunfire. Checkpoints are also regularly attacked by sniper fire. The ISF are frequently targeted in larger attacks involving car bombs or suicide bombers, including in multiple coordinated attacks across the country. Major attacks against the ISF in 2011 and 2012, some of them claimed by Al-Qa’eda in Iraq (ISI/AQI), were carried out in Al-Anbar, Babel, Baghdad, Basrah, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewa and Salah Al-Din Governorates.
In addition, targeted killings of ISF personnel have been increasing since late 2010. While most attacks occur in the cities of Baghdad and Kirkuk, senior ISF officials have also regularly been targeted in the central governorates of Al-Anbar, Diyala, Ninewa and Salah Al-Din. In southern Iraq, targeted attacks on senior ISF officials are less frequent. Most assassinations are reportedly carried out through the use of weapons with silencers or “sticky bombs” attached to vehicles. The victims have likely been monitored in advance of an attack. According to Iraqi officials, senior ISF members of Sunni background have been particularly singled out for assassinations. Both Sunni and Shi’ite armed groups are thought to be responsible for the targeting of senior ISF officials. Iraqi officials suggested that Shi’ite groups strengthened their campaign against those of Sunni background due to fears that they could lead a military coup against the Government after the USF-I’s withdrawal from Iraq. According to Ministry of Defense officials, “hit lists” have been issued by armed Shi’ite groups and published on websites, and some officers have received threatening phone calls. Acknowledging the increased risks, the Ministry of Interior introduced measures to help officials avoid assassination – even though, according to experts, “there are few preventive measures against the use of such economical and low-profile tactics” as sniper fire or sticky bombs.
Members of the ISF are also reportedly singled out for assassination when off-duty, including in their homes, sometimes in apparently coordinated multiple attacks. Attacks on off-duty ISF members, as reported by the media, occur mainly in Ninewa and Kirkuk Governorates, but also in Al-Anbar, Babel, Baghdad, Diyala and Salah Al-Din Governorates. Because members of the ISF, regardless of rank, are often attcked in their private environment, e.g. their homes or private vehicles, their family members, guards and drivers as well as civilian passers-by are also at risk of being killed or wounded.”