The case originated in an application (no. 12986/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Stoja Trivkanović (“the applicant”), on 21 January 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr L. Šušak, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged that the procedural obligations incumbent on the respondent Government under Article 2 of the Convention had not been met.
On 18 September 2013 the complaints concerning the procedural aspect of Articles 2 and 14 of the Convention were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Sisak.
The applicant was married to N.T. and they had two sons, Z.T. and B.T. In 1985 the applicant and N.T. divorced.
On 25 August 1991 a number of members of the “Wolves” (Vukovi) unit of the Sisak police entered the house of the applicant’s son Z.T., They abducted Z.T., the applicant’s second son B.T. and her former husband N.T. On 26 August 1991 the body of N.T. was found in the River Sava and the autopsy showed that he had been shot and killed. Z.T. and B.T. disappeared. On 2 September 1991 the Sisak police lodged a criminal complaint with the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office in connection with the killing of N.T. Police enquiries were started by the Sisak police, under the command of Ɖ.B. and his deputy V.M. (see paragraph 31 below).
.  On 9 September 1991 the applicant contacted the Ministry of the Interior and informed them that her former husband and two sons had disappeared.
.  The commander of the Wolves unit was J.G., who died in a road accident in 1992.
.  On 14 June 1993 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the State Attorney’s Office
.  On an unspecified date broader police enquiries were opened into the killing of individuals of Serb ethnicity in the Sisak area during the war. The enquiries into the killing of N.T. and disappearance of the applicant’s sons were part of these overall enquiries.
.  Before 5 November 1997, when Croatia ratified the Convention, the police interviewed the applicant as well as potential witnesses D.F.T., M.T., Ž.B., D.M. and J.J. None of them had any concrete knowledge about the potential perpetrators.
.  On 15 October 2002 an investigating judge of the Sisak County Court heard evidence from Z.G., a former Croatian soldier who firstly denied knowing anything about the fate of the applicant’s sons and former husband but later on, through tears and saying that he was scared, said that he had seen all three of them in ORA, a military base near Sisak. Z.T. and B.T. had been visibly beaten.
.  In October and November 2002, January and February 2003 the police interviewed a number of former Croatian soldiers as witnesses, some of whom (Z.K., M.D., S.Š., S.K., Ž.R., M.B., I.A., M.P., A.D., S.G., D.M.S.K.I.Š., I.K., M.G., M.R., D.V. as well as two anonymous individuals) had given statements about the arrest of individuals during the war in the Sisak area and their detention in ORA. None of them had any knowledge about the fate of the applicant’s former husband and sons.
.  On 4 November 2002 the police interviewed D.M., a friend of the applicant’s sons, who had witnessed their and their father’s arrest by four people dressed in camouflage uniforms and had heard that they had been taken to ORA.
.  On 9 January 2003 an investigating judge of the Sisak County Court heard evidence from the applicant. She said that she had not witnessed the arrest of her former husband and sons but had heard from D.F.T., wife of her son Z.T., about it. D.M. had also witnessed the arrest of her former husband and sons. Also, M.F. had told her that he had seen her sons in ORA and his girlfriend had also told her that her sons had been beaten in ORA. Another person, C., had also told her that he had seen her son B.T. in ORA.
.  A report drawn up by the Sisak police in 2004 for the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office on disappeared individuals lists the applicant’s sons as missing.
.  On 29 July 2005 the State Attorney’s Office issued a document concerning enquiries into the killings of civilians between 1991 and 1995. The document was addressed to the County State Attorney’s Office, which were required to examine all the information collected to date on the killings of civilians during that period and to concentrate their activities on identifying the perpetrators and gathering the relevant evidence in order to initiate criminal proceedings.
.  On 21 November 2005 the applicant’s sons were declared dead by the Sisak Municipal Court as of 25 August 1991.
.  On 5 October 2006 the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office classified the killing of N.T. and the disappearance of the applicant’s sons as war crimes against the civilian population.
.  On 13 December 2006 the applicant again lodged a criminal complaint. She alleged that her sons had been arrested by the members of the Croatian army and taken to ORA, under the command of B.B.
.  On 25 January 2007 an investigating judge of the Sisak County Court heard evidence from witnesses D.M. and D.F.T. D.M. repeated his previous statements (see paragraph 15 above). D.F.T., the wife of the late Z.T., had witnessed the arrest of the victims but had no information on possible direct perpetrators.
.  On 9 October 2008 the State Attorney’s Office issued an instruction to the County State Attorney’s Offices concerning implementation of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure, in which it indicated that an inspection of their work had indicated two main problems: possible partiality on the part of the individuals involved in the pending proceedings as regards the ethnicity of the victims or the perpetrators; and the problem of trials in absentia. The instruction advocated the impartial investigation of all war crimes, irrespective of the ethnicity of those involved, whether victims or perpetrators, and reiterated the duty of those working for the State Attorney in that connection.
.  On 14 October 2008 the Sisak police compiled an analysis of the criminal complaints concerning the crimes committed in 1991 and 1992 in the broader Sisak area and adopted a plan for further actions to be taken, including in the Trivkanović case.
.  On 17 December 2008 the police again interviewed the applicant. She said that she had heard that Z.R. was one of the people who had taken her former husband and sons and that her daughter-in-law D.F.T. also knew one of the individuals implicated but was afraid to talk about it.
.  On the same day the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office compiled a report on the cases concerning war crimes, including the killing of the applicant’s sons.
.  On 18 December 2008 the police interviewed D.F.T. and M.F. D.F.T. said that she did not know any of the individuals who had arrested the victims. M.F. said that he had no knowledge of the events at issue.
.  On 26 January 2009 the Sisak police sent a report on the interviews to the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office.
.  In January and March 2009 the police interviewed D.K., M.R., I.V., J.J., and K.J., none of whom had any relevant knowledge of the critical events. The police also again interviewed D.M. and Z.G., who both repeated their respective prior statements.
.  On 25 March and 18 August 2009 the Sisak police sent a report to the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office.
.  The enquiries into the killing of the applicant’s former husband and sons were a part of broader police enquiries which concerned officials of the Sisak police as suspects and altogether thirty-four victims (see paragraph 61 below). As a result of these enquiries an investigation was opened in the Sisak County Court (see below, paragraphs 32 and 33).
On 20 June 2011 the Sisak county police lodged a criminal complaint against Đ.B., V.M and D.B. on charges of war crimes against the civilian population. This included the killing of the applicant’s sons and former husband. On the same day Đ.B., head of the Sisak police in 1991 and 1992, V.M., police commander at the border territory of Sisak and Banovina in 1991 and 1992 and deputy head of the Sisak police, and D.B., a member of the Wolves, a reserve unit of the Sisak police, were arrested.
On an unspecified date an investigation was opened. On 13 July 2011 Đ.B. died.
During the trial D.F., D.M., D.F.T., S.R., Z.G., P.M. and S.L. as well as the applicant all testified as witnesses that they had either seen or heard that the applicant’s former husband and two sons had been abducted from their home by the members of the Wolves unit and taken to ORA.
On 16 December 2011 the Osijek County State Attorney’s Office lodged an indictment against V.M. and D.B. with the Osijek County Court, alleging that they had been in command of the unit whose unnamed members had committed a number of crimes against the civilian population between July 1991 and June 1992, including the killing of the applicant’s relatives. They were charged with war crimes against the civilian population.
On 9 December 2013 a first-instance judgment was delivered. V.M. was found guilty of war crimes against the civilian population in that, in his capacity as “commander of police forces in the broader area of Sisak and Banovina” and “deputy head of the Sisak police”, he had allowed the killings of individuals of Serb ethnicity and had failed to take adequate measures to prevent such killings. The relevant part of the judgment concerning the applicant’s sons and former husband reads:
“On the afternoon of 25 August 1991 a number of members of the ‘Wolves’ unit of the Sisak police forcibly abducted N.T. and his sons Z. and B.T. from their family home at 38 Slavonska Street in Sisak and took them in a white van to the improvised prison at ‘ORA’, where they were beaten during an unlawful interrogation after which N.T. was taken to an unknown place on the same day and shot and killed and his body was found on 26 August 1991 at the left bank of the River Sava at a place called Gušće, whereas the fate of Z. and B.T. after they had been taken to ‘ORA’ remains unknown.”
M. was sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment. D.B. was acquitted of all charges.
On 10 June 2014 the Supreme Court upheld the conviction of V.M. and increased his sentence to ten years’ imprisonment.
Article 21 of the Constitution (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000 and 28/2001) reads as follows:
“Every human being has the right to life.
...”
Paragraph 1 of Article 120 of the Basic Criminal Code of the Republic of Croatia (Osnovni krivični zakon Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991, 39/1992 and 91/1992) reads as follows:
“(1) An individual who, by violating the rules of international law during war, armed conflict or occupation, orders that: an attack be carried out on the civilian population, a settlement, individual civilians or a person incapacitated for combat, with the consequence of death, serious bodily harm or serious detriment to the health of individuals; an attack be carried out, without a choice of target, which is directed against the civilian population; that the civilian population be killed, tortured or treated inhumanely or be subjected to biological, medical or other scientific tests, or that [from individuals of such population] tissue or organs be taken for transplant, or that serious suffering or injuries to the body or health be inflicted; or that [civilian population] be displaced, resettled, or forcefully lose their ethnic identity or be converted to another religion; or [that members of the civilian population] be raped or forced into prostitution; or that the measures of intimidation and terror be used, hostages taken, collective punishment or unlawful deportation in concentration camps or other unlawful detention be applied; or that [such a population] be deprived of their right to fair and impartial judicial proceedings; or that they be forced to serve in enemy armed forces or its intelligence services or administration; or that they be subjected to forced labour or famine; or that their property be confiscated, plundered, unlawfully and wilfully destroyed or appropriated at large scale when it is not justified by military needs; or that unlawful and disproportionate contributions and requisitions be imposed; or that the value of the domestic currency be decreased or unlawfully issued, or an individual who commits any of the above acts shall be punished by imprisonment of at least five years or twenty years.
...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002) provide:
“In order to ... decide whether to request an investigation ... a State Attorney shall order the police to collect the necessary evidence and take other measures concerning the crime [at issue] with a view to identifying the perpetrator ...”
“Where there is a suspicion that a criminal offence liable to public prosecution has been committed, the police shall take the necessary measures with a view to identifying the perpetrator ... and collect all evidence of possible relevance for the conduct of the criminal proceedings ...”
“When the perpetrator of a criminal offence is unknown, a State Attorney may ask the police to carry out certain investigative steps where, given the circumstances of the case, it would be useful to carry out such steps before instituting an investigation. If the State Attorney considers that certain investigative steps should be carried out by an investigating judge ... he or she will invite an investigating judge to carry out these steps ...”
“(1)  An investigation shall be opened in respect of a particular individual where there is a suspicion that he or she has committed a criminal offence.
(2)  During the investigation evidence and information necessary for deciding whether an indictment is to be brought or the proceedings are to be discontinued shall be collected ...”
The report on the work of the State Attorney’s Office for the year 2012, submitted to Parliament in September 2013, states that in the period between 1991 and 31 December 2012 there were 13,749 reported victims of war crimes in Croatia, of whom 5,979 had been killed. At that point, the Croatian authorities had opened investigations in respect of 3,436 alleged perpetrators. There had been 557 convictions for war-related crimes.
The Statute of the International Criminal Court (Article 25), the Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (Article 6) and the Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia refer to individual criminal responsibility. Article 7 of the last of these reads:
“1.  Anyone planning, instigating, ordering, committing or otherwise aiding and abetting the planning, preparation or execution of a crime referred to in Articles 2 to 5 of the present Statute shall be individually responsible for the crime.
The official position of any accused person, whether as Head of State or Government or as a responsible Government official, shall not relieve such person of criminal responsibility nor mitigate punishment.
The fact that any of the acts referred to in Articles 2 to 5 of the present Statute was committed by a subordinate does not relieve his superior of criminal responsibility if he knew or had reason to know that the subordinate was about to commit such acts or had done so and the superior failed to take the necessary and reasonable measures to prevent such acts or to punish the perpetrators thereof.
The fact that an accused person acted pursuant to an order of a Government or of a superior shall not relieve him of criminal responsibility, but may be considered in mitigation of punishment if the International Tribunal determines that justice so requires.”