The case originated in an application (no. 80960/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by nine Croatian nationals on 11 December 2012. A list of the applicants is set out in the appendix. All applicants are the children of Mr Milan Zdjelar, who died on 8 August 1995.
The applicants were represented by Mr L. Šušak, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the procedural obligations incumbent on the respondent Government under Articles 2 and 14 of the Convention had not been met and that they had no effective remedy in that respect, as required under Article 13 of the Convention.
On 10 April 2014 the above-mentioned complaints were communicated to the Government.
During 1991 and 1992 Serbian paramilitary forces gained control of about one third of the territory of Croatia and proclaimed the so-called “Serbian Autonomous region of Krajina” (Srpska autonomna oblast Krajina, hereinafter the “Krajina”). Part of the Zdjelar family – father Milan, mother Anđelija, daughter Dragica (the third applicant) and sons Janko (the first applicant), Slavko (the eighth applicant) and Čedo (the ninth applicant) – lived in Crni Potok, a village situated in the Krajina. At the beginning of August 1995 the Croatian authorities announced a campaign of military operation with the aim of regaining control over the Krajina. The operation was codenamed Storm and lasted from 4 to 7 August 1995. Before that action, the vast majority of the population of the Krajina had fled Croatia, initially for Bosnia and Herzegovina, but later many of them went to live in Serbia. Some returned to Croatia after the war. The number of people who fled is estimated at between 100,000 and 150,000.
On 11 October 2001, one S.K. submitted to the State Attorney’s Office (Državno odvjetništvo Republike Hrvatske, hereinafter the “SAO”) a list of persons killed during and after Operation Storm. Milan Zdjelar, the applicants’ father, was on the list and next to his name was a note that he had been shot in the head and a leg on 8 August 1995 by members of the Croatian Army’s “Tigers” brigade. On 16 October the SAO forwarded that list to the Ministry of the Interior.
On 25 October 2001 the Gvozd police photographed the site of Milan Zdjelar’s grave.
On 29 October 2001 the Gvozd police interviewed Dragica Zdjelar, the third applicant, who said that her father had been killed on 8 August 1995 in Crni Potok.
On an unspecified date in 2002 the body of Milan Zdjelar was exhumed and a post mortem was carried out in the Zagreb Šalata Hospital on 20 September 2002. The cause of death was not established and the only injury noted was a broken collar bone.
On 23 March 2004 the Gvozd police again interviewed Dragica Zdjelar. She said that of her family members, only she and her father had remained in Crni Potok after the beginning of Operation Storm. On 8 August 1995 at about 12.50 p.m. she had been sitting with her father Milan in front of their house, situated on a hill in Crni Potok, about a hundred metres away from the unpaved main road. A military transport vehicle had appeared on that road, coming from the direction of the village of Gojkovac. When it drew level with their house the vehicle had stopped and three soldiers, dressed in camouflage uniforms, had got out and started to walk towards her and her father. Her father had then said that he did not wish to wait for the soldiers but would run into the woods. When he started to run, she had followed him and then heard three gunshots. She had hidden in the grass and had seen her father shot twice, in the chest and the leg. He had died soon afterwards. The soldiers had returned to the vehicle and continued in the direction of Topusko. The soldiers who had killed her father had been from the “Tigers” brigade. She had hidden in the woods for two days while her father lay dead in the grass. When she returned from the woods she had reported the matter to the Croatian Army and had been given food by some soldiers, who had also buried her father.
On 24 March 2004 the Gvozd police interviewed Anđelija Zdjelar, who had no relevant information to give them about the circumstances in which her husband had been killed.
On 9 April 2004 the Sisačko-moslavačka Police Department (Policijska uprava sisačko-moslavačka) sent a report to the Sisak County State Attorney (Županijski državni odvjetnik Sisak) stating that Dragica Zdjelar had alleged that on 8 August 1995 her father Milan Zdjelar had been killed by Croatian soldiers, members of the “Tigers” brigade.
On 29 July 2005 the State Attorney’s Office issued a document concerning enquiries into the killings of civilians between 1991 and 1995. The document was addressed to the County State Attorney’s Offices, which were instructed to examine all the information collected to date on the killings of civilians during that period and to concentrate their activities on identifying the perpetrators and gathering the relevant evidence in order to instigate criminal proceedings.
On 26 September 2005 the applicants and their mother lodged a criminal complaint with the SAO in connection with the killing of Milan Zdjelar, classifying the offence as a war crime against a civilian and alleging that the victim had been of Serbian ethnic origin, unarmed and never involved in any military activity during the war in Croatia.
On 29 September 2005 the SAO referred the case to the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office, requesting an investigation into the killing of Milan Zdjelar.
Between October 2005 and February 2007 the State Attorney’s Office asked the police about the progress of the investigation on several occasions. Each time the police replied that there had been no progress.
On an unspecified date the police asked the Military Police Administration (Uprava Vojne Policije, hereinafter the “MOP”) for information about the killing of Milan Zdjelar. On 7 February 2007 the MOP answered that they had no relevant information. This was forwarded to the Sisak State Attorney’s Office on 13 February 2007.
On several occasions between September 2007 and July 2008 the State Attorney’s Office asked the police about the progress of the investigation. Each time the police replied that there had been no progress.
On 9 October 2008 the State Attorney’s Office issued an instruction for implementation of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure to the County State Attorney’s Offices, in which they indicated that an inspection of the work of these Offices had highlighted two main problems: the possible partiality of persons involved in the pending proceedings as a result of the ethnicity of the victims or the perpetrators; and the problem of trials in absentia. The instruction advocated the impartial investigation of all war crimes, irrespective of the ethnicity of those involved, whether victims or perpetrators, and stressed the duties of those working for the State Attorney in that respect.
On 30 December 2008 the Sisak State Attorney’s Office asked the Investigation Department of the Sisak County Court to hear evidence from Dragica Zdjelar. This request was complied with on 25 March 2009, when an investigating judge of that court heard evidence from her. Dragica Zdjelar repeated her earlier statement.
On 11 May 2009 the police interviewed F.O. and F.K., both of whom were neighbours of the Zdjelar family in Crni Potok. F.K. confirmed that it had been soldiers from the Croatian Army who had come to the village when Milan Zdjelar had been killed. They had no other relevant information about possible perpetrators.
On 12 May 2009 the police informed the Sisak State Attorney’s Office that they had asked the Ministry of Defence for information regarding the members of brigade 153 of the Croatian Army who had arrived in Crni Potok after Operation Storm and the killing of Milan Zdjelar. On 20 July 2009 the Ministry of Defence informed the police that Milan Zdjelar had been buried by members of brigade 153 of the Croatian Army which had been under the command of a person named M., and provided a list of all members of that brigade with that name. One of them, M.Š., had already died.
Between 26 January and 3 February 2010 the police interviewed five former Croatian soldiers, A.A., B.J., N.S., G.G. and M.T., all members of the First Brigade of the Croatian army, also called the “Tigers”.  None of them had any knowledge about the killing of M.Z. or any other civilians during Operation Storm.
On 15 February 2010, in answer to an inquiry from the SAO, the Sisak State Attorney’s Office drew up a short report on the case. There had been no significant progress.
On 9 and 16 March 2010 the police interviewed M.J., M.L. and M.M., members of smaller army units belonging to brigade 153 of the Croatian Army. M.J., a former member of the engineering unit, said that his unit had comprised between three and five soldiers and that he had never witnessed the killing of any civilians by any of them. M.L., a former commander of logistics in the artillery unit, stated that his unit had never encountered any civilians at any time during Operation Storm, with the exception of a few in Topusko, to whom they had given food and drink. Most of the villages they had passed through had had no name signs. He had no information to give them about the killing of Milan Zdjelar. M.M. had been a soldier in the unit under the command of I.P., and the smaller unit to which he had belonged had been under the command of K. M.M. had no information to give them about the killing of Milan Zdjelar and denied any involvement of his unit in the killing of civilians during Operation Storm.
On several occasions between May and December 2011 the State Attorney’s Office asked the police about the progress of the investigation. Each time the police replied that there had been no progress.
In a separate development, on 8 October 2012, Ž.L., who had been a member of the “Tigers” brigade for about a month in 1994, after which he had been transferred to the Third Battalion, lodged a criminal complaint with the SAO against P.M. – the Minister for war veterans – and others for alleged abuse of authority. In that complaint Ž.L. mentioned the killing of a civilian or civilians in Crni Potok, a few days after Operation Storm. He alleged that the crime had been “tolerated by the command of the Third Battalion (bojna) of the First Brigade of the Croatian Army (“gbr.” which stands for “gardijska brigada”) whose commander had been M.A. On 2 November 2012 the SAO forwarded that information to the State Attorney’s Office in Sisak, which forwarded it to the police on 14 November 2012.
On 22 November 2012 the police interviewed Ž.L. He said that during Operation Storm, the battalion had been in the village of Krznarić and had then gone on to Crni Potok. A person in charge of logistics, named M., had brought in a civilian, saying that he was a “četnik” (derogatory term for a Serbian nationalist or a member of Serbian paramilitary forces). Ž.L. described the man in question in detail. Soon the vice-commander P.Z. and the commander of the Third Company (satnija) J.M. had arrived and had taken the man away somewhere. P.Z. and J.M. had returned after about twenty minutes, and when questioned about the whereabouts of the man they had taken away, P.Z. had answered that he had “drifted in the river”. After some time they had heard firing on a hilltop above them. Ž.L. and another soldier, M.T., had started walking towards the top of that hill and had come to a house where an old woman was standing wailing. There had been no one in the house, but in a field about twenty metres away they had found an elderly man lying on his belly with gunshot wounds to his back and head. A gun had been lying next to him. The man from logistics had said that he had shot him in the head to “shorten his pain”. Ž.L. had expressed his disapproval of the behaviour of the Croatian soldiers to his commander Ž.M. Later on he had learned that the old woman they had encountered in front of her house had also been killed.
On 13 December 2012 the police again interviewed Dragica Zdjelar. She repeated her earlier statement, in essence, and also gave a description of the two soldiers who had killed her father.
During 2013 several short reports on the actions allegedly taken were compiled by the police and the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office.
On 10 July 2013 the SAO sent to the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office a submission by Ž.L. in which he alleged that he had witnessed the killing of civilians in Crni Potok, which had been both encouraged and perpetrated by the officers in command of the Third Battalion (bojna) of the First Brigade of the Croatian Army.
On 16 October 2013 the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office sent summonses to Dragica Zdjelar, F.O. and Ž.L. for 19 and 20 November 2013.
On 11 November 2013 Ž.L. informed the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office that, owing to his health problems, he would not be able to come to Sisak on his own. He asked that transport to Sisak be organised for him or that he be heard in Karlovac, where he lived. In a further letter written on the same day he stated that some police officers had interviewed him on 22 November 2012 and had concluded that “the information he provided did not lead to the conclusion that a criminal offence had been committed”. He further referred to a letter from the Zagreb State Attorney’s Office of 28 May 2013 stating that “the allegations from his objections and criminal complaints were unfounded”.
On 19 November 2013 Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office heard evidence from Dragica Zdjelar and on 26 February 2014 from F.O. They both repeated their earlier statements.
It appears that on 1 December 2014 the Sisak State Attorney’s Office emailed a summons to Ž.L. requiring him to give a statement regarding the killings in Crni Potok in 1995. On 6 December 2014 Ž.L. sent a note back to the State Attorney’s Office referring to the summons and stating that he refused to give any statements because of his health problems, the passage of time, and the fact that he had not actually witnessed any crimes and that his prior allegations in that respect had been unfounded. He also alleged that he had been denied his rights in connection with his medical treatment. On 31 December 2014 the State Attorney’s Office forwarded Ž.L.’s note to the Sisak County State Attorney’s Office.
On 5 June 2015 the investigation in respect of a number of victims killed on the broader territory of the Sisak County by unknown perpetrators during Operation Storm was assigned to the Osijek County State Attorney’s Office (hereinafter the “OCSAO”).
On 13 July 2016 the OCSAO, relying on Ž.L.’s statement to the police, asked the Ministry of Defence to provide information about the whereabouts of the people Ž.L. had named, in particular P.J., J.M., a person nicknamed M. and the person who had been in charge of logistics in the “Tigers” brigade.
On 23 November 2016 the OCSAO requested that the police in Sisak carry out interviews with one F.K., who possibly had information about the men who had killed Milan Zdjelar; to interview B.J., A.A., N.S., G.G. and M.T., members of the “Tigers” brigade who had been in Crni Potok during Operation Storm, about their whereabouts during the operation; to locate three commanders of the Croatian Army unit whose members had allegedly buried Milan Zdjelar on 10 August 1995 and whose first names all began with M, namely M.J., M.L. and M.M.; and to again interview D.Z., M.V., N.M., D.V, J.V. and M.B., all inhabitants of Crni Potok.
On 20 December 2016 the police informed the OCSAO that F.K., N.M., M.B. and J.V. had died. There were also several people in Crni Potok called M.V. and D.V.
On 29 December 2016 the police interviewed G.G. and N.S., former members of the “Tigers” brigade. G.G. said it was possible that the brigade had passed through Crni Potok during Operation Storm but that they had not seen any civilians. He also said that B.J., N.S. and M.T. had been part of a patrol group (izviđačka desetina).
S. said that the “Tigers” brigade had not killed or arrested any civilians or soldiers during Operation Storm.
On 11 January 2017 the Ministry of Defence informed the police about the whereabouts of M.J., M.L. and M.M.
On 16 January 2017 the police interviewed A.A., who had been a member of a “Tigers” brigade patrol group. He said his group had not been in Crni Potok during Operation Storm and he did not know whether the “Tigers” brigade had been there either.
On 24 April 2004 the applicants and their mother brought a civil action against the State in the Gvozd Municipal Court, seeking compensation in connection with the death of their father. They based their claim on the 2003 Liability Act.
The claim was dismissed on 14 July 2005. This judgment was upheld on appeal by the Sisak County Court on 18 June 2009 and by the Supreme Court on 5 October 2011. The national courts found that the claim for compensation had been submitted after the expiry of the statutory limitation period prescribed by the law governing damages awards in civil proceedings.
A subsequent constitutional complaint lodged by the applicants was dismissed on 5 June 2012.
Article 21 of the Constitution (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000 and 28/2001) reads:
“Every human being has the right to life.
...”
Article 34 of the Criminal Code (Krivični zakon, Official Gazette nos. 25/1977, 50/1978, 25/1984, 52/1987, 43/1989, 8/1990, 8/1991, and 53/1991) prescribes imprisonment for at least five years for murder. Aggravated murder is punishable by up to twenty years’ imprisonment.
Paragraph 1 of Article 120 of the Basic Criminal Code of the Republic of Croatia (Osnovni krivični zakon Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991, 39/1992 and 91/1992) reads as follows:
“(1) An individual who, by violating the rules of international law during war, armed conflict or occupation, orders that: an attack be carried out on the civilian population, a settlement, individual civilians or a person incapacitated for combat, with the consequence of death, serious bodily harm or serious detriment to the health of individuals; an attack be carried out, without a choice of target, which is directed against the civilian population; that the civilian population be killed, tortured or treated inhumanely or be subjected to biological, medical or other scientific tests, or that [from individuals of such population] tissue or organs be taken for transplant, or that serious suffering or injuries to the body or health be inflicted; or that [civilian population] be displaced, resettled, or forcefully lose their ethnic identity or be converted to another religion; or [that members of the civilian population] be raped or forced into prostitution; or that the measures of intimidation and terror be used, hostages taken, collective punishment or unlawful deportation in concentration camps or other unlawful detention be applied; or that [such a population] be deprived of their right to fair and impartial judicial proceedings; or that they be forced to serve in enemy armed forces or its intelligence services or administration; or that they be subjected to forced labour or famine; or that their property be confiscated, plundered, unlawfully and wilfully destroyed or appropriated at large scale when it is not justified by military needs; or that unlawful and disproportionate contributions and requisitions be imposed; or that the value of the domestic currency be decreased or unlawfully issued, or an individual who commits any of the above acts shall be punished by imprisonment of at least five years or twenty years.
...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002) provide:
“In order to ... decide whether or not to request an investigation ... the State Attorney shall order the police to gather the necessary information and take other measures concerning the crime [at issue] with a view to identifying the perpetrator ...”
“Where there is a suspicion that a criminal offence liable to public prosecution has been committed, the police shall take the necessary measures with a view to identifying the perpetrator ... and gather all information of possible relevance for the conduct of the criminal proceedings ...”
“(1)  An investigation shall be opened in respect of a particular individual where there is a suspicion that he or she has committed a criminal offence.
(2)  During the investigation, the evidence and information necessary for deciding whether an indictment is to be brought or the proceedings are to be discontinued shall be gathered ...”
The report on the work of the State Attorney’s Office for the year 2012, submitted to Parliament in September 2013, states that in the period between 1991 and 31 December 2012 there were 13,749 reported victims of the war in Croatia, of whom 5,979 had been killed. Thus far, the Croatian authorities had opened investigations in respect of 3,436 alleged perpetrators. There had been 557 convictions for war-related crimes.