The case originated in an application (no. 5046/07) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Ilgar Hilal oglu Maharramov (İlqar Hilal oğlu Məhərrəmov – “the applicant”), on 11 January 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Aliyev, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been deprived of his property in breach of the requirements of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 30 November 2009 the corresponding part of the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Ganja.
The applicant had ownership rights to a shop at 32 Attarlar Street in Ganja. According to the certificate “on the sale of State property to legal entities or individuals” issued on 30 October 2003 by the Ministry of Economic Development’s Department of Management and Privatisation of State Property, the total area of the property was 78.3 sq. m and it had been purchased by the applicant from the State for 1,309,000 old Azerbaijani manats (AZM) (equivalent to 261.8 New Azerbaijani manats (AZN) or approximately 230 euros).
According to the property’s “technical passport” issued by the Ministry of Economic Development’s Property Inventory Bureau on 5 September 2003, the shop had originally been constructed in 1972, was located on a plot of land of 84 sq. m, had a total surface area of 78.3 sq. m and was 3.5 m high. The shop had concrete foundations, the external and internal walls were made of metal and wood, while the roof was made of metal and covered with slate tiles. The property was classified as a nonresidential building used for wholesale or retail trade purposes. The document further stated that the plot of land on which the shop was located had been allocated on the basis of relevant documents. No other documents concerning the ownership of the land have been submitted by the parties.
The applicant paid land tax for 2004 of AZM 19,400 for the plot underneath the shop.
In 2004 the Ganja City Executive Authority (“the GCEA”) decided to renovate and widen Attarlar and Nizami Streets in accordance with the city’s planning scheme because the streets were not wide enough for the pedestrian and car traffic.
According to the applicant, in November 2004 GCEA officials asked him verbally to vacate the shop in connection with the above decision. The applicant refused and brought a legal action asking the court to order the GCEA to stop its allegedly unlawful activities.
According to the applicant, in December 2004 the GCEA destroyed the shop. According to the Government, the shop, being a transportable metal construction, was lifted away by crane and moved to an unspecified part of the city.
On an unspecified date in December 2004 the applicant asked AyselM, a private valuation firm, to assess the shop’s market value. According to Aysel-M’s expert report, dated 13 December 2004, the market value at the time was AZM 588,000,000, or 120,000 US dollars (USD) (there is no copy of the report in the case file).
The applicant supplemented his court action against the GCEA with additional claims, asking for compensation of AZM 588,000,000 for the shop, AZM 99,000 for an unspecified “State fee” and AZM 490,000 for Aysel-M’s fee for the report.
In its submissions to the court, the GCEA as the respondent stated that a number of “old shops and other retail facilities” on Attarlar and Nizami Streets had been removed owing to the urgent need to widen the streets in order to accommodate the number of pedestrians and cars. The respondent argued that the applicant’s shop had not been destroyed but, being a metal construction, had been removed by crane to another, unspecified location in the city. The applicant had been offered another plot of land in the city to continue operating his shop but he had refused. The applicant had not owned the original plot of land. The respondent argued that the compensation claimed by the applicant was excessive, taking into account the price he had paid the State for it in 2003.
Following the respondent’s submissions concerning the alleged excessiveness of the compensation claim, by an interim decision of 15 July 2005 the Khojavand District Court requested a new valuation by a State expert.
On an unspecified date the State expert refused to issue an opinion, noting that the shop at 32 Attarlar Street no longer existed and that therefore it was technically impossible to examine it and assess its market value. Accordingly, the interim decision of 15 July 2005 remained unexecuted.
On 6 October 2005 the Khojavand District Court dismissed the applicant’s legal action without citing any provisions of the applicable domestic law. In its reasoning the court accepted the GCEA’s explanation that the shop in question had been removed in accordance with townplanning policy. Being a metal construction it had been possible to move it in one piece. It had not been destroyed but simply transported to another location. The court also accepted that the applicant had been offered a new plot of land by the GCEA but had refused it. It further decided to reject the applicant’s compensation claim based on Aysel-M’s report, without providing any reasons. However, the court ordered the GCEA to allocate the applicant a plot of land in Ganja equivalent in size to the shop in question.
The applicant appealed, reiterating that his shop had been unlawfully destroyed and asking for compensation.
On 23 January 2006 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal, upholding the first-instance court’s assessment. The appellate judgment contained no references to applicable domestic legal provisions.
Following a further appeal by the applicant, on 14 July 2006 the Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeal’s judgment.
No information is available in the case file as to whether a new land plot was allocated to the applicant or as to its location or any other details.
Article 13 § I of the Constitution provides as follows:
“Property in the Republic of Azerbaijan is inviolable and is protected by the State.”
.  Article 29 § IV of the Constitution provides as follows:
“No one shall be deprived of his or her property without a court decision. Total confiscation of property is not permitted. Alienation of the property for State needs may be permitted only subject to prior and fair compensation corresponding to its value.”
Article 4.4 of the Land Code provides as follows:
“4.  Unless provided for otherwise by legislation, a plot of land and the corresponding rights over it, as well as immovable property connected to the plot of land (soil, bodies of water, forests, perennial plantings, buildings, constructions and other such objects), participate in [market] circulation in an inseparable manner.”
Article 88 of the Land Code, concerning the specifics of obtaining property rights over a plot of land in connection with the transfer of rights to the immovable property located on that land, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“1.  Upon transfer of the ownership right over a building, construction or enterprise (facility) to another person, the ownership right over the plot of land on which they are situated is also transferred to the same person in accordance with this Article, in the same dimensions as when it belonged to the previous owner ... and subject to the same conditions and restrictions on its use.
Upon the sale of a State-owned building, construction or enterprise (facility) into private ownership under the procedure specified by legislation, the plot of land on which that immovable property is situated is also sold [into private ownership] or leased with the right of purchase.”
Article 157.9 of the Civil Code, as applicable between 30 June 2004 and 31 August 2007, provided:
“Private property may only be alienated by the State if required for State or public needs in the cases permitted by law for the purposes of building roads or other communication lines, delimiting the State border or constructing defence facilities, by a decision of the relevant State authority [the Cabinet of Ministers], and subject to prior payment of compensation in an amount corresponding to its market value.”
.  Presidential Decree No. 386 of 25 August 2000 dealing with various aspects of the implementation of the 2000 Civil Code, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 78 of 17 June 2004 and as in force at the material time, designated the Cabinet of Ministers as “the relevant State authority” referred to in Article 157.9 of the Civil Code.
.  Article 203.3 of the Civil Code provides as follows:
“203.3. Forcible deprivation of property is not permitted, except for the following measures taken on grounds provided for by law:
3.1. forfeiture of property for liabilities;
3.2. alienation of property which, by law, cannot belong to a given person;
3.3. alienation of immovable property in connection with the purchase of land;
3.4. purchase of badly maintained cultural assets;
3.5. requisition [alienation of property in connection with natural disasters, technological accidents, epidemics and other emergencies];
3.6. confiscation.
...
5. The alienation of property owned by individuals and legal entities for State or public needs shall be carried out in accordance with paragraph IV of Article 29 of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan.”
Article 207 of the Civil Code provides as follows:
“Where it is impossible to alienate a plot of land for State needs without terminating ownership rights over the buildings, structures or other immovable property located on the land, the State may purchase the property.”
.  Article 243.1 of the Civil Code provides that the owner of immovable property located on a plot of land owned by a third party has the right to use the part of the plot on which his or her property is located.
Article 1 of the Law defined “immovable property” as follows:
“1.0.1.  Immovable property comprises plots of land, rights over which are subject to State registration, subsurface areas, separate water reservoirs (bodies of water) and all items which are firmly fixed to the land and whose location cannot be changed without disproportionate (excessive) damage, including buildings, constructions, residential and non-residential areas, private residential and country houses, forests and perennial plantings, and property complexes; ...”
According to Article 10 of the Law, an individual applying for State registration of immovable property must present, inter alia, the following documents together with his application: the plan and dimensions of the plot of land and the “technical passport” of buildings or other immovable property situated on the land.
Article 29.6 of the Law provides:
“The owners of privatised facilities may purchase or lease with the right of purchase the plots of land on which those facilities are situated, in accordance with the procedure specified by the relevant legislation, as well as use those plots of land permanently or temporarily, pursuant to a relevant decision (agreement). ...”
.  Article 9 of the Second State Programme regulated the sale of Stateowned land under privatised State-owned property or property built on it by private individuals. In particular, Article 9.1, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“9.1.  Plots of land underneath privatised State-owned enterprises or facilities or underneath facilities constructed by private individuals or non-governmental legal entities, shall be sold by the State Commission on Property Issues to the owners of those enterprises or facilities in accordance with the relevant legislation. ...”