The case originated in an application (no. 16048/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Andrey Yevgenyevich Lotorevich (“the applicant”), on 6 April 2006.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 7 May 2007 the President of the First Section decided to communicate the complaint concerning non-enforcement of a binding judgment to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Krasnoznamensk, a town in the Moscow Region.
At the material time the applicant was a lieutenant colonel of Space Forces. After 22 years of service, he was due to retire on reaching the age limit in August 2004. Under domestic law, long-serving servicemen in need of better housing (the applicant met this condition) could be discharged against their will only if the command provided them with such housing. When preparing his discharge, the applicant insisted that the command provide him with a flat and did not agree to be discharged “flatless” (бесквартирным).
As the flat had not been provided in time, the applicant sued his command. On 25 February 2005 the  ordered the command to provide the applicant with housing at his place of service and, once this done, to discharge him. This judgment became binding on 10 March 2005 but was not enforced immediately.
In February 2006 the applicant was offered a flat in Bolshie Vyazyomy, a village 3.5 km away from Krasnoznamensk. The applicant refused this offer, insisting that the flat should be located in Krasnoznamensk itself.
On 15 June 2007 the applicant received a flat in Krasnoznamensk. He was discharged later the same year.
Under section 9 of the Federal Law on Enforcement Proceedings of 21 July 1997, a bailiff must enforce a judgment within two months.
Under section 23 § 1 of the Federal Law on the Status of Servicemen, servicemen who have served ten years and more and whose housing needs to be improved cannot be discharged against their will without the provision of such housing.
According to the Ruling of the  322-O of 30 September 2004, after expiry of a serviceman’s contract and in the absence of his written agreement to a “flatless” discharge, he should be considered as serving voluntarily only until the provision of housing.