The case originated in an application (no. 6219/08) against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Ivoirian national, Mr Didier Pierre Paulet (“the applicant”), on 4 February 2008.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Dr Keith Lomax of Lester Morrill Solicitors inc. Davies Gore Lomax LLP, a lawyer practising in Leeds. The United Kingdom Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Neenan of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
On 3 September 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1984 and lives in Leeds.
The facts of the case may be summarised as follows.
The applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 January 2001 and thereafter lived illegally at an address in Bedford.
Whilst living in the United Kingdom the applicant successfully applied for three jobs using a false French passport. Between April 2003 and November 2004 he was employed by a recruitment agency. Between August 2004 and January 2006 he was employed in a cash and carry business and between January 2006 and February 2007 he was employed as a forklift truck driver.
The applicant had used the false passport to support his assertion that he was entitled to work in the United Kingdom. All of his employers subsequently stated that they would not have employed him had they known of his true immigration status. Between April 2003 and February 2007 the applicant earned a total gross salary of 73,293.17 pounds sterling (GBP) from his employment. At the end of this period he had total savings of GBP 21,649.60.
In January 2007 the applicant applied to the Driving and Vehicle Licensing Agency for a provisional driving licence. The application was accompanied by the same false French passport that the applicant had used to obtain employment in the United Kingdom. When the falsity of the passport was discovered, the police were informed.
On 4 June 2007 the applicant pleaded guilty in the Crown Court at Luton to three counts of dishonestly obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception (counts one, two and three on the indictment). He also pleaded guilty to one count of having a false identity document with intent (count four), one count of driving whilst disqualified (count five) and one count of driving a motor vehicle without insurance (count six). On 29 June 2007 the applicant was sentenced to concurrent terms of fifteen months’ imprisonment for the first four counts together with a consecutive sentence of two months’ imprisonment for the offence of driving whilst disqualified. No separate sentence was imposed for driving without insurance. The trial judge also recommended the applicant for deportation.
In addition to the custodial sentence and the recommendation for deportation, the prosecution sought a confiscation order under section 6 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 in respect of the applicant’s earnings (see relevant domestic law and practice below). The trial judge accepted that the applicant had paid all the tax and national insurance due on his earnings and that the money he had made from his employment had been truly earned. After deducting tax and national insurance payments, it was calculated that the benefit the applicant received from his earnings was GBP 50,000. It was agreed that of the GBP 50,000 the applicant still had assets of GBP 21,949.60. On this basis, on 29 June 2007 the trial judge imposed a confiscation order in the sum of GBP 21,949.60 upon the applicant, with a consecutive sentence of twelve months’ imprisonment to be served in default of payment. Thus, the confiscation order had the effect of depriving the applicant of all of the savings that he had accumulated during the four years of employment.
On 8 April 2008 the applicant sought an extension of time within which to appeal to the Court of Appeal against the imposition of the confiscation order. In his grounds of appeal, he contended that the grant of the confiscation order had not respected “European law”. That application was refused on 13 June 2008. The Single Judge noted that the applicant had failed to establish good reason for the extension of time sought and that he had no arguable grounds of appeal because he had benefited from the use of the false passport to the extent that it had enabled him to work and earn money and there had been no breach of his rights under the Convention.
The applicant renewed his application before the Court of Appeal which, on 14 November 2008, granted him an extension of time and leave to appeal. Leading counsel was appointed on his behalf. Counsel initially argued first; that the applicant’s earnings were not a relevant benefit from criminal conduct within the meaning of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002; and secondly, that the prosecutor’s decision to seek a confiscation order in this case constituted an abuse of process.
The Court of Appeal heard part of the appeal on 18 February 2009. However, it decided to adjourn the appeal pending the publication by the Department of Public Prosecution (“the DPP”) of guidance for prosecutors on the circumstances under which a confiscation order could be sought.
In a supplementary skeleton argument dated 5 June 2008, counsel for the applicant accepted that in light of the decision in R v. Carter and Others [2006] EWCA Crim 416 (see relevant domestic law and practice below), the court was bound to reject the first ground of appeal, namely that the applicant’s earnings were not a relevant “benefit”. He therefore accepted that the issue on appeal was whether it was oppressive and therefore an abuse of process for the Crown to seek and the court to impose a confiscation order for what amounted to the applicant’s entire savings over nearly four years of genuine work. In this regard, counsel submitted that there would be an abuse of process where, on a correct application of the law to the facts, the resulting “benefit” figure yielded a disproportionate or oppressive result. He further noted that Parliament has intended the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 to be applied in a manner compatible with the requirements of the Convention. Therefore, in light of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, in order to remain proportionate the application of the confiscation regime had to remain rationally connected to the public interest aims pursued and go no further than necessary to achieve them. It was therefore submitted that to seek the imposition of a confiscation order on the basis of a benefit figure which far exceeded the value of the defendant’s crimes could properly be described as disproportionate – either in the traditional sense used in criminal sentencing (“not fitting the punishment to the crime”) or in the language of the Convention – and was therefore an abusive exercise of jurisdiction.
The applicant further submitted that a confiscation order could be described as oppressive where it did not pursue any of the legitimate aims of the confiscation regime and/or did not further the Parliamentary intent of stripping defendants of the proceeds of crime. He reiterated that Parliament had intended the legislation to be compatible with the Convention.
On 28 July 2009, after the DPP guidance had been promulgated (see relevant domestic law and practice below), the Court of Appeal held that the decision to seek a confiscation order against the applicant did not constitute an abuse of process. The court therefore dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the order. In reaching this conclusion, the Court of Appeal said that the guidance represented a fair analysis of the effect of previous Court of Appeal and House of Lords decisions on the confiscation order regime.
The court stated:
“Abuses of the confiscation process may occur and, when they do, the appropriate remedy will normally be a stay of proceedings. However an abuse of process cannot be founded on the basis that the consequences of the proper application of the legislative structure may produce an ‘oppressive’ result with which the judge may be unhappy. Although the court may, of its own initiative, invoke the confiscation process, the responsibility for deciding whether properly to seek a confiscation order is effectively vested in the Crown. When it does so, the court lacks any corresponding discretion to interfere with that decision if it has been made in accordance with the statute. The just result of these proceedings is the result produced by the proper application of the statutory provisions as interpreted in the House of Lords and in this court. However to conclude that proceedings properly taken in accordance with statutory provisions constitute an abuse of process is tantamount to asserting a power in the court to dispense with the statute.
As a matter of principle, that is impermissible, and this court has said so. This, in R v. Shabir [2009] 1 CAR (S) 497, it was observed:
	‘This jurisdiction must be exercised with considerable caution, indeed sparingly. It 	must be confined to cases of true oppression. In particular, it cannot be exercised 	simply on the grounds that the judge disagrees with the decision of the Crown to 	pursue confiscation, or with the way it puts its case on that topic.’
We repeat what was said at an earlier hearing involving Paulet.
	‘The abuse of process jurisdiction is one which needs to be exercised with great 	circumspection. The jurisdiction cannot be converted on a case by case basis into a 	structure which involves, on proper analysis, something like wholesale 	undermining of the statutory provisions. It is not easy to conclude that it is an 	abuse of process for those responsible for enforcing legislation to see that it is 	indeed properly enforced.’”
The Court of Appeal found that applicant’s case could not be distinguished from its previous ruling in R v Carter and Others (see relevant domestic law and practice, paragraph 31 below). It concluded:
“The reality is that throughout the period of his employment [the applicant] was relying on a continuing dishonest representation to three different employers. He deceived them into thinking that he was entitled to obtain employment with them. That was a crucial element of his criminality. His earnings, of course, reflected the fact that he had done the necessary work, as we shall assume, to the satisfaction of his various employers. But the opportunity for him to do so, that is the pecuniary advantage, was unlawfully obtained. If the employee worked to his employer’s satisfaction, and he paid his tax and National Insurance contributions on his earnings, and his deception either lacked any significant wider public interest, or, perhaps because of the passage of time, but for whatever reason, had ceased to have any meaningful effect on his employers’ decision to continue his employment, the resolution of the issue might well be different. As it is there was here a wider public interest. The appellant was deliberately circumventing the prohibition against him seeking remunerative employment in this country in any capacity. No basis for interfering with the order made in the Crown Court has been shown. In our judgment the appropriate link between the appellant’s earnings and his criminal offences, in the context of the wider public interest, was plainly established. The appeal therefore fails.”
On 27 October 2009 the Court of Appeal refused to certify a point of law of general public importance which ought to be considered by the Supreme Court.
Enforcement proceedings have since been instigated against the applicant.
On 28 June 2007 the applicant applied for asylum in the United Kingdom, alleging that his father had been killed in a land dispute between the Dioula and Bete community and that he would be at risk in Ivory Coast owing to his Dioula ethnicity. On 4 October 2007 his application was refused by the Secretary of State for the Home Department, who found no objective evidence that the Dioula were targeted solely on account of their ethnicity, and that the delay in claiming asylum had adversely affected the credibility of the rest of the applicant’s claim. A deportation order made by the Secretary of State was served on the applicant on 19 November 2007. On 24 April 2008 the applicant brought judicial review proceedings challenging the refusal of asylum and the decision to make a deportation order. This application was refused by the High Court on 16 May 2008 as the application had been lodged out of time and, in any event, the applicant had failed to avail himself of his statutory appeal rights by applying to the then Asylum and Immigration Tribunal. His renewed application for judicial review was rejected by the High Court on 27 June 2008. However, it appears that on 3 April 2008 the applicant submitted a notice of appeal to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal. This was rejected by the Tribunal on 29 April 2008 as out of time.
Confiscation proceedings are now governed by the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. Section 6(4) sets out the approach to be followed by the court:
“(a) it must decide whether the defendant has a criminal lifestyle;
(b) if it decides that he has a criminal lifestyle it must decide whether he has benefited from his general criminal conduct;
(c) if it decides that he does not have a criminal lifestyle it must decide whether he has benefited from his particular criminal conduct.”
Section 6(5) provides that where the court decides that the defendant has benefited from the conduct referred to, it must decide the “recoverable amount” and make a confiscation order requiring him to pay that amount.
Under section 7, the “recoverable amount” is defined as an amount equal to the defendant’s benefit from the conduct concerned unless the defendant shows that the available amount is less than that benefit. In that case the recoverable amount becomes the available amount.
Section 8 sets out the test for determining the defendant’s benefit from his criminal activity. It reads as follows:
“(1) If the court is proceeding under section 6 this section applies for the purpose of—
(a) deciding whether the defendant has benefited from conduct, and
(b) deciding his benefit from the conduct.
(2)The court must—
(a) take account of conduct occurring up to the time it makes its decision;
(b) take account of property obtained up to that time.”
Section 9 defines the recoverable amount as follows:
“(1) For the purposes of deciding the recoverable amount, the available amount is the aggregate of—
(a) the total of the values (at the time the confiscation order is made) of all the free property then held by the defendant minus the total amount payable in pursuance of obligations which then have priority, and
(b) the total of the values (at that time) of all tainted gifts.
(2) An obligation has priority if it is an obligation of the defendant—
(a) to pay an amount due in respect of a fine or other order of a court which was imposed or made on conviction of an offence and at any time before the time the confiscation order is made, or
(b) to pay a sum which would be included among the preferential debts if the defendant’s bankruptcy had commenced on the date of the confiscation order or his winding up had been ordered on that date.”
Section 76(3)–(7) defines, inter alia, “particular criminal conduct” (as used in section 6(4)(c) above) and “benefit” as follows:
“(3) Particular criminal conduct of the defendant is all his criminal conduct which falls within the following paragraphs—
(a) conduct which constitutes the offence or offences concerned;
(b) conduct which constitutes offences of which he was convicted in the same proceedings as those in which he was convicted of the offence or offences concerned;
(c) conduct which constitutes offences which the court will be taking into consideration in deciding his sentence for the offence or offences concerned.
(4) A person benefits from conduct if he obtains property as a result of or in connection with the conduct.
(5) If a person obtains a pecuniary advantage as a result of or in connection with conduct, he is to be taken to obtain as a result of or in connection with the conduct a sum of money equal to the value of the pecuniary advantage.
(6) References to property or a pecuniary advantage obtained in connection with conduct include references to property or a pecuniary advantage obtained both in that connection and some other.
(7) If a person benefits from conduct his benefit is the value of the property obtained.”
The above provisions of the Proceeds of Crime Act replaced similar provisions contained in section 71 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988. It gave the Crown Court (and where appropriate magistrates’ courts) the power to make confiscation orders. Section 71(2) provided:
“The Crown Court may make such an order against an offender where—
(a) he is found guilty of any offence to which this Part of this Act applies; and
(b) it is satisfied—
(i) that he has benefited from that offence or from that offence taken together with some other offence of which he is convicted in the same proceedings, or which the court takes into consideration in determining his sentence, and which is not a drug trafficking offence...”
Section 71(4) and (5) provided:
“(4) For the purposes of this Part of this Act a person benefits from an offence if he obtains property as a result of or in connection with its commission and his benefit is the value of the property so obtained.
(5) Where a person derives a pecuniary advantage as a result of or in connection with the commission of an offence, he is to be treated for the purposes of this Part of this Act as if he had obtained as a result of or in connection with the commission of the offence a sum of money equal to the value of the pecuniary advantage.”
In Carter the defendants were convicted of offences of dishonesty and deception in connection with a business supplying casual labour comprising illegal immigrants and asylum seekers. One defendant was convicted of conspiracy to use false instruments, possession of false registration cards, possession of replica immigration stamps and concealing the proceeds of criminal conduct, namely money laundering. Two other defendants, who had obtained work on the basis of the false documents, were convicted of obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception and various other counts associated with the conspiracy.
Confiscation orders were made under section 71 of the Criminal Justice Act in respect of the wages the defendants had earned in the course of the business. The defendants argued that their wages did not constitute benefit for the purposes of the Criminal Justice Act 1988. In response the Court of Appeal stated:
“It seems to us to be obvious that where you obtain an opportunity to work from an offer of employment being made to you, and the offer has been induced by a false representation that you are entitled to work, the false representation continues thereafter for the benefit of the offender who, permitting the representation to continue, is able to retain employment.
Once made it continues to have effect throughout the employment which has been taken up. At any stage had the representation been corrected, it is plain the employment would have ceased.”
The Court of Appeal considered that, in determining whether benefit was obtained within the meaning of section 71(4) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, the question was whether the deception was “an operative cause” of obtaining the benefit. On the facts in Carter, that test was met. The court also stated that, whilst the confiscation order regime was “draconian”, it was satisfied that it was proportionate for the purposes of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
In May the House of Lords emphasised the broad principles to be followed by those called upon to exercise the power to make confiscation orders:
"(1) The legislation is intended to deprive defendants of the benefit they have gained from relevant criminal conduct, whether or not they have retained such benefit, within the limits of their available means. It does not provide for confiscation in the sense understood by schoolchildren and others, but nor does it operate by way of fine. The benefit gained is the total value of the property or advantage obtained, not the defendant’s net profit after deduction of expenses or any amounts payable to co-conspirators.
(2) The court should proceed by asking the three questions posed above: (i) Has the defendant (D) benefited from relevant criminal conduct? (ii) If so, what is the value of the benefit D has so obtained? (iii) What sum is recoverable from D? Where issues of criminal life style arise the questions must be modified. These are separate questions calling for separate answers, and the questions and answers must not be elided.
(3) In addressing these questions the court must first establish the facts as best it can on the material available, relying as appropriate on the statutory assumptions. In very many cases the factual findings made will be decisive.
(4) In addressing the questions the court should focus very closely on the language of the statutory provision in question in the context of the statute and in the light of any statutory definition. The language used is not arcane or obscure and any judicial gloss or exegesis should be viewed with caution. Guidance should ordinarily be sought in the statutory language rather than in the proliferating case law.
(5) In determining, under the 2002 Act, whether D has obtained property or a pecuniary advantage and, if so, the value of any property or advantage so obtained, the court should (subject to any relevant statutory definition) apply ordinary common law principles to the facts as found. The exercise of this jurisdiction involves no departure from familiar rules governing entitlement and ownership. While the answering of the third question calls for inquiry into the financial resources of D at the date of the determination, the answering of the first two questions plainly calls for a historical inquiry into past transactions.
(6) D ordinarily obtains property if in law he owns it, whether alone or jointly, which will ordinarily connote a power of disposition or control, as where a person directs a payment or conveyance of property to someone else. He ordinarily obtains a pecuniary advantage if (among other things) he evades a liability to which he is personally subject. Mere couriers or custodians or other very minor contributors to an offence, rewarded by a specific fee and having no interest in the property or the proceeds of sale, are unlikely to be found to have obtained that property. It may be otherwise with money launderers."
The case of Shabir involved a defendant whose defalcations were accepted to amount to GBP 464 but from whom the Crown sought a confiscation order of over GBP 400,000. The applicant argued, inter alia, that the confiscation order was oppressive and/or a breach of his rights under Article 1 of Protocol 1 to the Convention.
In considering these arguments, the Court of Appeal concluded:
"The court retains the jurisdiction to stay an application for confiscation, as any other criminal process, where it amounts to an abuse of the court’s process. In the present context, that power exists where it would be oppressive to seek confiscation, or to do so on a particular basis.
... ... ...
This jurisdiction must be exercised with considerable caution, indeed sparingly. It must be confined to cases of true oppression. In particular, it cannot be exercised simply on the grounds that the Judge disagrees with the decision of the Crown to pursue confiscation, or with the way it puts its case on that topic. A specific example of that principle is that it is clearly not sufficient to establish oppression, and thus abuse of process, that the effect of confiscation will be to extract from a defendant a sum greater than his net profit from his crime(s). That is inherent in the statutory scheme.
... ... ...
This country’s confiscation regime has consistently been held to be a proportionate and legitimate response to crime and thus to occasion no infringement of the Protocol: see for example Phillips v United Kingdom (2001) 11 BHRC 280 and R v Rezvi [2003] 1 AC 1099. Even if it be accepted that the Protocol may be capable of being infringed by a truly oppressive and thus disproportionate individual order for confiscation (as to which we express no opinion), it is clear that the court’s power to stay for oppression provides the remedy.
... ... ...
The enormous disparity between the excess of Shabir ‘s inflated claims (some few hundreds of pounds) and the confiscation order of over £212,000 raises the real likelihood that this order is oppressive. As it seems to us, however, such a disparity will not in every case by itself establish oppression. If it is a case in which the criminal lifestyle provisions of the Act can legitimately be applied, and with them the several section 10 assumptions as to the source of assets, it may well be perfectly proper for a confiscation order to be massively greater than the gain from the offences of which the defendant has been convicted. That is the whole purpose of the criminal lifestyle provisions. They extend the reach of confiscation beyond the particular offences of which the defendant has been convicted."
The applicant in this case had obtained a loan of GBP 465,000, which he combined with GBP 310,000 of his own money to purchase a property for GBP 775,000. The mortgage was subsequently redeemed. The applicant was later convicted of making false statements in obtaining the GBP 465,000 loan. By the time of confiscation proceedings in 2008, the value of the property was GBP 1,850,000. At the suggestion of the Crown, the judge assessed his “benefit” as the value of the property at the time of trial, less his original untainted contribution of £310,000. This led to an order being made in the sum of GBP 1,540,000. The Court of Appeal reduced the confiscation order to GBP 1,100,000, being 60% of the market value of the flat, since 60% of the purchase price came from the tainted mortgage.
On appeal, the Supreme Court considered, inter alia, the impact of the Human Rights Act 1998 on the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. It held unanimously that the provisions of the 2002 Act were capable of operating in a manner which violated Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention. Consequently, the 2002 Act had to be given effect in a way which was compatible with the Convention. In practice, that meant that a judge should, "if confronted with an application for an order which would be disproportionate, refuse to make it but accede only to an application for such sum as would be proportionate".
The Supreme Court considered the Court of Appeal’s judgments in a number of cases, including that of Shabir. It noted that:
"Whilst the outcomes of those cases were, as is conceded, correct, the better analysis of such situations is that orders such as those there considered ought to be refused by the judge on the grounds that they would be wholly disproportionate and a breach of [Article 1 of Protocol No.1]. There is no need to invoke the concept of abuse of process."
The above Guidance was issued by the Crown Prosecution Service on 28 May 2009. The Guidance sets out four circumstances when it may be inappropriate for prosecutors to decide to instigate confiscation proceedings. The first was where the Crown has reneged on an earlier agreement not to proceed with confiscation. The second was where the defendant had voluntarily paid full compensation to the victim or victims, or was ready, willing and able immediately to repay all of the victims to the full amount of their losses, and had not otherwise profited from his crime. The third was where a court might be compelled to find that property obtained in the most part legitimately by the defendant, and to which the defendant would have been entitled but for his criminal conduct, must be treated as “benefit”. The example was given of a case where the defendant was in fact entitled to the property which he had instead chosen to obtain by deception.
The Guidance considered that a fourth situation would be where a defendant had obtained paid employment by a false representation to his employer. The Guidance stated:
“The defendant’s wages may be his benefit (R v Carter [2006] EWCA Crim 416), but some cases will arise where the link between the criminality and the receipt of payment from dishonestly obtained employment is too remote, for example, where had the representation been corrected, the employment would have continued, or where after many years of otherwise lawful employment, a relatively minor previous conviction is discovered.”