The case originated in an application (no. 51755/10) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Antanas Šidlauskas (“the applicant”), on 6 August 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr P. Astromskis, a lawyer practising in Kaunas. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė.
The applicant alleged that he had been unlawfully deprived of his only home without receiving adequate compensation, in violation of Article 8 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 7 March 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1945 and lives in Jonava.
In 1994 the applicant bought an apartment in Jonava. In 1998 he lost his regular job and was no longer able to pay for utilities.
In 2000 the utility provider instituted civil proceedings against the applicant concerning his debt of 2,861 Lithuanian litai (LTL – approximately 828.60 euros (EUR)). The domestic courts allowed the claim. In 2003 the judgment was transferred to a bailiff for enforcement. The bailiff decided to direct enforcement against the applicant’s apartment. On 6 October 2004 he organised a public auction at which the apartment was sold to a third party for LTL 3,390 (approximately EUR 982). On 18 November 2004 a district court confirmed the transfer of the apartment to the third party.
Since that date, the applicant has not had a permanent home. He submitted that he had been living in temporary accommodation, at times in unsuitable conditions, and often in exchange for manual work.
Between 2006 and 2008 the apartment was resold and gifted to different individuals on several occasions.
In November 2007 the applicant instituted civil proceedings before the Jonava District Court, arguing that the sale of his apartment at the public auction had been unlawful. The applicant submitted that, in accordance with the domestic law, taking a person’s home in order to enforce a court judgment was only permitted when the debt in question was larger than LTL 3,000 (see paragraph 22 below), which had not been the case here (see paragraph 7 above). The applicant also submitted that he had owned 0.05 hectares of land near Jonava, so the enforcement should have begun in respect of that property and not his only home (vienintelė gyvenamoji vieta). In view of the alleged unlawfulness of the sale, the applicant claimed damages jointly from the bailiff and the bailiff’s professional liability insurer. According to the applicant, restitution in integrum was not possible because there was no indication that the third party who had bought the apartment at the public auction had acted in bad faith. Therefore, he claimed LTL 51,000 (approximately EUR 14,770) in damages, an amount corresponding to the market price of the apartment at the time of the submission of the claim.
The defendants (the bailiff and his professional liability insurer) contested the applicant’s claim. They submitted that the value of the applicant’s land had been insufficient to cover his debt, so the enforcement had had to be directed against the apartment. They also argued that the applicant’s debt (LTL 2,861) and the enforcement expenses (LTL 540), taken together, had exceeded LTL 3,000, and thus the sale of his apartment had been in accordance with the domestic law. The defendants further argued that the applicant had acted in bad faith – he had not appealed against the execution writ or the results of the public auction, and he had submitted his claim at the very end of the time-limit because he had been waiting for the market price of the apartment to increase. Therefore, they argued that the applicant could not claim damages corresponding to the market price of the apartment at the time of the submission of the claim, but only the price for which the apartment had been sold at the public auction – LTL 3,390 (see paragraph 7 above).
On 17 June 2009 the Jonava District Court dismissed the applicant’s claim. It acknowledged that his debt had been below the required threshold of LTL 3,000 and that the bailiff had erred by calculating the debt together with the enforcement expenses. However, the court considered that this breach had not been such as to warrant the annulment of the sale. Accordingly, it dismissed the applicant’s claim for damages. The court also noted that the applicant had submitted his claim three years after the sale and on the last day permitted by the time-limit, when the market price of housing was several times higher than in 2004. Therefore, his claim for damages corresponding to the market price of the apartment at the time of the submission of the claim could be regarded as an attempt at unjust enrichment (vertintinas kaip siekimas nepagrįstai praturtėti).
The applicant appealed against the Jonava District Court’s judgment. He and the defendants presented essentially the same arguments as in their pleadings before the first-instance court (see paragraphs 10-11 above).
On 1 October 2009 the Kaunas Regional Court quashed the firstinstance judgment and allowed the applicant’s claim in its entirety. The court held that the bailiff had acted in violation of domestic law, firstly by failing to direct the enforcement against the applicant’s land, but also by selling his apartment at a public auction even though his debt had been less than LTL 3,000. The court considered that the bailiff had failed to respect the balance between the interests of the debtor (the applicant) and the creditor. It held that, because of the material breaches of the relevant law, the sale of the applicant’s apartment had to be declared unlawful.
Accordingly, the Kaunas Regional Court decided to award the applicant damages from the bailiff’s professional liability insurer. It stated that it “essentially agreed with the amount claimed by the applicant” (iš esmės sutinka su ieškovo nurodyta suma) and awarded him LTL 51,000 (approximately EUR 14,770), after subtracting the amount of his debt (see paragraph 7 above).
The bailiff’s professional liability insurer appealed against the Kaunas Regional Court’s judgment. It submitted, inter alia, that the amount of damages awarded to the applicant had no basis, and the court should have either ordered restitution in integrum or awarded the applicant the amount for which his apartment had been sold at the auction (see paragraph 7 above), but not its market price in 2007, which had increased significantly since 2004.
The applicant contested the appeal, arguing that there was no legal obligation for him to ask for restitution rather than for damages, and that the amount of damages was a question of fact which the Supreme Court could not examine.
On 8 February 2010 the Supreme Court amended the judgment of the Kaunas Regional Court in part. It upheld the conclusion that the sale of the applicant’s apartment had been unlawful for the reasons established by the lower court (see paragraph 14 above). The Supreme Court then reiterated its own case-law that, where the sale of property at a public auction is unlawful because of a bailiff’s actions, restitution in integrum should not be applied; accordingly, it considered that the most appropriate way of protecting the applicant’s rights was by awarding him damages. However, the court considered that, in line with “the nature of the obligation and the principles of equity, reasonableness and good faith” (pagal prievolės esmę, atsižvelgiant į teisingumo, protingumo ir sąžiningumo kriterijus), the amount of damages in the applicant’s case had to be assessed at the moment of the unlawful act, that is, the sale of the apartment. According to the State Enterprise Centre of Registers, the market price of the applicant’s apartment at the time of its sale had been LTL 12,100 (approximately EUR 3,504). Therefore, the Supreme Court awarded the applicant that amount, after subtracting his debt (see paragraph 7 above) and the bailiff’s enforcement expenses (see paragraph 11 above).
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania read:
“Property shall be inviolable.
The rights of ownership shall be protected by law.
Property may be taken only for the needs of society according to the procedure established by law and shall be justly compensated for.”
“A person’s home shall be inviolable.
...”
“A person whose constitutional rights or freedoms are violated shall have the right to apply to a court.
Compensation for material and moral damage inflicted upon a person shall be established by law.”
Article 664 of the Code of Civil Procedure establishes the following order of precedence which must be used in relation to enforcement against a debtor’s property: (1) mortgaged property, when the enforcement is for the benefit of a mortgage holder; (2) cash savings, property rights, securities, salary, scholarships or other income, or moveable property; (3) immovable property, except for farming land and the debtor’s home; (4) farming land, when farming is the debtor’s main occupation; (5) the debtor’s home (gyvenamasis būstas, kuriame jis gyvena).
Article 662 § 4 provides that enforcement may be directed against property of a lower rank only if the bailiff is not aware of any property of a higher rank, or if that property may not be sufficient to cover the debt and the enforcement expenses, or if that property is not liquid, or if the debtor so requests.
At the material time, Article 663 § 3 provided that enforcement could be directed against a debtor’s home only if the amount to be recovered (išieškoma suma) exceeded LTL 3,000.
At the material time, Article 512 provided that an appeal against any actions of a bailiff could be submitted within ten days from the date on which the person submitting such an appeal found out or ought to have found out about the action in question, but not later than thirty days after that action had been taken.
Article 1.125 § 8 of the Civil Code establishes a three-year timelimit for submitting a claim for damages.
Article 6.146 provides that, after a transaction has been annulled, restitution shall be made in kind, except in cases where this would be impossible or would cause serious inconvenience for the parties. In such cases, restitution shall be executed by payment of the monetary equivalent.
Article 6.249 § 5 provides that the amount of damages shall be assessed according to the valid market prices on the day when the court judgment was issued, unless the law or the nature of the obligation requires the application of prices which were valid on the day when the damage arose or on the day when the claim was brought.
In its ruling of 19 August 2006 the Constitutional Court held:
“In the course of protection and defence of human rights and freedoms ... particular importance falls on the institute of compensation for damage. It is established in Article 30 § 2 of the Constitution that compensation for material and moral damage inflicted upon an individual shall be established by law. Thus, the necessity to compensate material and moral damage is a constitutional principle ... [T]he Constitution does not permit to establish any exceptions when moral and/or material damage would not be compensated, for example, because it was inflicted by unlawful actions of officials or institutions of the State itself. If the law, let alone other legal acts, established such legal regulation whereby the State would be fully or partially exempt from the duty to justly compensate for material and/or moral damage inflicted by unlawful actions of State institution or officials, it would not only disregard the constitutional concept of compensation for damage and be contrary to the Constitution (inter alia, Article 30 § 2 thereof), but it would also undermine the raison d’être of the State itself ...
[I]t should be particularly emphasised that the Constitution does not tolerate any legal regulation by virtue of which an individual who has sustained material and/or moral damage because of unlawful actions of State institutions and officials would be unable to claim in court just compensation for such damage, or a court ... would be unable, while taking into account all relevant circumstances of the case, to establish the size of the material and/or moral damage inflicted and to award just compensation for [that damage] in line with, inter alia, the imperatives of justice, reasonableness and proportionality.”
In its ruling of 21 September 2006 the Constitutional Court held:
“The constitutional imperatives that only courts administer justice [and] that the law [must be] public, as well as the requirement arising from the Constitution to examine a case in a fair manner, imply that every court judgment (or other final decision of a court) must be based on legal arguments (reasoning). The process of reasoning must be rational: a judgment ... must contain sufficient arguments to [make it well-founded] ... In this context, it must be noted that the requirement of legal clarity, which arises from the constitutional principle of a state under the rule of law, means, inter alia, that a court judgment ... cannot contain any implicit arguments, nor any unspecified circumstances which are relevant to the issuing of a fair judgment ... Court judgments ... must be clear to the parties in the case, as well as to other people. If this requirement is disregarded, then this is not the administration of justice required by the Constitution.”