The case originated in an application (no. 35254/04) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Viktor Anatolyevich Titov (“the applicant”), on 10 September 2004.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 1 July 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. In accordance with the pilot judgment Burdov v. Russia (no. 2) (no. 33509/04, ECHR 2009), the application was adjourned pending its resolution at the domestic level. On the same date the Ukrainian Government were informed of the application and its adjournment under the pilot procedure. The Russian Government refused to settle the case, referring, in particular, to the applicant’s failure to exhaust the domestic remedies.
The applicant was born in 1946 and lives in Lisichansk-18, the Lugansk region of Ukraine.
In 1972 the applicant suffered 100 per cent disability as a result of a traffic accident. In 1994 the Lisichansk Town Court of the Lugansk Region of Ukraine found the State Health Care Institution of the Sanitary and Epidemiology Monitoring of the Ministry of Railways of the Russian Federation (“the institution”) responsible for the accident and ordered it to pay to the applicant compensation and to reimburse his medical expenses. Since that time, the applicant has been involved in several sets of proceedings concerning various types of allowances and compensation due to him.
On 17 July 1995 by the Lisichansk Town Court ordered the increase of the monthly payments due to the applicant in respect of compensation, allowances and medical expenses. It appears that the debtor institution complied with the judgment in part and in May 2000 discontinued payments due under the judgment.
On 31 March 2006 the Perm Regional Court of Russia allowed the applicant’s request for compulsory execution of the above judgment in Russia as from May 2000. It was enforced on 30 March 2007.
The applicant sued the defendant institution for medical expenses, various types of allowances and compensation, as well as index-linking and arrears in the respective payments, and acquired several judgments by Russian courts in his favour listed in Appendixes I and II.
In course of the proceedings the defendant institution was replaced by the Federal Health Care Institution “Hygiene and Epidemiology Center of the Perm Region and the Komi-Perm Autonomous Region” and subsequently by Federal Health Care Institution “Hygiene and Epidemiology Center of the Perm Region”, its legal successors.
He complained about non-enforcement to the Ministry of Finance, the prosecutor’s office and various other authorities, but to no avail.
The judgments were enforced fully or in part on dates listed in Appendixes I and II. Some of them have not been enforced, as shown in the tables below.
Federal Law № 68-FZ of 30 April 2010 (in force as of 4 May 2010) provides that in case of a violation of the right to trial within a reasonable time or of the right to enforcement of a final judgment, the Russian citizens are entitled to seek compensation of the non-pecuniary damage. Federal Law № 69-FZ adopted on the same day introduced the pertinent changes in the Russian legislation.
.  Section 6.2 of the Federal Law № 68-FZ provides that everyone who has a pending application before the European Court of Human Rights concerning a complaint of the nature described in the law has six months to bring the complaint to the domestic courts.