.  The case originated in an application (no. 50200/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Vera Vijatović (“the applicant”), on 24 July 2013.
.  The applicant was represented by Mr V. Adžić, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
.  The applicant alleged, in particular, that the refusal of her request to purchase the flat she occupied amounted to a violation of her right to peaceful enjoyment of her possessions and that the decisions of the national courts were inconsistent.
.   On 2 June 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
.  The applicant was born in 1927 and lives in Zagreb.
.  On 24 May 1961 the applicant’s husband was granted a specially protected tenancy in respect of a flat in Zagreb by the Yugoslav People’s Army (the “YPA”). The applicant, as his spouse, was also a holder of a specially protected tenancy of that flat.
.  On 3 June 1991 Parliament enacted the Protected Tenancies (Sale to Occupier) Act (Zakon o prodaji stanova na kojima postoji stanarsko pravo – hereinafter “the Sale to Occupier Act”), which regulated the sale of socially-owned flats previously let under a specially protected tenancy (see paragraph 19 below). However, State-owned flats were excluded.
. On 3 October 1991 the Government adopted a decree (Uredba o preuzimanju sredstava JNA i SSNO na teritoriju Republike Hrvatske u vlasništvo Republike Hrvatske) whereby it took all the YPA’s property in Croatia into State ownership.
.  In 1995 the Act Amending the Sale to Occupier Act (Zakon o izmjenama i dopunama Zakona o prodaji stanova na kojima postoji stanarsko pravo – hereinafter “the APTSO”) allowed the sale of State-owned flats as well (see paragraph 22 below). The time-limit for lodging a request to purchase such a flat was set at sixty days.
.  On 29 January 1997 the Constitutional Court abrogated some of the provisions of the APTSO, including the one stipulating the time-limit for lodging a purchase request (see paragraph 23 below)
.  The applicant’s husband died on 15 April 2006.
.  On 7 June 2006 the applicant lodged with the Ministry of Defence a request to purchase the flat she was occupying. The request was denied on the ground that it had been lodged outside the prescribed time-limit, which had expired on 31 December 1995.
.  On 19 March 2008 the applicant brought a civil action in the Zagreb Municipal Court seeking a judgment in lieu of a sale contract. She relied on several decisions of the Constitutional Court ruling that there was no time-limit in respect of a holder of a specially protected tenancy lodging a request to purchase the respective State-owned flat (see paragraphs 24-26 below).
.  In its judgment of 24 June 2008 the Zagreb Municipal Court held that there was no dispute between the parties that the applicant, as a former holder of a specially protected tenancy of the flat that she occupied, had the right to purchase that flat under favourable conditions. The only issue to be resolved was whether there was a time-limit that the applicant had to observe when lodging her request to purchase that flat – and if so, whether she had complied with it. The Municipal Court dismissed the applicant’s claim on the ground that the applicant had lodged her purchase request outside the accepted time-limit, which had been 31 December 1995.
.  The applicant lodged an appeal, arguing that the time-limit under the APTSO for lodging a request to purchase a State-owned flat had been abrogated by the Constitutional Court and that no new time-limit had been fixed. The fact that there was no prescribed time-limit in place should not have been interpreted to the detriment of a plaintiff. She also relied on the opinion of the Constitutional Court that the very purpose of the Sale to Occupier Act was to enable holders of specially protected tenancies in respect of socially and State-owned flats to purchase such flats (see paragraph 22 below).
.  The first-instance judgment was upheld by the Zagreb County Court on 12 October 2010. The relevant part of the second-instance judgment reads:
.  The applicant’s subsequent constitutional complaint was dismissed on 20 February 2013. The relevant part of that decision reads:
“The Constitutional Court notes that the competent courts dismissed the applicant’s civil action on the grounds that she had not proved that any objective circumstances had prevented her from lodging a request to purchase the flat in issue within the prescribed time-limit. The Constitutional Court considers that the impugned decisions contain reasons acceptable from the standpoint of the constitutional law and that therefore they cannot be seen as arbitrary or unreasonable.”
.  The Housing Act (Zakon o stambenim odnosima, Official Gazette nos. 51/1985, 42/1986, 22/1992 and 70/1993), as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“2. If a specially protected tenancy was acquired by one spouse who lives with the other, the other shall also be considered as having acquired it.
...”
.  The Sale to Occupier Act (Official Gazette no. 27/1991 with subsequent amendments), which entered into force on 19 June 1991, entitled the holder of a specially protected tenancy (“the tenant”) of a socially-owned flat to purchase it from the provider of the flat under favourable conditions.
Section 4(2) provided that a written request to purchase (the first request) had to be made within one year of the date of the Act’s entry into force (by means of subsequent amendments to the Act, this time-limit was extended until 31 December 1995), and a further request for the actual conclusion of the purchase contract within two years of the first request.
.  In its decision no. Rev-944/99-2 of 13 August 2002 the Supreme Court interpreted section 4(2) of the Sale to Occupier Act as follows:
“Since the plaintiff did not make a request for the purchase of the flat to the defendants in written form by 31 December 1995, as provided by law ... the lower-instance courts correctly assessed that the plaintiff had lost his right to request the conclusion of a purchase contract.”
The decision of the Constitutional Court no. U-III-344/2002 of 8 December 2005, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“The very purpose of the Specially Protected Tenancies (Sale to Occupier) Act, as regards socially-owned flats in respect of which there were specially protected tenancies, is to clearly define those persons with an entitlement to [purchase] formerly socially-owned property and to ensure that [such persons] are, in the first place, persons who have been using such flats lawfully.”
.  The APTSO (Official Gazette no. 58/1995) which entered into force on 17 August 1995 extended the right of purchase to holders of specially protected tenancies of State-owned flats.
Section 16 reads as follows:
“(1) Holders of specially protected tenancies ... shall have the right to purchase flats in State ownership.
...
(3) The following persons shall not be entitled to purchase, or transfer the right to purchase, a flat in State ownership:
- those sentenced by a final judgment for crimes against humanity and international law,
- those sentenced by a final judgment for crimes against the Republic of Croatia,
- those against whom criminal proceedings for crimes against humanity and international law or crimes against the Republic of Croatia have been instituted, until the judgment becomes final,
- those who have participated or participate in enemy activities against the Republic of Croatia,
- those who have evaded conscription,
- those against whom proceedings for termination of a specially protected tenancy or termination of a lease agreement in respect of a flat have been instituted, until the end of those proceedings,
- those owning a dwelling house or flat in the same place [i.e. village, town or city],
- those who have left the Republic of Croatia or have moved to the occupied territories and have not used the flat for more than six months.”
Section 20(1) and (2) of the APTSO provides that a written request to purchase a State-owned flat had to be made within sixty days of the date of the APTSO’s entry into force (sub-section 1(1), after the expiry of which the tenant lost his or her right to purchase the flat (sub-section 2).
Section 20(3) provided that the seller had to conclude the purchase contract with the buyer within one year after the expiry of the time-limit referred to in paragraph 1 (this time-limit was by subsequent amendments extended until 31 December 1998).
Section 20(4) provided that if the seller, at the request of the buyer, failed to conclude a contract within the time-limit stipulated in paragraph 3, the buyer had the right to bring a civil action in the competent court with a view to obtaining a judgment that would entirely replace such a contract.
.  Having received 37 requests for it to review the constitutionality of the APTSO, on 26 June 1996 the Constitutional Court instituted proceedings to that end. On 29 January 1997 it delivered decision no. UI697/1995 abrogating a number of the provisions of the APTSO as being unconstitutional, including sub-sections 1 and 2 of section 20.
Sub-sections 1 and 2 of section 20 were abrogated because of an unwarranted distinction in respect of the time-limits for making a purchase request to be observed by the holders of, respectively, specially protected tenancies of State-owned flats and socially-owned flats. The Constitutional Court noted that holders of specially protected tenancies of State-owned flats had been obliged to make their request within only sixty days of the entry into force of the APTSO, whereas the holders of tenancies of socially-owned flats had had to do so within one year of the entry into force of the Sale to Occupier Act, the time-limit for which had been extended several times (eventually until 31 December 1995). The Constitutional Court held that new time-limits could be prescribed by the legislature and also by the Government.
.  In its decisions U-III-559/2004 of 16 November 2004 and UIII344/2002 of 8 December 2005, the Constitutional Court held that applicants who had been prevented on objectively justified grounds from lodging a request to purchase State-owned flats that they occupied could not have been required to lodge such requests as long as these obstacles existed (in the two cases in point these were applicants whose specially protected tenancies of State-owned flats had been recognised only in 1996 and 2001, respectively).
.  In case no. U-III-551/2002 of 6 May 2005 the applicant in that case argued that she had acquired the specially protected tenancy of a State-owned flat only on 13 March 1997 and had therefore not been able to lodge a request to purchase it before that date. The Constitutional Court held, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“5. The Constitutional Court in the reasoning of its decision no. U-I-697/1995 of 29 January 1997, in connection with abrogating section 20(1) of the Act amending the Protected Tenancies (Sale to Occupier) Act (the APTSO), which prescribed a sixty-day time-limit for lodging requests to purchase State-owned flats, held as follows:
‘The inequality of the positions of buyers of so-called State-owned flats and buyers of other flats, which is incompatible with the Constitution, exists also in respect of the time-limits for lodging requests to purchase State-owned flats. Therefore, section 20(1) and (2) and section 21 of the APTSO have been repealed because they [discriminated against] those citizens for whom the time-limit for seeking to purchase the flats [they occupied] was sixty days or thirty days from the APTSO entering into force, in comparison with those citizens who [initially] had a one-year time-limit to lodge such requests ... [such time-limit having been subsequently] extended for a further couple of years.
In repealing these provisions, the [Constitutional] Court is aware that new time-limits ... could be prescribed not only by the legislature but also by the Government of the Republic of Croatia. ...’
The Constitutional Court stresses the following:
Before the APTSO had entered into force, section 50 of the Specially Protected Tenancies (Sale to Occupier) Act (Official Gazette no. 43/92 – consolidated text) provided as follows:
‘Flats which have become the property of the Republic of Croatia on the basis of the Decree on the Taking Over of the Assets of the YPA [Yugoslav People’s Army] ... on the Territory of the Republic of Croatia (Official Gazette no. 52/91) and the Decree on the Taking Over of the Assets of the Former SFRY [the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia] into the Ownership of the Republic of Croatia (Official Gazette no. 68/91) shall not be sold before the enactment of laws establishing specific criteria for the sale of such flats’.
That law reflects exactly the APTSO, which in section 20(1) and (2) fixed the time-limit (between 5 August and 4 October 1995) for lodging requests to purchase State-owned flats (such as the flat the applicant wishes to buy). After certain provisions of that Act were repealed (by the decision mentioned in point 5 of this decision), the competent body did not enact any new law prescribing a new time-limit.
Therefore, the Constitutional Court finds that the non-existence of a time-limit for taking a certain action (particularly in view of the fact that the time-limit was repealed by a decision of the Constitutional Court) cannot be interpreted to the detriment of a party who had to take such action.
The Constitutional Court has established that the lower courts wrongly applied substantive law and thus violated the applicant’s constitutional right, as guaranteed by Article 14 § 2 of the Constitution, which guarantees the equality of all before the law.”
.  In case no. U-III-1525/2010 of 27 May 2010 there is no indication that the applicant in that case was prevented from lodging before 31 December 1995 a request to purchase the flat that she occupied. The Constitutional Court held, insofar as relevant, as follows:
“5. The APTSO set time-limits for lodging requests to purchase so-called State-owned flats (between 5 August and 4 October 1995). After some of the provisions of that Act were repealed ..., the competent body did not enact laws prescribing a new time-limit.
Therefore, the Constitutional Court finds that the non-existence of a time-limit for taking a certain action (particularly in view of the fact that the time-limit was repealed by a decision of the Constitutional Court) cannot be interpreted to the detriment of a party who had to take such action.
The Constitutional Court expressed the same opinion in its decision no UIII559/2004 of 16 November 2004 (Official Gazette no. 174/04).”
.  The constitutional Court expressed the same view its decision no. UIII-4842/2013 of 13 May 2015.
.  In its decision no. Rev-1256/02-2 of 14 July 2004 the Supreme Court interpreted the relationship between the Sale to Occupier Act (in particular its section 4) and the APTSO as follows:
“The plaintiff made a request for the purchase of the flat to the defendant on 18 October 1996, that is, after the expiry of the prescribed time-limit (31 December 1995), so the courts [ruled] correctly [when they] dismissed her claim. The time-limit in question is preclusive, meaning that after its expiry a holder of a specially protected tenancy loses his or her right to make a request to purchase such flat ...
The fact that the proceedings for termination of the specially protected tenancy – which ended with the first-instance judgment ... of 16 April 1996, which became final on 11 July 1996 – were pending between the parties at the time when the time-limit expired (31 December 1995) is not relevant. ... [Those proceedings] did not prevent the plaintiff from making a request to purchase the flat. ...
The provisions of section 16 of the APTSO on which the plaintiff relies, and which concern so-called State-owned flats, did not extend the time-limit for making the request to purchase the flat. Under [section 16 of the APTSO] persons against whom proceedings for termination of the specially protected tenancy ... have been instituted, could not, until the end of those proceedings, buy a State-owned flat. That means, in particular, that the plaintiff cannot have concluded a sale contract in respect of the flat until 11 July 1996, when the proceedings for the termination of the specially protected tenancy ended ... On that day that impediment ceased to exist ... [H]owever, making a written request to purchase the flat before the expiry of the prescribed time-limit is a precondition for the conclusion of the contract [of sale]. Because the plaintiff did not make such a request before the time-limit expired (on 31 December 1995), she lost the right to make the request and the defendant was not obliged to sell her the flat on the basis of the request made after the expiry of the time-limit (18 October 1996). The proceedings for termination of the specially protected tenancy were an impediment to buying the flat (for the conclusion of a contract), but not to making a request to purchase the flat. The existence of the [pending] proceedings does not extend the time-limit for making a request to purchase the flat.
The Constitutional Court’s decision U-I-697/1995 of 29 January 1997 abrogating, inter alia, section 20(1) and (2) of the APTSO is of no relevance to the outcome of these proceedings. Those abrogated provisions provided that the request ... to purchase the State-owned flat had to be made within sixty days of the entry into force of the APTSO and that after the expiry of that time-limit the applicant lost the right to buy the flat. [Those provisions] placed the holders of specially protected tenancies of State-owned flats in an unequal position compared to the holders of such tenancies of flats not owned by the State, because for them the considerably shorter preclusive time-limit for making their request to purchase the flat was prescribed (the prescribed time-limit of sixty days expired on 16 October 1995). By the Constitutional Court’s decision the buyers of State-owned flats were put in the same position as other buyers, but they were not given a privileged status, so the prescribed time-limit for making a request to purchase a flat (31 December 1995), valid for all other buyers, would not apply to them.”
.  On 2 April 2009 the Croatian Government issued the Decision on the Sale of Flats Owned by the Republic of Croatia and Managed by the Ministry of Defence (Odluka o prodaji stanova u vlasništvu Republike Hrvatske kojima upravlja Ministarstvo obrane (Official Gazette nos. 43/209, 109/2010 and 116/2011) by which it allowed the sale of these flats for their market value, but excluded those flats which were the subject of the Sale to Occupier Act and the APTSO.