The case originated in an application (no. 35538/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Ms Janina Misielak (“the applicant”), on 16 September 2004.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz, succeeded by Ms J. Chrzanowska, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the ex officio reopening of the social security proceedings concerning her right to an early-retirement pension, which resulted in the quashing of the final decision granting her a right to a pension, was in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 20 May 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Zagorzyce.
The applicant is married and has children. Prior to her application for pension she was employed for twenty-six years and paid her social security contributions to the State.
On 18 September 2001 the applicant filed an application with the Rzeszów Social Security Board (Zakład Ubezpieczeń Społecznych) to be granted the right to an early-retirement pension for persons raising children who, due to the seriousness of their health condition, required constant care, the so-called EWK pension.
Along with her application for a pension, the applicant submitted, among other documents concerning her daughter’s health condition, a medical certificate issued by a specialist medical centre on 4 September 2001. The certificate stated that the child (born in 1987) suffered from asthma and other disorders and was in need of the parent’s constant care.
On 25 September 2001 the Rzeszów Social Security Board (“the SSB”) issued a decision granting the applicant the right to an earlyretirement pension as of 1 September 2001 in the net amount of 632 Polish zlotys (PLN).
The Social Security Board initially suspended the payment of the pension due to the fact that the applicant was still working on the date of the decision. On 30 September 2001 the applicant resigned from her full-time job in a private company where she has been working since 1985. Afterwards, payment of the pension was resumed.
On 29 May 2002 the Rzeszów Social Security Board requested the Main Social Security Board’s doctor (Główny Lekarz Orzecznik) to inform it whether the applicant’s daughter required the permanent care of a parent. On 8 July 2002 the doctor stated that, on the basis of the medical documents, the child in question could not be considered as ever having required such care.
On 31 July 2002 the Rzeszów Social Security Board issued simultaneously two decisions in respect of the applicant. By virtue of one decision, the payment of the applicant’s pension was discontinued with immediate effect. By virtue of the other decision, the Board reopened the proceedings, revoked the initial decision granting a pension and eventually refused to award the applicant the right to an early-retirement pension under the scheme provided for by the Cabinet’s Ordinance of 15 May 1989 on the right to early retirement of employees raising children who require permanent care (Rozporządzenie Rady Ministrów z dn. 15 maja 1989 w sprawie uprawnień do wcześniejszej emerytury pracowników opiekujących się dziećmi wymagającymi stałej opieki) (“the 1989 Ordinance”).
The applicant appealed against the respective decisions divesting her of the right to an early-retirement pension. She submitted that she should receive the benefit because her child required constant care, as confirmed by the medical certificate attached to the applicant’s original application for a pension. Moreover, the applicant alleged that the revocation of her retirement pension was contrary to the principle of vested rights.
On 3 June 2003 the  (Sąd Okręgowy) dismissed the appeal. The  concluded on the basis of the evidence, including expert medical evidence, that while indeed the applicant’s child suffered from asthma and other disorders she did not require her mother’s permanent care since her health condition did not significantly impair her body functions. The domestic court held that the applicant had been rightfully divested of her right to a pension under the scheme provided by the 1989 Ordinance as she did not satisfy the requirement of necessary permanent care.
The applicant further appealed against the first-instance judgment.
On 20 November 2003 the Rzeszów Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) dismissed the appeal.
On 29 April 2004 the Supreme Court (Sąd Najwyższy) refused to entertain the cassation appeal lodged by the applicant.
Following the social security proceedings the applicant was not ordered to return her early-retirement benefits paid by the Social Security Board, despite the revocation of her right to the early-retirement pension.
The applicant submitted that after the revocation of the EWK pension her situation had been very difficult. After the revocation of the pension the applicant was unemployed without a right to any benefit for three years and four months. On 23 November 2005 she was employed again by the company where she had worked before the revocation of the pension. She worked there until she qualified for early retirement.
The Government submitted that the applicant had been unemployed from January 2003 until November 2005. She started working in November 2005 and was employed until November 2008, when she was granted an early retirement pension in the amount of PLN 1,000 per month. The applicant’s husband had also been employed periodically between 2001 and 2004. The applicant’s eldest son had worked temporarily in 2001 and 2002. Since 2006 he has been employed without interruption. The applicant also owned a farm of 1.47 ha.
In addition, the Government submitted information as regards various types of social benefits available in . However, they have failed to specify which of those benefits, if any, were available in the applicant’s situation.
Under the relevant laws currently in force, it appears that the applicant will qualify for a regular retirement pension in 2013.
Some 130 applications arising from a similar fact pattern have been brought to the Court. The majority of the applicants form the Association of Victims of the SSB (Stowarzyszenie Osób Poszkodowanych przez ZUS) (“the Association”), an organisation monitoring the practices of the Social Security Board in , in particular in the Podkarpacki region.
Out of all applications lodged with the Court, about twenty-four applicants decided not to lodge a cassation appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal given in their case.
One hundred-and-four applicants lodged cassation appeals against the final judgments given in their cases. The Supreme Court entertained and dismissed on the merits fifteen appeals. In eighty-one applications the Supreme Court refused to entertain cassation appeals on the ground that they did not raise any important legal issue or make it necessary for the Supreme Court to give a new interpretation to legal provisions which raised serious doubts or caused ambiguity in the jurisprudence of the domestic courts. In the remaining eight cases cassation appeals were rejected for failure to comply with various procedural requirements.
The legal provisions applicable at the material time and questions of practice are set out in the judgment of the case of Moskal v. Poland, no. 10373/05, § 31-34, 15 September 2009.
The social security scheme for farmers is regulated by the Farmers’ Social Security Act of 20 December 1990 (“the 1990 Act”; ustawa o ubezpieczeniu społecznym rolników).
The re-opening of the proceedings concerning the early retirement pension is regulated in section 114 (1) of the Law of 17 December 1998 on retirement and disability pensions paid from the Social Insurance Fund (Ustawa o emeryturach i rentach z Funduszu Ubezpieczeń Społecznych) (“the 1998 Law”), which at the relevant time read as follows:
“The right to benefits or the amount of benefits will be re-assessed upon application by the person concerned or, ex officio, if, after the validation of the decision concerning benefits, new evidence is submitted or circumstances which had existed before issuing the decision and which have an impact on the right to benefits or on their amount are discovered.”
On 1 July 2004 a new subparagraph 114 (1) (a) was added, which reads as follows:
“Section 1 shall apply respectively, if, after the validation of the decision it is discovered that the evidence that had been submitted did not give the right to a pension, disability pension or its amount.”
A party to civil proceedings could, at the material time, lodge a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court against a judicial decision of a second-instance court. A party had to be represented by an advocate or a legal adviser.
Article 3931 of the Code of Civil Procedure as applicable at that time listed the grounds on which a cassation appeal could be lodged. It read as follows:
“The cassation appeal may be based on the following grounds:
1)  a breach of substantive law as a result of its erroneous interpretation or wrongful application;
2)  a breach of procedural provisions, if that defect could significantly affect the outcome of the case.”
Pursuant to Article 393¹³ the Supreme Court, having allowed a cassation appeal, could quash the challenged judgment in its entirety or in part and remit the case for re-examination. Where the Supreme Court failed to find non-conformity with the law, it dismissed the cassation appeal. According to Article 39315 if the cassation appeal was well-founded the Supreme Court could also amend the impugned judgment and adjudicate on merits.
On 22 June 1999 the Ombudsman made an application to the Constitutional Court, asking for section 186 (3) of the Law of 17 December 1998 on retirement and disability pensions paid from the Social Insurance Fund (Ustawa o emeryturach i rentach z Funduszu Ubezpieczeń Społecznych) (“the 1998 Law”) to be declared unconstitutional in so far as it restricted the application of the 1989 Ordinance to persons born before 1 January 1949. More specifically, the Ombudsman submitted that the introduction of an age-limit in respect of persons taking care of a child, which in essence amounted to a deprivation of the right to a benefit, constituted a violation of the principle of equality set forth in Article 32 § 1 of the Constitution.
On 4 January 2000 the Constitutional Court (K18/99) declared the impugned section 186 (3) of the 1998 Law unconstitutional in so far as it restricted the application of the 1989 Ordinance to persons born before 1 January 1949. The  reiterated among other things the constitutional principle of acquired rights which guarantees particularly strong protection for the right to receive social welfare benefits.
On 10 February 2011 the Ombudsman made an application to the Constitutional Court, asking for section 114 (1)(a) of the 1998 Law to be declared unconstitutional in so far as it allowed the SSB to reopen ex officio proceedings relating to the grant of a pension or a disability pension on the basis of a new assessment of evidence which had already been submitted.
On 28 February 2012 the Constitutional Court (K5/11) declared the impugned section 114 (1)(a) of the 1998 Law unconstitutional in so far as it allowed the SSB to reopen such proceedings following a new assessment of evidence which had already been submitted.