The case originated in an application (no. 31788/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Svetlana Aleksandrovna Alentseva (“the applicant”), on 24 May 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Akopov, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had been deprived of her flat in contravention of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention and that her eviction had amounted to a violation of Article 8 of the Convention.
On 7 January 2014 the President of the First Section decided to grant the application priority under Rule 41 of the Rules of the Court and to give the Government notice of the complaints under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention and Article 8 of the Convention. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Moscow.
Prior to its privatisation, the flat at 10-3-34 Bolshoy Rogozhskiy Pereulok, Moscow, had been owned by the City of Moscow. R. had resided there as a tenant under the social housing agreement with the City. On 31 May 1993 the title to the flat was transferred to R. under a privatisation scheme.
On 12 August 1996 R. died.
In October 1999 Yar. applied to a notary seeking recognition as R.’s heir. In support of his application, Yar. submitted a will allegedly signed by R. on 9 February 1996.
On 2 June 2000 the notary granted the request and issued a certificate confirming, inter alia, that Yar. had inherited R.’s flat.
On 20 June 2000 the Moscow City Committee for Registration of Real Estate Transactions (the “City Registration Committee”) registered the certificate, confirming Yar.’s title to the flat.
On 13 July 2000 Yar. sold the flat to the applicant. On an unspecified date the City Registration Committee registered the transaction and issued the relevant deed, confirming the applicant’s title to the flat. The applicant moved in and resided in the flat. After the birth of her daughter in 2004, she resided there with her daughter.
On an unspecified date the authorities opened a criminal investigation concerning the forgery of the will issued on behalf of R.
On 6 June 2001 the Taganskiy District Court of Moscow found Yar. guilty of fraud and sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment and confiscation of property. In particular, the court established that Yar., acting in concert with other persons, whose identity was not known, had fraudulently acquired R.’s flat and sold it to the applicant on the basis of a forged will. The judgment became final on 25 July 2001.
On 5 March 2002 the prosecutor brought a civil claim on behalf of the Department for Housing of the City of Moscow (the “Housing Department”) seeking (1) the annulment of R.’s will and of the applicant’s title to the flat; (2) the applicant’s eviction; (3) restitution of the flat to the City of Moscow; and (4) annulment of the purchase agreement between Yar. and the applicant, and the reimbursement by Yar. of the amount the applicant had paid for the flat.
On 16 December 2003 the District Court examined the case in the applicant’s absence and granted the prosecutor’s claims in full. The applicant appealed.
On 16 June 2004 the Moscow City Court held that the District Court had failed to duly inform the applicant of the date and time of the hearing. It quashed the judgment of 16 December 2003 and remitted the case for fresh consideration.
In the new set of proceedings the applicant brought a counterclaim against the City of Moscow, seeking to be recognised as a bona fide purchaser of the flat.
On 14 November 2005 the District Court invalidated R.’s will and Yar.’s title to the flat. The court established that the property was escheat and ordered its restitution to the City of Moscow. It also ordered the applicant’s eviction. The court dismissed the remainder of the prosecutor’s claims concerning the annulment of the sale contract concluded by Yar. and the applicant, and the former’s obligation to return the sum paid by the applicant to her. As regards the applicant’s counterclaim, the court recognised that she had bought the flat in good faith. However, it found that because Yar. had acquired R.’s flat fraudulently, he had, in fact, stolen it from the City of Moscow and the latter had the right to reclaim the flat from the applicant, despite the fact that she was a bona fide purchaser.
On 24 January 2006 the City Court upheld the judgment of 14 November 2005 on appeal.
On 23 March 2006 the district bailiff’s service instituted enforcement proceedings in respect of the judgment of 14 November 2005.
On 2 April 2008 the applicant and her daughter were evicted from the flat. According to the applicant, they had to move in with her parents and her brother and his family.
According to the Government, on 9 April 2010 the flat was reassigned to Sh., who had been on the social housing waiting list for twenty-five years.
On 12 May 2011 the District Court recognised the City’s title to the flat. In particular, the court established that R. had died intestate and without heirs and that her flat should have been transferred to the State as escheat property. The court also terminated the applicant’s title to the flat.
On 22 September 2011 the City Court upheld the judgment of 12 May 2011 on appeal.
Pursuant to the Federal Law On State registration of titles to, and transactions in respect of, real property, adopted on 21 July 1997 (as amended), the State confirms the acquisition, transfer or termination of the title to real property by means of state registration (Article 2). Once the state registration authorities receive the application for state registration of the title to real property, they are under obligation to conduct an expert review as regards the lawfulness of the transactions underlying the acquisition, transfer or termination of the title. They are further required to establish that there are no conflicting interests in respect of such property and verify whether the application should be accepted (Article 13 § 1). When applying for state registration, the parties to the transaction underlying the acquisition, transfer or termination of the title to real property should present a valid ID. If the application is lodged by the parties’ representative(s), he or she should submit a duly notarised authority form (power of attorney) (Article 16 §§ 1 and 2).
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation provide as follows:
“1.  The invalidation of a transaction shall have no legal consequences except for those connected with the invalidation, and the transaction shall be considered invalid from the date of the transaction.
If a transaction has been declared invalid, each of the parties shall return to the other the consideration it has received under the transaction, and if the return is impossible in kind (including where the transaction concerns the use of property, work performed or services rendered), its cost shall be reimbursed in the form of money - unless other consequences of the invalidity of the transactions have been stipulated by law.
If it follows from the content of the disputed transaction that it may not be terminated until a future date, the court, while declaring the transaction invalid, shall fix a future date for its termination.”
“An owner has the right to recover his or her property from the unlawful possession of a thirty party.”
“1.  If a property has been purchased from a person who had no right to sell it, and the purchaser is unaware and could not have been aware [of this fact] (the bona fide purchaser), the owner shall have the right to reclaim this property from the purchaser, if the said property was lost by the owner or by the person into whose possession the owner has conveyed the property, or if it was stolen from either of them, or if it left their possession in another way against their will.
If the property has been acquired gratuitously from a person who had no right to convey it, the owner shall have the right to reclaim the property in all cases.
Money and bearer securities shall not be reclaimed from a bona fide purchaser.”
“1.  If there are no [legal or testamentary heirs], or if none of the heirs has a right to inherit, or if all are disinherited, or if all have refused the inheritance and none has indicated that he or she has refused it in favour of another heir, the property is considered escheat.
... If [escheat property consisting of residential premises] is located in ... the City of Moscow ..., title shall be transferred by operation of the law to [the City of Moscow. The premises shall form part of the residential social housing stock.
The procedure for the succession and registration of escheat property that has reverted by operation of the law to the Russian Federation, and its transfer to the constituent entities of the Russian Federation and municipalities, shall be governed by law.”
“1.  In order to acquire rights in respect of inheritance, an heir should accept the inheritance.
In order to acquire rights in respect of escheat property, acceptance of inheritance is not required.”
“1.  Inheritance must be claimed within six months of the date of [the death of the person] ...
Persons whose inheritance rights arise only by virtue of [no claim being submitted] by other heirs may claim the inheritance within three months of the expiry of the time-limit set forth in paragraph 1.”
By its ruling of 21 April 2003, 6-P, the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation interpreted Article 167 of the Code as not allowing the original owner to reclaim his property from a bona fide purchaser unless there was a special legislative provision to that effect. Instead, a claim vindicating prior rights (виндикационный иск) could be lodged under Article 302 of the Code if the conditions indicated in paragraphs 1 and 2 were met, in particular if the property had left the owner’s possession without his or her intention to divest himself of it, or if the property had been acquired gratuitously.
Further interpretation of Article 302 of the Civil Code was provided by the Plenary of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation and the Plenary of the High Commercial Court of the Russian Federation. Their joint ruling of 29 April 2010, no. 10/22 “On certain questions arising in judicial practice in respect of resolution of disputes connected with the protection of property rights and other real rights” stated as follows:
“39.  Article 302 § 1 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation provides that the owner may reclaim his property ... regardless of the respondent party’s claim that he or she is a bona fide purchaser, if he proves that the property has left his possession ... against his will.
The fact that the transaction ... has been declared invalid does not by itself signify that the property left the [owner’s] possession against his or her will. It is incumbent on the court to establish whether the owner expressed his or her will to convey [the property] to another person.”
In its ruling no. 188OO of 27 January 2011, the Constitutional Court relied on the interpretation of Article 302 provided by the Plenaries when verifying the said Article’s compliance with the Constitution.
On 29 May 2012 the Plenary of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation adopted Ruling no. 9 on Judicial Practice Concerning Inheritance. As regards escheated property, the Plenary noted as follows:
“50.  Escheat property in the form of housing located [in the City of Moscow] ... . as of the date of [the death of the property’s owner] shall be transferred to ... the City of Moscow ... .
A certificate confirming the inheritance of title to escheat property shall be issued to ... the City of Moscow ... in accordance with the procedure applicable to other heirs, without a separate judgment recognising such property as escheat.”
When deciding whether the City of Moscow could reclaim escheat housing from a bona fide purchaser, the courts have consistently found that, when a property owner died intestate and without heirs, the property should be considered escheat and title transferred to the City of Moscow as of the date of death of the property owner. Escheat property fraudulently acquired by a third party was considered to have been stolen from the City of Moscow. A statutory exception set out in Article 302 of the Russian Civil Code (see paragraph 25 above) allowed the City of Moscow to reclaim such property from bona fide purchasers. The following are examples of the courts’ practice on the matter.
I. died without leaving any heirs. On an unspecified date, L. acquired title to a flat belonging to I. as I.’s heir.
On 24 December 2001 L. sold the flat to K.V. On 6 March 2002 K.V. sold the flat to B. On 9 July 2002 B. sold the flat to K.N., who moved in and resided in the flat with his daughter and her son, who was a minor.
On 20 November 2009 the Timiryazevskiy District Court of Moscow found L. guilty of fraud. The court established that L. had fraudulently inherited the flat from I. by forging the latter’s will.
On an unspecified date the Housing Department brought a civil action seeking, inter alia, recognition of the City’s title to the flat and the eviction of K.N. and his family.
On 2 August 2011 the Timiryazevskiy District Court of Moscow dismissed the claims against K.N. and his family. The court recognised K.N. as a bona fide purchaser of the flat and took into account that K.N. and his family had been living in the flat for eight years and had nowhere else to live. The court also noted that, in such circumstances, the family’s eviction would amount to a violation of human rights protected by the Constitution. Lastly, the court ruled that the Housing Department had missed the statutory deadline for its vindication claim against K.N.
On 24 October 2011 the Moscow City Court upheld the judgment of 2 August 2011 on appeal.
The flat at issue belonged to L., who died on 3 November 2003 without leaving any heirs. B. and G. forged a contract dated 10 October 2003, according to which L. had sold the flat to B.
On 4 October 2004 the City Registration Committee registered the said contract.
On 14 February 2008 the Savelovskiy District Court of Moscow found B. and G. guilty of fraud.
On an unspecified date the Housing Department brought a civil claim against B., seeking to recover the escheat flat from B.
On 18 August 2012 B. sold the flat to A. On 3 September 2012 the City Registration Committee registered the transaction and A.’s title to the flat.
It appears that, in the course of the civil proceedings concerning the recovery of the flat, the Housing Department brought an action against A. seeking not only the recovery of the flat but also A.’s eviction.
On 21 June 2013 the District Court dismissed the claims against A., recognising A. as a bona fide purchaser.
On 14 November 2013 the Moscow City Court quashed, in part, the judgment of 21 June 2013 on appeal. The court found, in particular, that the flat was the property of the City and could be reclaimed from A., albeit a bona fide purchaser. The court terminated A.’s title to the flat and ordered A.’s eviction.
On 29 January 2014 the City Court dismissed A.’s application for cassation review of the matter. The court held that the flat had been stolen and had left the City’s possession against its will. Accordingly it could be reclaimed from the bona fide purchaser, A.
Under Article 1 of the Fundamental Principles of Notarial Legislation 1993, amended in 2014, notaries are responsible for protecting the rights and lawful interests of individuals and legal entities in accordance with the Constitution of the Russian Federation and applicable legislation by means of carrying out notarial acts on behalf of the Russian Federation.
Under Article 8.4 of the Moscow Real Estate Committee Regulations, adopted by Decision of the Mayor of Moscow no. 341-RM of 8 April 1998, the responsibilities of the City Registration Committee include legal expert examination of documents submitted for registration of rights to real property in order to ensure their compliance with the legislation of the Russian Federation and the lawfulness of the transaction.