The case concerns the prolonged non-enforcement of a final judgment in the applicants’ favour against a private third party.
The applicants were born in 1926 and 1923 respectively and lived in Varna. They passed away, respectively in 2015 and 2016. Their heirs, namely G. Ugrinov, K. Ugrinov and M. Georgieva, as well as K. Sakazov and B. Sakazov, expressed a wish to continue the proceedings in their stead.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms V. Hristova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the applicants and not contested by the Government, may be summarised as follows.
In a decision of 1992 the local authorities restituted an immovable property (a plot of land with a small house on it) to the applicants jointly under a newly adopted restitution law (Закон за възстановяване собствеността върху одържавени недвижими имоти 1992). In August 1993 the mayor of Varna ordered the individuals who were occupying that property at the time to vacate it and to demolish the construction (another, bigger, house with a swimming pool and a solid fence) they had unlawfully built on it. One of the individuals concerned, P.Ts., brought judicial review proceedings challenging the mayor’s order. On 3 November 1995 the Varna Regional Court rejected the challenge in a final decision. P.Ts.’s attempt to have the proceedings reopened was dismissed by the Supreme Administrative Court in 1997.
On 5 June 2002, in a final judgment, the Supreme Court of Cassation (“SCC”) upheld the lower court’s judgment of 29 November 2000 in which the Varna Regional Court, ruling on a rei vindicatio claim brought in the meantime by the applicants against P.Ts., had ordered the latter to hand over the property (see paragraph 4 above) to the applicants, as well as to stop building on the plot and to demolish what he had already built on it.
The Varna District Court issued a writ of enforcement to the applicants on 12 September 2002 on the basis of the SCC’s judgment of 5 June 2002. They turned to the bailiff requesting that he enforce the final judgment.
On 23 July 2003 the bailiff refused to hand over the property to the applicants because he considered that the construction P.Ts. had built on it was potentially subject to legalisation. On an unspecified date the applicants challenged that refusal in court. On 4 December 2003 the Varna Regional Court found in a final decision that enforcement was owed to the applicants on the basis of the final 2002 judgment. The court further quashed the bailiff’s refusal to enforce and held that he was obliged to hand over the property to the applicants and to see to the demolition of the illegal constructions.
The bailiff scheduled the handing over of the property to the applicants for 31 March 2004. As a result of deficiencies in the summoning of the debtor the handing over was postponed twice, respectively to 28 April 2004 and 21 May 2004. On 29 November 2004 a relative of the first applicant acting on her behalf asked the bailiff to schedule a date for the handing over of the property to the applicants. As no handing over took place, in 2006 the applicants challenged in court the bailiff’s failure to act. On 23 May 2007 the Varna Regional Court established that the bailiff (in that case a State bailiff) had unlawfully failed to act and ordered him to do so in order to enforce the final judgment in the applicants’ favour.
The bailiff scheduled two more dates for the handing over of the property to the applicants, respectively for 29 December 2007 and 22 July 2008, without success. Thereafter the applicants wrote to various authorities, including the Council of Ministers and the Inspectorate under the Supreme Judicial Council, complaining about the bailiff’s failure to act and their inability to recover their property. Those authorities confirmed the sequence of events in the applicants’ case and informed them that they had to turn to the bailiff for all matters related to enforcement.
In the meantime, the attempts by P.Ts. to legalise the constructions he had built on the applicants’ property met with no success.
The applicants brought proceedings in 2010, asking the Varna Regional Court to interpret precisely which unlawfully built constructions P.Ts. was obliged to demolish pursuant to the 2002 judgment in their favour. The court first noted that the 2002 judgment had not been enforced. It then found that the buildings subject to the demolition order had been specified and identified in an expert report of 1998 but that specification had not been reproduced in the 2002 judgment. The court thus allowed the request and explicitly specified the buildings in question in a decision of 31 March 2010. The SCC did not allow a cassation appeal brought by P.Ts. in a final decision of 1 February 2011.
As of October 2019, the 2002 final judgment in the applicants’ favour has not been enforced.
A person with a judgment in his or her favour can challenge before the relevant regional court a bailiff’s refusal to carry out an action requested by that person or a bailiff’s decision to terminate or suspend enforcement proceedings (Article 332 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1952, reproduced in Article 435 of the Code of Civil Procedure 2007). The court’s decision on such a complaint is final.
When the debtor owes a non-substitutable action which is dependent exclusively on his or her own good will, the bailiff upon a request by the creditor compels the debtor to carry out that action, by imposing a fine of up to 100 euros (EUR) on him or her. If the debtor fails to act, thereafter the bailiff fines him or her repeatedly with new fines in the same amount (Article 527 of the Code of Civil Procedure 2007).
The police are obliged to assist bailiffs when they encounter obstacles for carrying out their duties. State institutions, municipalities and other organisations are also required to assist bailiffs with their functions (Article 328 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1952, reproduced in Article 431 § 2 of the 2007 Code).