The case originated in an application (no. 71462/17) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Ivanovich Kochergin (“the applicant”), on 6 September 2017.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 7 November 2017 notice of the complaint concerning the annulment of the applicant’s title to the flat was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in Chelyabinsk.
The flat in question was a two-roomed flat measuring 38.9 sq. m and located at 27-24 Krasnoznamennaya Street, Chelyabinsk, which belonged to Chelyabinsk Municipality. Two brothers, A.N. and V.N., resided in the flat under a social-tenancy agreement with the Municipality.
On 21 December 2009 V.N. was sentenced to a term of imprisonment, which he served in a correctional colony in Chelyabinsk Region.
On 12 March 2014 the Municipality annulled V.N.’s registration in respect of the flat following a request by A.N.
On 11 August 2014 the Municipality transferred the title to the flat to A.N. under a privatisation scheme. A.N. submitted a notarised statement made by V.N., in which the latter waived his right to participate in acquiring the flat.
On 18 September 2014 the regional land registry registered A.N.’s title to the flat.
On 19 September 2014 the regional land registry confirmed, in response to a request by the applicant, that A.N. was the owner of the flat and that the flat was free from any liens or encumbrances.
On 23 September 2014 A.N. sold the flat to the applicant. The applicant paid 1,450,000 Russian roubles to A.N. as a purchase price. On 29 September 2014 the regional land registry registered the applicant’s title to the flat. The applicant and his family moved into the flat and lived there.
On 4 December 2015 V.N. was released from prison.
On an unspecified date V.N. brought an action against the applicant, A.N. and the Municipality seeking the invalidation of (1) the privatisation of the flat into A.N.’s ownership and (2) the sale of the flat to the applicant. V.N. claimed that the notarised waiver of his right to participate in the privatisation of the flat allegedly signed by him had been forged.
The court did not establish the whereabouts of A.N. The latter did not have any known address and could not be found. He did not take part in the proceedings in person. The court appointed M. as his counsel. M. contested V.N.’s claims.
The court informed the Municipality of the pending civil proceedings concerning the consideration of V.N.’s claims. The Municipality chose not to attend the hearing.
The applicant submitted that he had bought the flat in good faith and, as a matter of law, had a right to retain his title to it despite the fraudulent actions allegedly committed by A.N.
On 18 May 2016 the Kurchatovskiy District Court of Chelyabinsk granted V.N.’s claims in full. It established that V.N.’s waiver had been forged and recognised his right to reside in the flat. The court invalidated all the transactions with the flat, transferred the title to the flat back to the Municipality and ordered A.N. to repay the applicant the price the latter had paid for the flat. The court refused to recognise that the applicant had bought the flat in good faith, noting that the applicant (1) had had an opportunity to verify whether A.N. had had a right to sell the flat and whether V.N. had indeed waived his rights to his share in the privatised flat; (2) could have known that A.N. had not had a right to sell the flat; and (3) had known that V.N. had been serving a prison sentence and, upon his release, would have been eligible to reside in the flat.
On 9 August 2016 the Chelyabinsk District Court upheld the judgment of 18 May 2016 on appeal. When upholding the District Court’s refusal to recognise that the applicant had bought the flat in good faith, the appellate court also noted that the applicant (1) had bought the flat at below market value and (2) had known that A.N. had had a drinking problem. The court refused to order the enforcement procedure requested by the applicant, who had asked that the annulment of his title to the flat precede the repayment by A.N. of the purchase price of the flat.
On 9 March 2017 the Regional Court dismissed an appeal on points of law by the applicant against the judgments of 18 May and 9 August 2016.
On 29 June 2017 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation dismissed a second appeal on points of law by the applicant.
On 26 September 2016 the bailiff’s office instituted enforcement proceedings against A.N. The bailiff’s office did not establish A.N.’s whereabouts or any of his assets. The judgment in the part concerning the repayment of the purchase price to the applicant has not been enforced to date.
On an unspecified date V.N. brought a civil action, seeking the applicant’s eviction. On 2 February 2017 the District Court allowed V.N.’s claims in full. The applicant did not appeal against the said judgment.
On 15 June 2017 the District Court stayed the applicant’s eviction until 15 November 2017.
On 31 May 2018 the applicant and his family were evicted from the flat.