The case originated in an application (no. 27101/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Tatyana Petrovna Dmitriyeva (“the applicant”), on 20 June 2004.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained about non-enforcement of a judgment in her favour and its quashing by way of supervisory review.
On 22 February 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
On 4 April 2006 the Court put additional questions to the parties.
The applicant was born in 1946 and lives in the village of Chulman in the Sakha (Yakutiya) Republic of the .
The applicant brought an action against the Government, seeking to enforce State promissory notes for purchasing of a Russian-made car or to recover the monetary value thereof.
On 15 November 2002 the Neryungri Town Court of the Sakha (Yakutiya) Republic found for the applicant and awarded her RUB 138,967 against the Treasury. On 20 January 2003 the Supreme Court of the Sakha (Yakutiya) Republic (hereinafter the “Supreme Court”) upheld the judgment on appeal.
On 26 February 2003 the applicant submitted a writ of execution to the Government of the . On 4 March 2003 the writ was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance of the .
According to the Government, in October 2003 the Supreme Court stayed proceedings on all claims concerning State promissory notes until such time as the  had decided on the reference for a preliminary ruling submitted by the Presidium of the Supreme Court. The reference concerned compatibility of the law governing redemption of State promissory notes with the Russian Constitution.
On 21 December 2004 the Ministry of Finance asked the court for an extension of the time-limit for filing an application for supervisory review of the judgment in the applicant’s favour.
On 28 March 2005 a judge of the  granted the Ministry’s request, finding as follows:
 “Pursuant to Article 376 of the Code of Civil Procedure, final court judgments may be appealed against before the supervisory-review instance within one year after they became final. In the present case ... this procedural time-limit expired on 20 January 2004. However, as the court has established, on 23 October 2003 the Supreme Court of the Sakha (Yakutiya) Republic did indeed suspend proceedings on the claims lodged by owners of State promissory notes for purchasing of cars against the Government of Russian Federation (the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation) in connection with the reference for a preliminary ruling..., which fact is confirmed by the Supreme Court’s letter of 5 November 2003.
Having regard to the above, pursuant to Article 112 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, a court may only extend a time-limit if the party can show valid reasons for having missed it. The court finds that the above reasons exposed by the [Ministry of Finance] were valid.”
On 7 July 2005 the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Sakha (Yakutiya) Republic, by way of supervisory-review proceedings, quashed the judgment of 15 November 2002, as upheld on 20 January 2003, and dismissed the applicant’s claims. According to the applicant, she was not informed of the hearing. The Government produced a copy of summons addressed to several persons, including the applicant. In quashing the judgment, the Presidium noted that the lower courts had not taken into account certain provisions relating to reimbursement of State promissory notes and thereby committed a breach of substantive law.