.  The case originated in an application (no. 3851/12) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Maltese national, Mr Anthony Aquilina (“the applicant”), on 20 December 2011.
.  The applicant was represented by Dr Joseph Ellis, a lawyer practising in Valletta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr Peter Grech, Attorney General.
.  The applicant alleged that his property rights were being infringed as a result of legislative amendments in 1979 which imposed on him a continued lease relationship for an indeterminate time without providing him with a fair and adequate rent. He relied on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
.  On 21 February 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
.  The applicant was born in 1948, and at the time of lodging the application lived in Milton, Ontario, Canada.
.  Malta has gone through various legislative regimes in order to regulate its housing situation. The first regime came about in 1931 and protected tenants from the termination of their leases. This was followed by the 1944 Rent Restriction (Dwelling Houses) Ordinance which, apart from regulating termination of the lease of dwelling houses, also controlled rents and the initial conditions of contracts. The Housing Act was then enacted in 1949, with the aim of providing a solution to homelessness caused by the Second World War. In 1959 the Housing (Decontrol) Ordinance, Chapter 158 of the Laws of Malta (hereinafter “the HD Ordinance”) was enacted, which provided incentives to encourage landlords to rent their property, and created a special class of dwelling houses free from rent control.
.  The applicant owns a property in Gozo (a maisonette measuring 105 square metres) which he inherited from his parents, his mother having passed away in 1984.
.  On 12 January 1960 the property was registered as a “decontrolled dwelling house” in accordance with Article 3 of the HD Ordinance. At the time, Article 5 (1) of the HD Ordinance provided that the provisions of the “Rent Ordinances” (the Reletting of Urban Property (Regulation) Ordinance, Chapter 69 of the Laws of Malta and the Rent Restriction (Dwelling Houses) Ordinance, Chapter 116 of the Laws of Malta) were not applicable to dwelling houses decontrolled in accordance with Article 3 of the HD Ordinance.
.  In 1970 the applicant’s mother leased the premises to couple C., who are Maltese citizens (born in 1943 and 1950 respectively), for a rent of 35 Maltese Liri (MTL) (approximately 81.50 euros (EUR)) every six months, which was later decreased to the equivalent of EUR 75.70 every six months. At the time, the law permitted her to increase the rent, to refuse to renew the lease or to change its terms on renewal.
.  In 1979 the Maltese parliament enacted an amendment to the HD Ordinance, which provided that the rent restrictions set out in the Rent Ordinances would apply where tenants were Maltese citizens and occupied houses as ordinary residences. It further provided that landlords could not refuse to renew leases, raise their rent, or impose new conditions on renewal, except as provided for by law (see “Relevant domestic law” below). The applicant submitted that the contractual freedom of parties was greatly restricted as a result of the new provisions, in that his family could not charge a fair rent or recover possession of their property, despite the fact that his tenants owned substantial immovable property.
.  By a decision of the Rent Regulation Board (RRB) of 7 July 1998, the rent was further reduced to EUR 65.22 per year. The applicant did not appeal.
.  In 1995 new laws were enacted in respect of new leases which could again be free from rent control. They did not apply to the applicant’s case.
.   In 2009 and 2010 new concepts and provisions were introduced, aimed at gradually eliminating the restrictive regimes applicable to leases entered into before 1995.
.   Thus, while a rent of EUR 65.22 per year had been paid to the applicant since September 1998, a rent of EUR 185 had been paid from September 2010 onwards in view of the above-mentioned amendments. However, the applicant refused to accept any rent as from 2007 and it was duly deposited in court by the tenants by means of a schedule of deposit.
.  According to a court-appointed architect’s evaluation made in the context of constitutional proceedings instituted in 2005 (see paragraph 17 below), the property at that time had a rental value of EUR 2,912 per year. According to an architect’s report commissioned by the Government, the rental market value in 2013 was EUR 2,900 per year, and the sale value EUR 58,000.
.  To date, couple C still reside in the applicant’s property. It does not at present appear that they have any children formally residing with them.
In 2005 the applicant instituted constitutional redress proceedings complaining, inter alia, that the 1979 amendments (in particular Article 5 (2) and (3) of the HD Ordinance, which prohibited landlords from refusing to renew existing leases or from raising their rent) had breached his property rights under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 4 June 2008 the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional jurisdiction rejected his complaint. Basing its judgment on domestic case-law relating to the same subject matter, it considered that he remained the owner of the property at issue, which was being used as a dwelling house, that he could still evict the tenants if they failed to fulfil their obligations under the lease, and that although the amount of rent was low, the law provided for an increase in rent every fifteen years, amounting to double the actual rent. The interference with his rights was therefore proportionate given the needs of society. Moreover, his mother had not been forced to lease out the property.
The applicant appealed on 25 June 2008.
On 3 November 2008 the Constitutional Court dismissed his appeal as being lodged out of time, the statutory time-limit having expired on 16 June 2008.
.  On 29 April 2009 he lodged an application with the Court, relying on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
.  By a decision of 10 November 2009 the Court, sitting as a Committee of three judges, declared the applicant’s application inadmissible. It found that he had lodged his appeal with the Constitutional Court out of time. The domestic remedies had therefore not been exhausted as required by Article 35 § 1 of the Convention.
In 2010 the applicant instituted constitutional redress proceedings complaining that the 1979 amendments, which prohibited landlords from refusing to renew existing leases or from raising their rent when the tenant was a Maltese citizen, had breached his property rights under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention. He submitted that the amendments introduced in 2009 had not improved his situation, even assuming they (in particular Article 1531C of the Civil Code) applied to the case in question, a matter which was unclear in the domestic context. With a new rent of EUR 185 per year (see Relevant domestic law below), he remained a victim of the alleged violation, not least because he was also prevented from refusing to renew the lease. He cited the then recent case of Amato Gauci v. Malta (no. 47045/06, 15 September 2009), in which the Court had found a violation in analogous circumstances.
By a decree of 30 April 2010 the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional jurisdiction ruled that the defendant in the case should be the Attorney General of Malta, not the State of Malta as purported by the applicant.
On 15 October 2011 the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional jurisdiction, upholding the objection raised by the third party who joined in the suit (kjamat fil-kawża), rejected the applicant’s complaint on the basis that the matter had already become res judicata by virtue of the decision of 4 June 2008 (see paragraph 18 above). It noted that such a conclusion required three elements, namely the same parties (eaedem personae), the same object (eadem res) and the same cause of action (eadem causa petendi). Moreover, where the arguments raised were different, it had to be seen whether they could have been raised at the time of the principal judgment. In the present case, it considered that there had been no doubt that the requirement of eaedem personae had been met, despite the fact that the applicant had attempted to bring the present proceedings against the State and that the other proceedings had been against the Attorney General, as it was clear that the defendant in both cases was the Maltese Government. The element of eadem res had also been satisfied in so far as the present case concerned the same lease of the same property, with the same tenants and the same circumstances that had led the applicant to institute proceedings the first time round. Similarly, the element of eadem causa petendi had also been satisfied, since the applicant’s applications to the court were to a great extent the same, if not identical, despite the fact that he had made further arguments and submitted that his situation had remained unchanged notwithstanding the 2009 amendments to the Civil Code. The court considered that the changes to the application had not changed the nature of the action, namely a claim that the restrictions on the rent imposed by the law had been disproportionate. This matter had already been dealt with by the court in the first set of proceedings (no. 49/05), where it had decided that a fair balance had been struck by the authorities; it was not therefore open to the applicant to relitigate the matter. The court further held that even though the applicant had argued that despite the 2009 amendments (if they applied at all) he had remained a victim of the alleged violation, there was already a judgment in his respect stating that the law in so far as it applied to his case had not breached his rights, and the more recent amendments had not worsened his situation. Thus, the Civil Court (First Hall) held that there could not have been a breach of his rights even under the new law. Lastly, it concluded that any new arguments put forward by him should have been incorporated into the first set of proceedings. As to the Court’s recent case-law, it considered that the judgment cited did not entitle the applicant to ask for a fresh examination of his case.
By a judgment of 24 June 2011 the Constitutional Court upheld the first-instance judgment, considering the appeal to be frivolous and vexatious.
.  The Housing Decontrol Ordinance, Chapter 158 of the Laws of Malta, as amended in 1979 by means of Act XXIII of 1979 and again in 2004, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“(1) Subject to the following provisions of this article and of article 6, the provisions of the Rent Ordinances shall not apply to any decontrolled dwelling-house from the day on which the house is registered in accordance with the provisions of article 3.
(2) Where on the expiration of the lease of a decontrolled dwelling-house (whether such period be conventional, legal, customary or otherwise) the tenant is a citizen of Malta and occupies the house as his ordinary residence, the provisions of sub-article (3) shall have effect and the provisions of the Reletting of Urban Property (Regulation) Ordinance shall also apply but only in so far as they are not inconsistent with the said provisions of this article.
(3) The provisions referred to in sub-article (2) are:
(a) It shall not be lawful for the lessor of the dwelling house to refuse to renew the lease except in any of the circumstances set out in paragraph (b), nor shall it be lawful for him to raise the rent, or to impose new conditions for the renewal of the lease, except as provided in paragraphs (c) and (d).
(b) The lessor may only refuse to renew the lease, and may only resume possession of the house, at the termination of the lease, if he shows to the satisfaction of the Board, on an application to resume possession, that in the course of the lease, the tenant has failed to pay the rent due by him in respect of two or more terms within fifteen days from the day on which the lessor called upon him for payment, or has caused considerable damage to the house, or otherwise failed to comply with the conditions of the lease or his obligations thereunder, or has used the premises for a purpose other than mainly as his ordinary residence.
(c) The rent payable under the same lease after the date of the first renewal of the lease made by virtue of this sub-article may be increased by the lessor, upon such renewal and after the lapse of every fifteenth year thereafter during the continuance of the lease in favour of the same tenant, by so much of the rent payable immediately before such renewal or before the commencement of each subsequent fifteen year period, being an amount not exceeding the said rent, as represents in proportion to such rent the increase in inflation since the year the rent to be increased was last established.
(d) Where, on or before the date of any renewal of the lease of the dwelling-house, the lessor files in the Registry of the Board, a certificate, signed by a qualified architect and civil engineer and which is either accepted as correct by the tenant or has been so declared by the Board on an application by the lessor requesting such a declaration, showing that the house is in good state of maintenance and repair, all repairs and all maintenance of the dwelling-house shall thereafter, and throughout the continuance of the lease in favour of the same tenant, be at the charge of the tenant.”
The 2009 amendments include the introduction of various articles of the Civil Code, Chapter 16 of the Laws of Malta, which in so far as relevant, and as amended again in 2010, read as follows:
“(1) The rent of a residence which has been in force before the 1st June 1995 shall be subject to the law as in force prior to the 1st June 1995 so however that unless otherwise agreed upon in writing after the 1st January 2010, the rate of the rent as from the first payment of rent due after the 1st January 2010, shall, when this was less than one hundred and eighty-five euro (€185) per year, increase to such amount:
Provided that where the rate of the lease was more than one hundred eighty-five euro (€185) per year, this shall remain at such higher rate as established.
 (2) In any case the rate of the rent as stated in sub-article (1) shall increase every three years by a proportion equal to the increase in the index of inflation according to article 13 of the Housing (Decontrol) Ordinance; the first increase shall be made on the date of the first payment of rent due after the 1st January 2013:
Provided that where the lease on the 1st January 2010 will be more than one hundred eighty-five euro (€185) per year, and by a contract in writing prior to 1st June 1995 the parties would have agreed upon a method of increase in rent, after 1st January 2010 the increases in rent shall continue to be regulated in terms of that agreement until such agreement remains in force.”
“The external ordinary maintenance of a tenement leased prior to 1st January 2010, save unless otherwise agreed upon in writing between the parties, shall be at the expense of the tenant and not of the lessor.”
“In the event of a lease of a house used as an ordinary residence made prior to 1st June 1995 that person who will be occupying the tenement under a valid title of lease on the 1st June 2008 as well as his or her spouse if living together and if they are not legally separated shall be deemed to be the tenant; when the tenant dies the lease shall be terminated:
Provided further that a person continues the lease after the death of the tenant under the same conditions of the tenant if on the 1st June 2008 -
(i) such person is the natural or legal child of the tenant and has lived with the said tenant for four years out of the last five years; and after 1st June 2008 continues to live with the tenant until his death:
Provided that, if more than one child has lived with the tenant for four years out of the last five years before the 1st June 2008 and they continued to live with the tenant until his death, all such children will continue the lease in solidum; this lease shall not extend to the wife, husband or offspring of the child, or
(ii) such person is the brother or sister of the tenant, who on the death of the tenant is forty-five years of age or more, or brother or sister of her husband or his wife who is forty-five years of age or more, and who has lived with the tenant for four years out of the last five years before 1st June 2008 and who after that date continued living with the tenant until his death:
Provided that, if there are more than one brother or sister who are over forty-five years of age and who have been living with the tenant for four years out of the last five years before the 1st June 2008 and have continued living with him until his death, all such brothers or sisters shall continue the lease in solidum; this lease shall not extend to the wife, husband or children of the said brother or sister, or
(iii) such person is the natural or legal child of the tenant, who is younger than five years of age and after 1st June 2008 has continued to live with the tenant until his death, or
(iv) such person is the natural or legal ascendant of the tenant, who is forty-five years of age, and who has lived with the tenant for a period of four years out of the last five years before the 1st June 2008 and has continued living with the tenant until his death; this lease shall not extend to the wife, husband or children of the ascendant:
Provided that if on the death of the tenant, there are several children, siblings, or ascendants who all satisfy the criteria of paragraphs (i), (ii), (iii) or (iv), all those persons shall have the right to continue the tenancy together in solidum:
Provided further that a person shall not be deemed not to have lived with the tenant for the sole reason that she has been temporarily absent from the residence of the tenant due to work, study or medical care:
Without prejudice to the provisions of this article, a person shall not be entitled to continue the lease following the death of the tenant, unless such person satisfies the means test criteria which the Minister responsible for accomodation may introduce from time to time.”
“(1) The lessor is bound to deliver the thing in a good state of repair in every respect.
(2) During the continuance of the lease, the lessor is bound to make all repairs which may become necessary, excluding, in the case of buildings, the repairs mentioned in article 1556, if he has not expressly bound himself to this effect.
(3) For the purposes of this Title with regard to an urban, residential and commercial tenement, "structural repairs" shall be deemed to be those relating to the structure of the building itself, including the ceilings.
(4) When the lessor in the case of a residence leased prior to the 1st June, 1995 carries out structural repairs which have become necessary not due to his own fault, then the rent shall be increased by six per cent of the costs incurred:
Provided that where the structural repairs have not become necessary due to a fault of the lessee, then the said lessee has the right to terminate the lease even though the period of the lease has not yet lapsed:
Provided that in the cases where the lessor is willing to carry out these repairs, the lessee may choose to carry out such repairs at his expense, and in such an event the rent shall remain unchanged; however the lessee shall in such case have no right for any full or partial compensation for such structural repairs at the termination of the lease.”
“If the lessee uses the thing leased for any purpose other than that agreed upon by the parties, or as presumed in the previous article, or in a manner which may prejudice the lessor, the lessor may, according to circumstances, demand the dissolution of the contract.”
“(1) In the case of a residential tenement, failure to use the tenement for a period exceeding twelve months shall be deemed to be bad use of the thing leased in terms of article 1555.”
“The lessee of an urban tenement is responsible for all repairs other than structural repairs.”
“A contract of letting and hiring may also be dissolved, even in the absence of a resolutive condition, where either of the parties fails to perform his obligation; and in any such case the party aggrieved by the non-performance may elect either to compel the other party to perform the obligation if this is possible, or to demand the dissolution of the contract together with damages for non-performance:
Provided that in the case of urban, residential and commercial tenements where the lessee fails to pay punctually the rent due, the contract may be terminated only after that the lessor would have called upon the lessee by means of a judicial letter, and the lessee notwithstanding such notification, fails to pay the said rent within fifteen days from notification.”
Article 39 (1) and (4) of Act X of 2009 provided as follows:
“(1) Leases which were in force before the 1st of June 1995 and which are still in force on the 1st January 2010, shall continue to be regulated by the laws which were in force before the 1st of June 1995, other than the provisions of Title IX Part II of Book Second of the Civil Code, Of Contracts of Letting and Hiring, as amended by this Act and subject to any regulations made in virtue of the amendments introduced by this Act.”
“(4) The provisions of Title IX of Part II of Book Second of the Civil Code, Of Contracts of Letting and Hiring, shall also apply to the letting of urban tenements where terminated contracts of emphyteusis or sub-emphyteusis have been or are about to be converted into leases by virtue of the law:
Provided that in the case of leases made by virtue of the Housing (Decontrol) Ordinance, the provisions of the said Ordinance defining the person to be considered as the lessee and the provisions providing for the transfer of the lease after the demise of the lessee shall continue to apply notwithstanding the aforesaid provisions of the Civil Code.”