The case originated in an application (no. 16161/90) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Cypriot national, Mr Antonakis Solomonides (“the applicant”), on 26 January 1990.
The applicant was represented by Mr C. Clerides, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z.M. Necatigil.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the Turkish occupation of the northern part of  had prevented him from having access to his properties.
The applicant died on 15 February 1998. On 11 June 1998 the District Court of Nicosia appointed his wife, Mrs Paulina Solomonides, and a certain Mrs Rodothea Karaviotou as administrators of his estate. In his observations of September 1999, the applicant’s lawyer declared that the application should continue on behalf of the estate in the name of the administrators. As Mrs Paulina Solomonides died on an unspecified date, Mrs Karaviotou became the sole administrator of the applicant’s estate. She signed an authority, authorising the applicant’s lawyer to continue the proceedings before the Court.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
By a decision of 24 August 1999 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). In addition, third-party comments were received from the Government of Cyprus, which had exercised its right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b)). The respondent Government replied to those comments (Rule 44 § 5).
The applicant was born in 1934 and lived in . He was the director of the private trading companies "A. Solomonidis Ltd", and "Solomonidis & Kozolidis Ltd".
The applicant stated that he was the owner of 99 plots of land in the Districts of Kyrenia, Famagusta and Nicosia, in northern . In support of his claim of ownership, he produced copies of the relevant affirmations of ownership issued by the .
The applicant claimed that from 1974 onwards he had been deprived of his property rights, his plots of land being located in the area which was under the occupation and the overall control of the Turkish military authorities. The latter had prevented him from having access to and use of his property.
In a letter of 17 June 2003 the applicant’s lawyer observed that the private trading companies "A. Solomonidis Ltd", and "Solomonidis & Kozolidis Ltd" were not the owners of the properties claimed in the application, the original and only owner being the applicant, Mr Antonakis Solomonides.