The case originated in an application (no. 19294/07) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovak national, Mr Štefan Krahulec (“the applicant”), on 30 April 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Procházka, a lawyer practising in Bratislava. The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicant alleged that the rent-control scheme had imposed restrictions on his right to peaceful enjoyment of his possessions, in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
By a decision of 7 June 2011, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1) on the merits and just satisfaction and replied in writing to each other’s observations.
The applicant was born in 1945 and lives in Zvolen.
In 1929 the applicant’s grandfather built a house in Piešťany. His predecessors retained ownership under the communist regime. Ownership was transferred to the applicant from his mother on 21 December 1998.
The house comprises four flats. Two have a surface area of 108 sq. m each in size, while the other two measure 123 sq. m each.
At the time the application was lodged, the flats were inhabited by tenants with a regulated rent. Their or their predecessors’ right to use the flats had been established by decisions taken by the municipal authorities between 1953 and 1986. After 1 January 1992 their right of use had been transformed into tenancies with regulated rent for an indefinite period.
Under the relevant legislation, the applicant had to accept that his flats were occupied by those tenants and that he could charge them no more than the maximum amount of rent fixed by the State (“the rent-control scheme”). The applicant had no possibility of unilaterally terminating the leases on his flats.
Under the applicable legislation, the maximum monthly rent chargeable for the flats in 1999 was the equivalent of some 13 to 33 euros (EUR). After several increases in the regulated rent, in 2004 the applicant was able to charge EUR 115 monthly in respect of each of the smaller flats and EUR 124 monthly in respect of the larger ones.
The applicant contended that he, in fact, received from the tenants less than the maximum amount of rent set by the applicable legislation. To this end he led several property disputes with them and the local municipality.
The parties provided differing figures as to the market rent.
The applicant relied on data from the National Association of Real Estate Agencies (“the NAREA”) and claimed that the monthly market rent for similar flats reached EUR 600 to 800 between 2004 and 2007.
The Government submitted an expert valuation according to which the monthly market rent for the applicant’s flats in 2010 amounted to EUR 265.50 and EUR 325 respectively.
In submissions made on 16 June 2014 the applicant informed the Court that the rent control in respect of his four flats had been terminated. The first flat had been subject to rent control until May 2007, the second and third flats until August 2007, and the fourth flat until April 2008.
The relevant domestic law and practice governing the rent-control scheme in Slovakia and its historical background are set out in the case of Bittó and Others v. Slovakia ((merits), no. 30255/09, §§ 716, 3272, 28 January 2014).
In Bittó and Others ((merits), cited above), the Court found that the application of the rent-control scheme in respect of the applicants’ property constituted a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention. In the relevant part of its judgment under Article 46 of the Convention it held that:
“133. [Its] conclusion ... as regards the effects of the rent-control scheme on the applicants’ right to peaceful enjoyment of their possessions, suggests that the violation found originated in a problem arising out of the state of the Slovakian legislation and practice, which has affected a number of flat owners to whom the rent-control scheme has applied .... The Court further notes that 13 other applications concerning the same issue are pending before it which concern some 170 persons.
It is true that measures have been taken with a view to gradually improving the situation of landlords. Thus, as a result of the introduction of Law no. 216/2011, the controlled rent could be increased by 20% every year as from the end of 2011. Where a municipality has not provided tenants exposed to material hardship with a dwelling by the end of 2016, the landlords will have the right to claim the difference between the free-market rent and the controlled rent ... Thus those measures provide for a complete elimination of the effects on flat owners of rent-control only as from 2017, and they do not address the situation existing prior to their adoption.
The Court considers that further measures should be taken in order to achieve compliance with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. To prevent future findings of infringement of that provision, the respondent State should introduce, as soon as possible, a specific and clearly regulated compensatory remedy in order to provide genuine effective relief for the breach found.”
Implementation of the judgment in Bittó and Others is still pending.