The case originated in an application (no. 18967/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Pavel Viktorovich Davydov (“the applicant”), on 12 March 2007.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained of the quashing in supervisory-review proceedings of a binding and enforceable judgment delivered in his favour.
On 3 May 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Saransk.
In 2005 the applicant brought civil proceedings against the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Mordoviya (“the Ministry”) seeking compensation for damage to his health caused during his service in the police (“the compensation”).
On 7 November 2005 the Leninskiy District Court of Saransk (“the District Court”) found in the applicant’s favour and ordered the Ministry: (a) to pay the applicant the compensation due to him for the period from 19 November 2004 to 31 October 2005 in the amount of 77,250.12 Russian roubles (RUB); and (b) starting from 1 November 2005, to make monthly compensation payments to the applicant of RUB 6,892.92 with subsequent indexation in accordance with the law. The judgment was not appealed against and became final on 22 November 2005.
However, on 12 October 2006, following a request lodged by the Ministry, the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Mordoviya (“the Presidium”) quashed the final judgment by way of supervisory review and dismissed the applicant’s claims. The Presidium found that the firstinstance court had erroneously applied and interpreted substantive legal provisions which had resulted in their significant violation. The Presidium held that there was no basis under domestic law for awarding the applicant the compensation sought and that he was entitled instead to insurance payments. The applicant did not provide the Court with information as to whether he had applied for those payments and/or was receiving them.
The District Court’s judgment of 7 November 2005 had been duly enforced until it was quashed by way of supervisory review.
The Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“1.  The grounds on which appeal courts may quash or alter judicial decisions are:
...
(4)  a violation or incorrect application of substantive or procedural legal provisions.
...”
“Judicial decisions of lower courts may be quashed or altered by way of supervisory review on the grounds of significant violations of substantive or procedural legal provisions.”
“1.  Having examined a case by way of supervisory review, the court may ...
(5)  quash or alter the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance and issue a new judicial decision, without remitting the matter for fresh examination, if substantive legal provisions have been erroneously applied or interpreted.
...”
The Code of Civil Procedure as currently in force provides as follows:
“1.  Final judicial decisions may be re-examined in the light of newly discovered or new circumstances.
Grounds on which final judicial decisions can be re-examined are:
...
2)  new circumstances – the circumstances indicated in paragraph 4 of the present Article which have appeared after the adoption of a judicial decision and which are significant for the correct resolution of a case.
...
The new circumstances are:
...
4)  a finding by the European Court of Human Rights, after examination of a case in which the final decision has been the subject of an application before it, of a violation of the provisions of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.”
Article 392 § 4 (4) of the Code of Civil Procedure was adopted as a consequence of judgment No. 4-P of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation of 26 February 2010 in a case concerning the review of the constitutionality of Article 392 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure in connection with complaints lodged by A. A. Doroshok, A. Ye. Kot, and Ye. Yu. Fedotova.
In its judgment the Constitutional Court argued that former Article 392 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure did not allow a court of general jurisdiction to refuse to re-examine a decision in the light of newly discovered circumstances upon an individual’s request if the European Court of Human Rights had established that the impugned decision had breached the Convention, and if that decision had served as grounds for applying to the European Court of Human Rights. The Constitutional Court went on to say, in paragraph 3.5 of its judgment, that “it is the competent court which decides on the possibility to re-examine a judicial decision relying on full and comprehensive examination of the applicant’s arguments and the circumstances of the case”. In the Constitutional Court’s view, any other interpretation of Article 392 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure in lawenforcement practice would be inconsistent with the Russian Constitution and the Convention.
The Constitutional Court pointed out that the establishment of a specific procedure for the re-examination of final judicial decisions was a general measure for the purposes of implementing the Convention. The State was obliged to take general measures under Article 46 of the Convention and the Constitution of the Russian Federation. Accordingly, the Constitutional Court held that there was a need to establish a statutory mechanism for the execution of final judgments delivered by the European Court of Human Rights, and urged the federal legislator to introduce amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure that would guarantee an opportunity to re-examine final judicial decisions delivered in violation of the Convention.
In its Resolution No. 21 of 27 June 2013 on the “Application of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November 1950 and its Protocols by the courts of general jurisdiction”, the Plenary of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation issued, inter alia, the following explanations to the courts:
“17.  In accordance with the provisions of Article 46 of the Convention, interpreted in the light of the Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe R (2000) 2 on the re-examination or reopening of certain cases at domestic level following judgments of the European Court of Human Rights (hereafter ‘the Recommendation on re-examination’), not every violation of the Convention or its Protocols established by the European Court in respect of the Russian Federation calls for re-examination of the domestic judicial acts in the light of new circumstances.
The courts should bear in mind that a judicial act should be re-examined if the applicant continues to suffer from the negative consequences of such an act (for instance, if the person remains in prison in violation of the Convention), and just satisfaction, awarded by the European Court in accordance with Article 41 of the Convention and paid to the applicant, or measures other than re-examination do not ensure the restoration of the violated rights and freedoms.
At the same time, the violation established by the European Court may enable at least one of the following conclusions to be arrived at:
-  that the judicial act directly contravenes the Convention on its merits (for example, where a decision as to administrative deportation of a person from the Russian Federation has been found by the European Court to be in breach of Article 8 of the Convention);
-  that the violation of the Convention or its Protocols of a procedural nature puts in question the outcome of the proceedings (for example, the court’s refusal to call a witness whose statements could have been decisive for the outcome of the case (Article 6 of the Convention)).
When deciding on re-examination, the courts should verify the existence of a causal link between the violations established by the European Court and the negative consequences from which the applicant continues to suffer.
...
If the European Court establishes a procedural violation of the rights of the persons who have taken part in the proceedings, or who have been unjustifiably excluded from such proceedings, the court may, when re-examining the judicial decision in question, upon ensuring if possible in the circumstances of the case the reparation of the violations of the Convention or its Protocols which have occurred previously, adopt a judicial act which would be similar to the previous one (Article 46 of the Convention, as interpreted in accordance with the Recommendation on reexamination).
If the judicial act in question had been enforced by the time of entry into force of the European Court’s judgment finding violations of the Convention and its Protocols by that act, the re-examination of that act under the new circumstances in view of the said judgment of the European Court should prevail over the principle of legal certainty (Article 46 of the Convention, interpreted in the light of the Recommendation on re-examination). If after the quashing of the executed judicial act a new decision is adopted, rejecting the claims in total or in part, or if the court refuses to consider the claim on its merits, the execution of the judicial act should be reversed, with the exception of cases falling under Article 445 of the Code of Civil Procedure.”
On 19 January 2000 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation No. R (2000) 2 to member States on the re-examination or reopening of certain cases at domestic level following judgments of the European Court of Human Rights. In that document the Committee of Ministers:
“I.  Invites, in the light of these considerations the Contracting Parties to ensure that there exist at national level adequate possibilities to achieve, as far as possible, restitutio in integrum;
Encourages the Contracting Parties, in particular, to examine their national legal systems with a view to ensuring that there exist adequate possibilities of reexamination of the case, including reopening of proceedings, in instances where the Court has found a violation of the Convention, especially where:
the injured party continues to suffer very serious negative consequences because of the outcome of the domestic decision at issue, which are not adequately remedied by the just satisfaction and cannot be rectified except by re-examination or reopening, and
the judgement of the Court leads to the conclusion that
the impugned domestic decision is on the merits contrary to the Convention, or
the violation found is based on procedural errors or shortcomings of such gravity that a serious doubt is cast on the outcome of the domestic proceedings complained of.”
The explanatory memorandum to the above recommendation provides, inter alia, as follows:
“3.  Although the Convention contains no provision imposing an obligation on Contracting Parties to provide in their national law for the re-examination or reopening of proceedings, the existence of such possibilities have, in special circumstances, proven to be important, and indeed in some cases the only, means to achieve restitutio in integrum. An increasing number of States have adopted special legislation providing for the possibility of such re-examination or reopening. In other States this possibility has been developed by the courts and national authorities under existing law.
...
The practice of the Convention organs has demonstrated that it is primarily in the field of criminal law that the re-examination of a case, including the reopening of proceedings, is of the greatest importance. The recommendation is, however, not limited to criminal law, but covers any category of cases, in particular those satisfying the criteria enumerated in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii). The purpose of these additional criteria is to identify those exceptional situations in which the objectives of securing the rights of the individual and the effective implementation of the Court’s judgments prevail over the principles underlying the doctrine of res judicata, in particular that of legal certainty, notwithstanding the undoubted importance of these principles.
Sub-paragraph (i) is intended to cover the situation in which the injured party continues to suffer very serious negative consequences, not capable of being remedied by just satisfaction, because of the outcome of domestic proceedings. It applies in particular to persons who have been sentenced to lengthy prison sentences and who are still in prison when the Convention organs examine the "case". It applies, however, also in other areas, for example, when a person is unjustifiably denied certain civil or political rights (in particular in case of loss of, or non-recognition of legal capacity or personality, bankruptcy declarations or prohibitions of political activity), if a person is expelled in violation of his or her right to family life or if a child has been unjustifiedly forbidden contacts with his or her parents. It is understood that there must exist a direct causal link between the violation found and the continuing suffering of the injured party.
...
The recommendation does not address the special problem of "mass cases", i.e. cases in which a certain structural deficiency leads to a great number of violations of the Convention. In such cases it is in principle best left to the State concerned to decide whether or not reopening or re-examination are realistic solutions or, whether other measures are appropriate.
When drafting the recommendation it was recognised that reopening or reexamination could pose problems for third parties, in particular when these have acquired rights in good faith. This problem exists, however, already in the application of the ordinary domestic rules for re-examination of cases or reopening of the proceedings. The solutions applied in these cases ought to be applicable, at least mutatis mutandis, also to cases where re-examination or reopening was ordered in order to give effect to judgments of the Court.
In cases of re-examination or reopening, in which the Court has awarded some just satisfaction, the question of whether, and if so, how it should be taken into account will be within the discretion to the competent domestic courts or authorities taking into account the specific circumstances of each case.”