The case originated in three applications (nos. 13122/11, 73303/11 and 19315/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Russian nationals whose names are specified in the appended table.
The Russian Government (“the Government” ) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by Mr A. Fedorov, Head of the Office of the Representative of the Russian Federation to the Court.
In the wake of the pilot judgment in the case of Gerasimov and Others v. Russia, on various dates in December 2014 the applications were communicated to the Government for settlement or resolution (see Gerasimov and Others v. Russia, nos. 29920/05 and 10 others, §§ 230-31 and point 13 of the operative part, 1 July 2014). The Court adjourned for two years, that is until 1 October 2016, the proceedings in all cases concerning non-enforcement or delayed enforcement of domestic judgments imposing obligations in kind on the State authorities (ibid., § 232 and point 14 of the operative part).
On 29 September 2016 the Government advised the Court that they were unable to settle the present applications within the above time-limit, as the domestic judgments in the applicants’ favour had remained unenforced.
Having regard to the expiry of the above-mentioned adjournment period, the Court has decided to resume the examination of the applications. The Court informed the parties at the communication stage that the cases, subject to settled case-law, would be allocated to the Committee.
The applicants are all Russian nationals living in different regions of Russia. Their personal details are set out in the appendix below.
On various dates the applicants obtained binding judicial decisions ordering the State authorities to provide them with housing or perform other obligations in kind.
According to the latest information available to the Court, judgments became final as specified in the table below and either were enforced with a delay or have remained unenforced. The relevant details in respect of the judgments are listed in the appendix.
The applicants on several occasions applied to different Russian authorities seeking to accelerate the enforcement of the judicial awards in their favour.
The applicant in case no. 73303/11 challenged lawfulness of his dismissal from military service alleging, in particular, that the judicial award in his favour of 28 May 2007 had not been complied with. By the final judgment of 12 May 2011 the Moscow Garrison Military Court rejected his action and established, inter alia, that the judgment of 28 May 2007 had been enforced in full on 25 March 2010.
On 14 December 2016 the Russian Parliament adopted Federal Law No. 450-FZ amending Federal Law No. 68-FZ on Compensation for Violation of the Right to a Trial within a Reasonable Time or the Right to Enforcement of a Judgment within a Reasonable Time (“the new Law” amending “the Compensation Act”). The amendments introduced provisions concerning compensation for violation of the right to enforcement within a reasonable time of a judgment ordering the State to fulfil obligations of a pecuniary and/or non-pecuniary nature. The new Law, signed by the President on 19 December 2016, entered into force on 1 January 2017. It extends the scope of the Compensation Act to cases concerning the non-enforcement of domestic judgments imposing obligations of a pecuniary or non-pecuniary nature on various domestic authorities, as follows.
The Compensation Act, as amended by the new Law, entitles a party (“an applicant”) to bring an action seeking compensation for the violation of his or her right to enforcement within a reasonable time of a judgment establishing a debt to be recovered from the State budgets, or a judgment ordering the federal authorities, authorities of the federal entities of the Russian Federation, local authorities, other bodies and organisations endowed with specific State or other public powers, or public and municipal servants to fulfil “other obligations of a pecuniary nature and (or) obligations of a non-pecuniary nature” (section 1(1) of the Compensation Act, as amended by section 1(1) of the new Law).
Such compensation can only be awarded if the alleged violation took place independently of the applicant’s own actions, except those taken in the circumstances of force majeure. A breach of the statutory time-limits for examination of the case does not amount per se to a violation of the right to a trial within a reasonable time or the right to enforcement of a judgment within a reasonable time (section 1(2) of the Compensation Act). A compensation award is not dependent on the courts establishing a fault on the part of the competent authorities (section 1(3) of the Compensation Act).
Compensation is awarded in monetary form (section 2(1) of the Compensation Act). The amount of compensation awarded should be determined by the courts in accordance with the applicant’s claims, the circumstances of the case, the length of the period during which the violation took place, the significance of its consequences for the applicant, the principles of reasonableness and fairness, and the practice of the European Court of Human Rights (section 2(2) of the Compensation Act).
Section 3 of the Compensation Act, as amended by section 1(2)(a) of the new Law, sets out the rules of jurisdiction and procedure. It provides, in particular, that a claim for compensation on account of delayed enforcement of a judgment may be lodged prior to the end of the procedure for enforcement of a judgment ordering that compensation be paid from the State budget. Alternatively, a claim may be lodged at the end of the proceedings or after the compulsory enforcement of a judicial act imposing other obligations of a pecuniary or non-pecuniary nature on the authorities, but not earlier than six months after the expiry of the statutory time-limit for enforcement and not later than six months after the termination of the procedure for enforcement.
In the respective court proceedings the Russian Federation, a federal entity or a municipality is represented by a relevant financial authority and the main administrator of the relevant budget (section 3(9) of the Compensation Act as amended and supplemented by section 1(2)(b) of the new Law).
A court decision granting compensation is subject to immediate enforcement (section 4(4) of the Compensation Act). It may be appealed against in accordance with the procedural legislation in force (section 4(5)).
A judgment ordering different authorities to fulfil other obligations of a pecuniary or non-pecuniary nature is executed by the relevant financial body (section 5(2(2) of the Compensation Act as amended by section 1(3)(b) of the new Law). The costs of compensation awards are included in the federal budget, in the budgets of the federal entities and in local budgets (section 5(3) of the Compensation Act as amended).
Costs related to the implementation of the new Law should be recovered from the funds of the relevant budgets of the Russian Federation allocated for that purpose (section 2 of the new Law).
All individuals who have complained to the European Court of Human Rights that their right to enforcement of a judgment within a reasonable time has been violated may claim compensation in the domestic courts under the Compensation Act as amended within six months of the new Law’s entry into force, provided that the European Court has not ruled on the admissibility or merits of the complaint (section 3(2) of the new Law).
Other relevant domestic law provisions are summarised in Gerasimov and Others, cited above, §§ 87-112.
Section 20 of the Military Service Act of 27 May 1998 No. 76-FZ provides that military servicemen and their family members have the right to travel free of charge, in particular, to and from a leave destination. According to the Order No. 200 of the Ministry of Defence dated 6 June 2001 and the enclosed Instruction, “travel documents” are specific claim forms, issued by the military authorities to servicemen and their family members for their travel, in particular, to and from a leave destination free of charge, and containing information on the travellers’ personal details, destination, military grade and the purpose of the trip. A serviceman receives travel tickets at the relevant transportation companies on presentation of the form.