The case originated in an application (no. 4413/10) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Mher Alikhanyan (“the applicant”), on 15 December 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr K. Tumanyan, a lawyer practising in Vanadzor. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 18 March 2014 notice of the complaints concerning the deprivation of property and the right to a fair trial was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant lives in Shnogh village.
In the 1970s a copper-molybdenum deposit (‘Teghout’) was discovered about four and six km away from the villages of Teghout and Shnogh respectively, in the Lori Region.
In 2001 a private company, Armenian Copper Programme CJSC, was granted a mining licence for the exploitation of the Teghout coppermolybdenum deposit for a period of twenty-five years.
On 1 November 2007 the Government adopted Decree no. 1279-N approving the expropriation zones of territories situated within the administrative boundaries of the rural communities of Shnogh and Teghout in the Lori Region to be taken for State needs and changing the category of land use. According to the Decree, Armenian Copper Programme CJSC or Teghout CJSC, founded by the former for the purpose of the implementation of the Teghout copper-molybdenum deposit exploitation project, were to acquire the units of land listed in its annexes.
The plot of land belonging to the applicant was listed among the units of land falling within these expropriation zones.
The applicant lives in Shnogh village and earns his living from agriculture. He owned a plot of arable land in the village measuring 0.186 ha. The land was used for growing crops for the family, feeding the livestock and beekeeping.
On an unspecified date Teghout CJSC addressed a letter to the applicant containing an offer to buy his plot of land. The amount of compensation offered was 134,000 Armenian Drams (AMD, approximately 290 euros (EUR)), plus an additional 15% as required by law.
The applicant did not reply to the offer, not being satisfied with the amount of compensation. It appears that the applicant tried to obtain an alternative evaluation of his property by other companies but did not succeed. He claims that no other evaluation company was willing to make an independent evaluation of the market value of his land.
On 13 May 2008 Teghout CJSC lodged a claim against the applicant seeking to oblige him to sign the agreement on taking of his property for State needs. The company based its claim, inter alia, on the evaluation report prepared at its request by Oliver Group LLC, a licensed evaluation company. According to the report, the market value of the applicant’s plot of land was estimated at AMD 134,000 (approximately EUR 290).
In the proceedings before the Lori Regional Court, the applicant argued that the market value of his land had been underestimated. He further submitted that the evaluation of his property had not been carried out correctly since no account had been taken of the number of fruit trees, their profitability and the existence of a fence and a water pipeline on the territory in question. He also claimed to be unable to submit an alternative evaluation of the real market value of his land since other companies refused to perform an evaluation.
In the course of the proceedings, Teghout CJSC submitted another evaluation report of the applicant’s property stating that, after the institution of the proceedings, Oliver Group LLC had prepared a corrected report according to which the market value of the applicant’s plot of land was estimated at AMD 137,000 (approximately EUR 298). The final amount of compensation, including the additional 15% required by law, would thus be AMD 157,550 (approximately EUR 343).
On 28 November 2008 the Regional Court granted Teghout CJSC’s claim, awarding the applicant a total of AMD 157,550 in compensation.
The applicant lodged an appeal. Relying, inter alia, on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, he complained that the Regional Court had deprived him of his property.
On 19 March 2009 the Civil Court of Appeal upheld the Regional Court’s judgment, finding that the latter had properly determined the market value of the property based on the corrected evaluation report prepared by Oliver Group CJSC.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law raising similar arguments to those submitted in the previous appeal.
On 17 June 2009 the Court of Cassation declared the applicant’s cassation appeal inadmissible for lack of merit.
According to Article 19, everyone has the right to a public hearing of his case by an independent and impartial court within a reasonable time, in conditions of equality and with respect for all fair trial requirements, in order to have his violated rights restored, as well as the validity of the charge against him determined.
According to Article 31, everyone shall have the right to dispose of, use, manage and bequeath his property in the way he sees fit. No one can be deprived of his property, save by a court in cases prescribed by law. Property can be expropriated for the needs of society and the State only in exceptional cases of paramount public interest, in a procedure prescribed by law and with prior equivalent compensation.
According to Article 6, civil proceedings shall be adversarial and shall be conducted with respect for equality of arms.
Article 53 § 2 of the Code provides that the court shall consider no piece of evidence as already established.
According to Article 60 § 1, in order to clarify issues requiring specialised knowledge which arise during the examination of a case, the court can appoint a forensic examination upon application by a party (parties) or of its own motion.
Article 60 § 6 of the Code provides that the court warns the expert about criminal liability for submission of an obviously false conclusion.
According to Article 61, the participants in the proceedings are entitled to be present at the forensic examination, save in cases where their presence could hinder the regular work of the expert.
According to section 3 § 1, the constitutional basis for alienation of property for the needs of society and the State is the prevailing public interest.
Section 3 § 2 provides that the constitutional requirements for alienation of property for the needs of society and the State are the following:
(a)  alienation must be carried out in accordance with a procedure prescribed by the law,
(b)  prior adequate compensation should be provided for property subject to alienation.
According to section 4 § 1, the public interest must prevail over the interests of the owner of property subject to alienation, and alienation of that property must be essential to implementation.
Section 4 § 2 provides that the prevailing public interest may pursue, inter alia, the implementation of mining projects having important State or community significance. The aim of securing additional income for the State or community budget is not by itself a prevailing public interest.
According to section 11 § 1, adequate compensation should be paid to the owner of property subject to alienation. The market value of the property plus an additional 15% is considered to be an adequate amount of compensation.
Section 11 § 3 provides that the determination of the market value of real estate and property rights in respect of real estate is carried out in accordance with the procedure set out by the Law on Real Estate Evaluation Activity.
According to section 8, evaluation is obligatory in case of alienation of immovable property for State or community needs.
Section 15 § 1 (1) provides that persons engaged in real estate evaluation have the right to use independent methods of real estate evaluation in compliance with the evaluation standard.
For the purpose of the implementation of the Teghout coppermolybdenum deposit exploitation project, and in the perspective of building and operating a mining plant, the Government decided to approve the expropriation zones of agricultural land situated within the administrative boundaries of the rural communities of Shnogh and Teghout in the Lori Region to be taken for State needs, with a total area of 81.483 ha. According to the Decree, the public interest in the development of the economy and infrastructure and the interest in higher levels of production and export prevailed over the private interests of the proprietors.