The case originated in an application (no. 65845/13) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Hungarian limited liability companies, S.E.F.T. Trafik Kft. „v.a.“ and S.E.F.T. Kft. „v.a.“, and by four Hungarian nationals, Mr Tibor Benkő, Mrs Tiborné Benkő, Ms Adrienn Benkő and Mr Tibor Benkő Jr. (“the applicants”), on 11 October 2013.
The applicants were represented by Mr T. Bihary, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
On 23 September 2016 the complaint concerning Article 1 of Protocol No 1 to the Convention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The first and second applicants, S.E.F.T. Trafik Kft. „v.a.“ and S.E.F.T. Kft. „v.a.“, are Hungarian limited liability companies with their seats in Budapest. The first and second applicants are partly owned by the fourth applicant. The third, fourth, fifth and sixth applicants, Mr Tibor Benkő, Mrs Tiborné Benkő, Ms Adrienn Benkő and Mr Tibor Benkő Jr., are Hungarian nationals, close family members who were born in 1956, 1957, 1983 and 1981 respectively and live in Budapest.
The applicants had been active in the tobacco retail business for several years. The first and second applicant companies operated 39 distinct tobacco shops in Hungary with the direct participation of the third, fourth, fifth and sixth applicants and several further employees.
On 11 September 2012 the Parliament enacted Act no. CXXXIV of 2012 on the Repression of Smoking of the Youth and on Tobacco Retail. The Act was published on 24 September 2012. According to the Act, tobacco retail was to become a State monopoly (exercised through a Stateowned company, ND Nemzeti Dohánykereskedelmi Nonprofit Zrt), and tobacco retailers would become authorised through a concession tender, advertised on 15 December 2012. Entities or persons previously engaged in tobacco retail had no privileges in the tender. Legal persons were not entitled to apply. One individual was eligible to apply for five concessions at most.
Since the first and second applicant companies were not entitled to apply for a concession under the new law, the third, fourth, fifth and sixth applicants applied personally for concessions, but none of them was successful. Together with their distant family members and employees, they submitted altogether 155 tenders for concession, and only five of these were successful. Currently they participate in the tobacco retail businesses of a distant family member who was granted concession.