The case originated in an application (no. 53068/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Igor Pavlovich Fedulov (“the applicant”), on 17 October 2008.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms A.V. Boychenyuk, a lawyer practising in Paris. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, and then by Mr V. Galperin, his successor in that office.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the State’s refusal to meet its statutory obligation to provide him with free medicines, necessary for the treatment of his cancer, and a refusal to provide him with compensation in relation to that refusal had breached Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention. He also alleged that the civil proceedings that he had brought in that connection had been tainted by various shortcomings, including a lack of legal aid, which had rendered them unfair, in breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 28 August 2015 notice of the above-mentioned complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in St Petersburg.
The applicant is suffering from advanced metastatic prostate cancer.
It appears that he was first diagnosed with that cancer in early 2007. In that connection, on 26 February 2007 the applicant was granted the status of a disabled person, with the result that, by virtue of Federal Law no. 178FZ of 17 July 1999 on State social assistance (“the State Social Assistance Act” – see paragraph 34 below), he became entitled to the provision of certain medicines free of charge on the basis of medical prescriptions issued by competent doctors. A list of the relevant medicines was approved by decree no. 665 of the Russian Ministry of Healthcare and Social Development of 18 September 2006 (see paragraph 38 below).
In February 2007 the applicant was put on the federal register of persons entitled to State social assistance, including the provision of free medicines. The applicant was assigned to pharmacy no. 162 of St Petersburg, where he was entitled to get free medicines for the treatment of his disease.
At the time of the events described below, the applicant was following a programme of treatment with Bicalutamide. The treatment plan required him to take one pill every day for a period of eight to twelve months. In accordance with the relevant regulations, a prescription for that type of medicine was only valid for one month, and therefore the applicant obtained a new prescription each month. However, he was only able to get Bicalutamide free of charge once, on 5 July 2007. On all the other occasions, the pharmacy to which he had been assigned was out of stock of Bicalutamide in so far as it was available for distribution free of charge. It kept the applicant’s prescriptions in order to provide a “deferred service” (отсроченное обслуживание), effectively promising to inform him of the availability of free-of-charge Bicalutamide as soon as stocks were replenished. At the same time, the applicant was informed that he could obtain the required medicine at his own expense. Since the applicant had to follow his treatment plan continuously, he bought the medicine on 8 June, 1 and 25 October and 26 November 2007 for a total amount of 49,400 Russian roubles (RUB – approximately 1,400 euros (EUR)).
According to the applicant, his aggregate monthly income, from his old-age and disability pensions plus extra earnings as a result of consulting for a private firm until 31 October 2007, totalled RUB 7,105.15 (approximately EUR 200).
The applicant complained to various public bodies about the unavailability of free-of-charge Bicalutamide, seeking also to have his expenses, borne in connection with the purchase of that medicine, reimbursed.
In a letter of 11 May 2007 the St Petersburg Committee of Healthcare (Комитет по здравоохранению г. Санкт-Петербурга – “the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee”) replied to the applicant’s complaints, stating that the provision of medicines free of charge was funded by the federal budget, and that, by virtue of executive order no. 328 of the Russian Ministry of Healthcare and Social Development (see paragraph 37 below), in the absence of the necessary medicine a patient’s prescription should be taken by a pharmacy for a “deferred service”. The letter further stated that the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee had sent a request to a pharmaceutical company with a view to obtaining free-of-charge Bicalutamide, and that as soon as the medicine arrived at the pharmacy to which the applicant was assigned, he would be informed accordingly. The letter also informed the applicant that, under the relevant legislation, individuals in difficult financial circumstances could obtain financial aid from district centres of social support located in the vicinity of those individuals’ domiciles, and the amount of that aid would be determined by the local authorities.
In a letter of 10 September 2007 the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee stated that it would not reimburse the costs of medicines which patients had obtained at their own expense. The letter further invited the applicant to apply to the relevant district centre of social support for financial aid.
On 7 November 2007 the St Petersburg Fund of Compulsory Medical Insurance (Территориальный фонд обязательного медицинского страхования г. Санкт-Петербурга – “the St. Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund”) informed the applicant that the federal legislation on social support did not provide for the reimbursement of patients’ expenses for medicines included in the list of those to be provided free of charge in the context of the relevant State programmes. It further stated that it was the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee that was entrusted with the task of satisfying the population’s needs in respect of medicines, and therefore the applicant should address his queries to that State agency.
According to the applicant, between October 2007 and February 2008 he also applied to various State agencies, non-governmental and human rights organisations, and bar associations in an attempt to obtain free legal advice and legal representation for any eventual court proceedings. These attempts proved unsuccessful.
In a letter of 14 January 2008 a deputy president of the St Petersburg Bar Association informed the applicant that free legal advice could be provided to a disabled person only in connection with his or her individual rehabilitation programme.
On 10 December 2007 the applicant brought civil proceedings against the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee and the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund in the Moskovskiy District Court of St Petersburg (“the District Court”). He sought compensation for pecuniary damage that he had sustained as a result of being compelled to obtain Bicalutamide at his own expense, and compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage arising from the distress that he had suffered.
The materials in the case file, including the applicant’s written submissions before the first-instance court and transcripts of the court hearings, reveal that the applicant advanced detailed arguments, with reference to the relevant domestic legal instruments, and actively participated in the court hearings, filing written applications and requests. The first-instance court granted some of the applications and requests, whilst rejecting others as irrelevant.
At the hearings, the defendants objected to the applicant’s claim. In particular, a representative of the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund argued that it was an obligation of the federal authorities to provide the relevant categories of citizens with free medicines, and that the entire amount earmarked by the Federal Fund of Compulsory Medical Insurance (“the Federal Medical Insurance Fund”) for that purpose for the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund had been transferred by the latter to a relevant pharmaceutical company with a view to obtaining the necessary medicines. In spite of this, the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund still had an outstanding debt with that company in respect of the medicines which the eligible residents of St Petersburg had obtained free of charge from the city’s pharmacies. The representative further argued that in 2007, with reference to the limits of the federal budget, the Federal Medical Insurance Fund had rejected the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund’s request for the provision of the necessary free-of-charge medicines for the eligible inhabitants of the city in quantities sufficient to cover their needs.
A representative of the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee stated that it had never been allocated any financial resources from the federal budget to ensure the provision of free medicines, as it had only been responsible for performing coordinating and monitoring functions for the implementation of the relevant federal programme.
On 5 February 2008 the District Court rejected the applicant’s claim in full.
In its judgment, the District Court established that the applicant had the status of a disabled person, and reaffirmed that under the State Social Assistance Act, and a relevant presidential decree, individuals with disabilities had a right to State assistance in the form of the provision of various social services, including free medicines, and that it was the State’s obligation to provide that assistance.
It also established that, on five occasions between April and November 2007, the applicant had received prescriptions for Bicalutamide and that he had, on four occasions, had to buy that medicine at his own expense for a total amount of RUB 49,400 (approximately EUR 1,400). The court also noted the applicant’s unsuccessful attempts to seek the assistance of the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund or the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee in obtaining the free medicine or in having his expenses reimbursed.
The court quoted decision no. 864 of 29 December 2004 of the Russian Government (see paragraph 36 below), which had imposed an obligation on the territorial compulsory medical insurance funds to submit requests to the Federal Medical Insurance Fund for the allocation of the financial resources necessary for the provision of free medicines. It was the Federal Medical Insurance Fund which, in accordance with that decision, was to earmark the necessary amounts from the federal budget for the appropriate territorial funds, and the latter were to transfer those amounts on a monthly basis to relevant pharmaceutical organisations, while a relevant territorial healthcare committee – an executive State agency – was to monitor the use of those financial resources by the relevant territorial compulsory medical insurance fund.
In the above connection, the District Court observed that in 2007 the Federal Medical Insurance Fund had rejected the request of the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund for the supply of free medicines based on the assessment of the needs of the residents of St Petersburg, having stated that the limits of the financial resources allocated for that purpose in the federal budget had been exceeded. The court also noted that the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund had submitted, in due course, an additional request for the provision of free medicines, including Bicalutamide, for the residents of St Petersburg for the second half of the year 2007 and that it had duly spent the entire amount earmarked for that purpose from the federal budget but still had an outstanding debt before the relevant pharmaceutical company.
The court went on to note that the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee did not get any allocation from the federal budget for the provision of free medicines to relevant categories of residents of St Petersburg.
In the light of the foregoing, the District Court concluded that there were no grounds to allow the applicant’s claim, as it had not been established during the proceedings that the applicant had sustained pecuniary losses and suffered non-pecuniary damage because of any unlawful actions on the part of either the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund or the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee.
The court found, in particular, that the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund had fully complied with its relevant obligations concerning provision of free medicines to certain categories of individuals within the limits of the sums allocated for that purpose from the federal budget. The court further referred to the fact that the request of the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund for the supply of free medicines corresponding to the needs of the residents of St Petersburg had been rejected by the Federal Medical Insurance Fund. Therefore, in the District Court’s view, there had been no fault on the part of the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund in the failure to provide the eligible residents of St Petersburg, including the applicant, with the necessary medicines, with the result that there were no grounds to hold the St Petersburg Medical Insurance Fund liable for the reimbursement of the applicant’s expenses for the purchase of the Bicalutamide.
The District Court further found no grounds to impose any such responsibility on the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee either, stating that its relevant programmes were financed from the federal budget and that the Committee only monitored and coordinated the provision of the patients with free medicines.
The court noted that, by virtue of Article 1069 of the Russian Civil Code (see paragraph 50 below), damage inflicted on an individual as a result of unlawful action or inaction of State bodies or officials was to be compensated. However, since there had neither been a fault on the part of the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee in failing to provide the eligible residents of St Petersburg with free medicines under the relevant federal programme, nor had a causal link been established between the action or inaction of that Committee and the expenses incurred by the applicant as a result of having to purchase the Bicalutamide medicine, that Committee had no obligation to reimburse those expenses.
On 23 April 2008 the St Petersburg City Court upheld the judgment of 5 February 2008 on appeal, endorsing the reasoning of the District Court. Further attempts by the applicant to have his case reviewed by means of a supervisory review proved futile.
The relevant constitutional provisions concerning health protection and medical care are as follows:
“1. Everyone shall be guaranteed social security at the expense of the State in old age, in cases of illness, disability, loss of a breadwinner, for bringing up children and in other cases established by law.
State pensions and social allowances shall be established by law.
Voluntary social insurance and the creation of additional forms of social security and charity shall be promoted.”
“1. Everyone shall have the right to health protection and medical care. Medical care in State and municipal health institutions shall be provided to citizens free of charge at the expense of the corresponding budget, insurance contributions and other resources.
In the Russian Federation federal programmes for the protection and improvement of the health of the public shall be financed by the State, measures shall be taken to develop State, municipal and private healthcare systems, and activities shall be encouraged which contribute to the improvement of human health, the development of physical education and sport, and ecological, sanitary and epidemiological well-being.
...”
The provisions concerning central and regionalised powers are as follows:
“1. The joint jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and the federal entities includes: ...
coordination of issues of healthcare, protection of the family including maternity, paternity and childhood, and social protection, including social security ...”
“...
Within the limits of the jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and the powers of the Russian Federation on the issue of the joint jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and the federal entities, the federal executive agencies and the executive agencies of the federal entities shall make up a single system of executive power of the Russian Federation.”
Federal Law no. 178-FZ of 17 July 1999 on State social assistance (Федеральный закон от 17 июля 1999 №178-ФЗ «О государственной социальной помощи»), as in force at the relevant time, provided, inter alia, that certain vulnerable categories of Russian citizens, individuals with disabilities being amongst their number, were entitled to a number of social services listed therein, including the provision of medicines free of charge (sections 6.1 and 6.2). It also established that the persons who were entitled to those services were to be included in the relevant federal register (section 6.4) and that the list of medicines to be provided free of charge had to be approved by the competent federal executive agency, namely the Russian Ministry of Healthcare and Social Development (section 6.2.2).
By decision no. 890 of 30 July 1994 the Russian Government approved the lists of categories of the eligible population and of diseases for the treatment of which medicines should be provided free of charge. In so far as relevant, the decision also entrusted the regional executive authorities with the responsibility of monitoring the availability of the requisite medicines in pharmacies, irrespective of whether they were private or Stateowned, and of taking the necessary action where there was a lack of such medicines. The executive authorities were also under an obligation to ensure timely payments for the medicines that were to be distributed to those entitled to receive them free of charge, and to involve additional sources of financing, in particular from commercial banks, insurance and trust companies, and other institutions, for the development of the healthcare industry and the improvement of the provision of medicines to the population.
By decision no. 864 of 29 December 2004 the Russian Government approved rules relating to the financing of State social support in the form of social services. The decision established that a territorial compulsory medical insurance fund should submit requests to the Federal Medical Insurance Fund for the allocation of the financial resources necessary for the provision of free medicines to those concerned. It was the Federal Medical Insurance Fund which was to determine the amounts to be allocated from the federal budget to each territorial fund, and those funds were to transfer the allocated amounts to the relevant pharmaceutical organisations on a monthly basis. The use of the allocated financial resources was to be monitored by the competent federal executive agencies.
By executive order no. 328 of 29 December 2004 the Russian Ministry of Healthcare and Social Development approved the rules governing the procedure for the provision of social services to eligible individuals, including the supply of medicines free of charge. It provided, in particular, that free medicines should be provided to such individuals on the basis of medical prescriptions issued by competent doctors, that those medicines should be obtained from pharmacies specially designated for that purpose, and that if a particular medicine was temporarily unavailable, a patient’s prescription should be taken by the pharmacy concerned for a “deferred service”, with the necessary medicine being provided within ten working days, or being replaced by a similar medicine from the relevant list.
By executive order no. 665 of 18 September 2006 the Russian Ministry of Healthcare and Social Development included Bicalutamide in the list of medicines to be provided free of charge in accordance with the State Social Assistance Act.
In the period subsequent to the events described in the present case, and more specifically, from 2011 to 2014, the national courts examined claims lodged against the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee by a number of residents of St Petersburg who were entitled to the provision of medicines free of charge and who, at various times, had had to obtain those medicines at their own expense. They sought the reimbursement of those expenses, and compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
In particular, in a judgment of 9 June 2011, a first-instance court examined a claim lodged by Ms R., who had argued that it was the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee’s obligation to provide the eligible residents of that city with free medicines, and that that Committee should have to bear responsibility for its failure to do so. She pointed out that the applicable legislation and regulations did not make the provision of free medicines conditional on any limits of budgetary funding, on a particular number of prescriptions per person, or on a maximum amount earmarked for that purpose.
Having examined Ms R.’s claim, the first-instance court rejected it in full, giving a similar reasoning to that in the applicant’s case. It held, in particular, that the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee had obtained medicines within the limits of the amount earmarked from the federal budget, and had then organised the distribution of those medicines free of charge among the individuals concerned by means of the pharmacies of St Petersburg. Therefore, in the view of the first-instance court, the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee had fully discharged its obligations and could not be blamed for a failure to provide Ms R. with the relevant medicines.
On 24 November 2011 an appellate court quashed the abovementioned judgment on appeal and took a new decision. It observed, in particular, that Ms R.’s right to be provided with the medicine in question had clearly been established in the domestic law, and had never been contested by the defendants. Moreover, she had had a prescription from a relevant health professional, but had been unable to obtain the necessary medicine free of charge.
The appellate court further pointed out that, by virtue of decision no. 890 of 30 July 1994 of the Russian Government (see paragraph 35 above), it was an obligation of the executive authorities of each region in Russia to ensure timely payments for medicines so that they were available for free distribution to the relevant categories of citizens. It stressed that the existing legal framework established the right of those entitled to be provided with necessary medicines not only free of charge but also without any restriction, and that a limit on the maximum quantity of a particular medicine per person, or a lack of budgetary funds allocated to a particular region could not be grounds for a refusal to provide the concerned individuals with essential medicines.
The appellate court further noted that the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee had not duly performed the obligation imposed on it by the relevant legal instruments, and, more specifically, that it had failed to ensure that Ms R. could obtain free medicines in a timely fashion. It was therefore under an obligation to reimburse the expenses that she had incurred in that connection. The appellate court also awarded Ms R. compensation in respect of the non-pecuniary damage which she had sustained.
Other court decisions, taken in various sets of proceedings, are similarly worded. Either at the first or the second level of jurisdiction, the courts granted the relevant claims, in so far as the claimants could demonstrate their entitlement to be provided with medicines free of charge, their efforts to obtain those medicines free of charge and their inability to do so given a lack of medicines available for free distribution, as well as the expenses incurred in purchasing those medicines when necessary.
The national courts observed, in particular, that it was an obligation of the public authorities of the relevant region of Russia – specifically the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee in those particular cases – to ensure the provision of free medicines to those so entitled. The courts also observed that the uninterrupted provision of the relevant medicines had been vital to the claimants’ lives and that by failing to ensure uninterrupted provision, or by providing those medicines only occasionally, the St Petersburg Healthcare Committee had breached that obligation, and therefore it was required to reimburse the expenses that the claimants had incurred when having to purchase the medicines themselves.
Section 26 of Federal Law no. 63-FZ of 31 May 2002 on legal practice and advocacy in the Russian Federation, as in force at the relevant time, provided, in so far as relevant, that free legal assistance in civil proceedings should be granted to Russian nationals with an income lower than the minimum amount for subsistence who were claimants in cases concerning the recovery of maintenance payments, compensation in respect of damage caused by the loss of a breadwinner, or compensation in respect of damage caused by an injury or any other form of harm to health sustained at work.
Article 15 of the Russian Civil Code (“the Code”) provides that an individual whose right has been breached is entitled to full compensation for the losses sustained as a result, unless a law or a contract specifically provides for reduced compensation. The losses are understood to comprise, among other things, expenses which an individual has incurred or will have to incur in the restoration of the right that has been breached.
Article 151 of the Code provides that if certain actions impairing an individual’s personal non-property rights or encroaching on other intangible assets have caused him or her non-pecuniary damage (that is physical or mental suffering), the court may impose an obligation on the perpetrator to pay pecuniary compensation for that damage. The amount of compensation is to be determined by reference to the gravity of the perpetrator’s fault and other significant circumstances. The court is also to take into account the extent of the physical or mental suffering in relation to the victim’s individual characteristics.
Article 1069 of the Code establishes that damage caused by unlawful action or inaction of State or local authorities or their officials is to be compensated from the Federal Treasury or a federal entity’s treasury.