The case originated in an application (no. 3244/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vladislav Yevgenyevich Dementyev (“the applicant”), on 17 December 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Gandzyuk, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 2 July 2007 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in .
He is currently a military serviceman.
From 13 May 2000 to 5 May 2001 the applicant served in the Russian peacekeeping contingent in Kosovo.
Upon his return to , he brought proceedings against the head of his military unit for his daily allowance in relation to his service abroad.
On 14 April 2003 the Military Court of the Ryazan Garrison ordered the military unit to pay the applicant 371,543.84 Russian roubles in respect of his daily allowance.
The military unit did not lodge an ordinary appeal within the statutory ten-day time-limit and on 25 April 2003 the judgment became binding and enforceable. The enforcement proceedings started.
However, on 25 August 2003 the military unit applied for a supervisory review of the judgment.
On 5 November 2003 the Presidium of the Military Court of the Moscow Command quashed the judgment of 14 April 2003 by way of supervisory review, re-examined the claim and dismissed it in full. The reason given for the quashing of the judgment was the “wrongful application of substantive law by the first-instance court”.
Article 362. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions by appeal courts
“1.  The grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions by appeal courts are:
...
(4)  a violation or incorrect application of substantive or procedural law.”
Article 387. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions 
by way of supervisory review
“Judicial decisions of lower courts may be quashed or altered by way of supervisory review on the grounds of substantial violations of substantive or procedural legal provisions.”
Article 390. Competence of the supervisory-review court
“1.  Having examined the case by way of supervisory review, the court may ...
(2)  quash the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance in whole or in part and remit the matter for a fresh examination ...
(5)  quash or alter the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance and issue a new judicial decision, without remitting the matter for a fresh examination, if the substantive law has been erroneously applied or interpreted.”