The case originated in an application (no. 60477/12) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Mieczysław Grobelny (“the applicant”), on 11 September 2012.
The applicant was represented by Ms K. Janik, a lawyer practising in Bielsko-Biała. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska, and subsequently by Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the refusal to grant him compensation for a period of twenty-one months – during which time, in spite of his recognised incapacity to perform farm work, he had remained without any financial support from the State – had violated his Convention rights.
On 5 January 2015 notice of the application was given to the Government under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Lubniewice.
He is a farmer insured by the Farmers’ Social Security Fund (Kasa Rolniczego Ubezpieczenia Społecznego) (“the Fund”), to which he has been paying his social security contributions.
From 1994 until 31 March 2008 the applicant received a disability pension because he was completely unfit for farm work.
On 16 May 2008 the Zielona Góra Farmers’ Social Security Fund, having had the applicant examined first on 7 April 2008 by its medical expert (lekarz rzeczoznawca Kasy Rolniczego Ubezpieczenia Społecznego) and again on 15 May 2008 by its medical board (komisja lekarska Kasy Rolniczego Ubezpieczenia Społecznego), issued a decision finding that he was not completely unfit for farm work. He was consequently refused further payments of his disability pension with effect from 1 April 2008.
The applicant appealed, submitting that his state of health had not changed or improved.
On 9 July 2009 the Gorzów Wielkopolski Regional Court (Sąd Okręgowy) dismissed his appeal. The court ordered a number of medical reports from experts in internal medicine, orthopaedics, gastroenterology, neurology, psychiatry, diabetology and vascular surgery. Having examined the applicant and his medical documentation, the experts found that he was not completely unfit for farm work. Relying on the above-mentioned expert reports, the Regional Court reached a concurring conclusion, moreover holding that the applicant’s “subjective feelings” with respect to his health were irrelevant as evidence.
The applicant appealed against the first-instance judgment, challenging in particular the expert report in neurology and orthopaedics.
On 26 November 2009 the Szczecin Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The appellate court fully concurred with the factual findings and legal assessment of the court of first instance, holding that the experts had correctly assessed the applicant’s state of health.
In December 2009 the applicant underwent surgical treatment for an L5 disc herniation in the Szczecin Neurosurgical Clinic.
On 31 December 2009 the applicant was served with a copy of the judgment of the Szczecin Court of Appeal of 26 November 2009, together with information about the right to lodge a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court.
On 19 January 2010 the applicant again lodged a request with the Zielona Góra Farmers’ Social Security Fund to grant him a disability pension on account of his being completely unfit for farm work.
On 26 March 2010, in the course of the proceedings conducted by the Farmers’ Social Security Fund, the Fund’s medical board declared the applicant temporarily completely unfit for farm work from 17 December 2009 until 28 February 2011. However, on 6 April 2010, the Fund refused the applicant’s request for a disability pension, finding that he had not fulfilled one of the conditions for being granted that benefit – namely, he had not paid social insurance contributions for the required period of time.
On 27 April 2010 the applicant lodged an appeal against the aforementioned decision with the Regional Court.
On 24 September 2010 the Gorzów Wielkopolski Regional Court found the appeal well-founded and, referring to section 22(2) of the Farmers’ Social Security Act of 20 December 1990 (Ustawa z dnia 20 grudnia 1990 r. o ubezpieczeniu społecznym rolników) (“the 1990 Act”), reinstated the applicant’s right to a disability pension, with effect from 19 January 2010 – that is to say the day on which the request had been lodged. The Regional Court found that the fact that the applicant had been fully unfit for farm work was undisputed and acknowledged by the defendant (the Fund). Moreover, referring to the medical report dated 18 June 2010 ordered for the purpose of the pending court proceedings and issued by experts in internal medicine, orthopaedics, neurology and psychiatry, the court established that the applicant had been completely unfit for farm work throughout the whole period starting from the end of March 2008 – that is to say from the day on which he had stopped receiving the above mentioned pension. The forensic experts – of whom at least two (the neurologist, a certain J.W., and the orthopedist, a certain J.B.) – had also issued their respective medical reports for the purpose of the previous set of proceedings in which the applicant’s disability pension had been discontinued, had prepared their latest reports on the basis of the medical documentation previously available to them, as well as on the medical files relating to the applicant’s treatment in the Szczecin Neurosurgical Clinic in December 2009. The court noted that they had indicated, without providing further details, that during the previous set of proceedings they had not had at their disposal the complete medical documentation and procedural files concerning the applicant (dokumentacja orzecznicza). Thus, in the reports issued for the purposes of the second set of proceedings they had reached a conclusion contrary to their previous findings, even though the applicant’s state of health had not improved and he had been completely unfit for farm work for the whole time. Lastly, the experts had indicated that the applicant’s complete inability to perform farm work would cease to exist no earlier than on 30 April 2011. Consequently, the Regional Court reinstated the applicant’s entitlement to a disability pension until that date.
The applicant appealed against the judgment of the Regional Court, in particular demanding that his right to a disability pension be reinstated with effect from 1 April 2008.
On 27 January 2011 the Szczecin Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The court held that, given the scope of the principle of res iudicata, it was impossible to re-examine and re-establish the issue of the applicant’s state of health, even though the experts in the ongoing proceedings had declared him completely unfit for farm work as of 31 March 2008. The court referred in this respect to a Supreme Court judgment of 18 February 2003 (file no. II UK 139/02) issued in a similar case. According to that judgment, an expert report which is contradictory to a final judgment is not subject to the court’s assessment. Therefore, the court found itself bound by the findings made in the first set of proceedings, in the judgment of the Szczecin Court of Appeal of 26 November 2009 (see paragraph 14 above).
On 23 February 2011 the applicant was served with a copy of the aforementioned judgment delivered by the Szczecin Court of Appeal.
On 1 August 2011 the applicant, relying on Article 417 of the Civil Code (Kodeks cywilny), brought a civil action for compensation against the Zielona Góra Farmers’ Social Security Fund. He considered that he should have been paid a disability pension for the whole period of his incapacity to perform farm work, starting from 1 April 2008. Thus, he demanded a payment of 13,850 Polish zlotys (PLN – approximately 3,462 euros (EUR)) covering the twenty-one months during which he had been deprived of his social benefits, together with and PLN 1,260 (approximately EUR 315) by way of reimbursement of the cost of the medical examination that he had undergone at his own expense and which had confirmed his incapacity for work.
On 29 February 2012 the Sulęcin District Court (Sąd Rejonowy) refused to grant the applicant the demanded compensation, finding that the requirements set out in Article 417 of the Civil Code had not been met – that is to say the activities of the Fund as a State representative had not been illegal (bezprawne). The District Court established that the medical experts had confirmed that they had not had at their disposal the complete relevant medical documentation and procedural files when they had issued the first medical report concerning the applicant. As a result, their second medical report had contained conclusions contrary to their previous evaluation of the applicant’s state of health. Nevertheless, it held that it could not override the final and legally binding judgment of 26 November 2011 issued by the Szczecin Court of Appeal, neither with respect to the appellate court’s legal assessment nor the underlying factual findings, owing to the scope of the principle of res iudicata, as provided in Article 365 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Kodeks postępowania cywilnego), which precluded it from ruling anew on the issue of whether the applicant had been completely unfit for farm work after 31 March 2008. The court also referred in this regard to the Supreme Court’s judgment of 18 February 2003 (file no. II UK 139/02). Thus, the District Court found itself bound to disregard the experts’ report issued during the second set of disability-pension proceedings instituted by the applicant to the extent to which it contradicted the judgment of the Court of Appeal. Moreover, it held that the courts in the previous sets of proceedings had not made any flagrant mistakes in their interpretation and application of the relevant legal principles that could have triggered the liability of the State Treasury.
The applicant appealed against the first-instance judgment.
On 29 June 2012 the Gorzów Wielkopolski Regional Court dismissed his appeal. The Regional Court concurred with the legal assessment of the court of first instance as regards the lawfulness of the Fund’s activity and the protection of the principle of legal certainty, construed as the principle res iudicata, and referred to the same Supreme Court judgment. Moreover, the court considered that the applicant had failed to prove that the lack of the complete medical documentation and procedural files had resulted from a failing on the part of the Fund. Additionally, the Regional Court examined the case under Article 4172 of the Civil Code, which allowed the granting of compensation even in the event that the actions of the State representative in question had been legal, the condition for qualifying for such compensation being here a bodily injury (szkoda na osobie). The court, however, also refused to award compensation on those grounds, holding that the damage suffered by the applicant had been purely pecuniary in nature. Given the amount of the claim, a cassation appeal was not available in these proceedings.
The right to a disability pension is regulated by sections 21 and 22 of the 1990 Act, which at the relevant time read in their pertinent parts as follows:
Section 21.1.
“An insured person is entitled to a disability pension if he meets ... the following requirements:
...;
(2) [he is], permanently or temporarily, completely unfit for farm work;
...;”
Section 22.2.
“A right to a disability pension [owing to] being unfit for work that has expired because the state of complete incapacity for work [has ended] shall be reinstated if within eighteen months of the date of expiry of that right the applicant is again found to be unfit for farm work.”
Section 44(2), read in conjunction with section 6(6) of the 1990 Act, as applicable at the material time, contained a reference to the rules specified in the relevant provisions of the Act of 13 October 1998 on the System of Social Insurance (Ustawa o systemie ubezpieczeń społecznych) (“the 1998 Act”) with regard to the issue of a re-assessment of the right to social benefits, including a disability pension, both ex officio and upon an insured person lodging an application therefor.
Section 114 of the 1998 Act read at the relevant time as follows:
“1. The right to benefits, or the amount [thereof], will be re-assessed – [either] upon an application being lodged by the person concerned or ex officio – if, after the validation of the decision concerning benefits, new evidence is submitted or circumstances which existed before the issuance of the decision and which have an impact on the right to benefits or the amount thereof are discovered.
...
If the right to benefits or the amount thereof was established by a decision of an appellate authority, the pension authority, on the basis of the evidence or circumstances specified in paragraph 1:
(1) shall issue of its own motion a decision allotting the right to benefits or increasing the amount thereof;
...”
Article 415 of the Civil Code reads as follows:
“Anyone who has inflicted damage on another person through their own fault shall make redress for it.”
Article 417 § 1 of the Civil Code reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1. The State Treasury, a municipality or another legal person wielding public power by virtue of the law shall be liable for damage caused by an unlawful act or [failure to act] in the exercise of that power.”
Article 4172 § 1 of the Civil Code reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“If by a lawful act [of a state official] a bodily injury has been inflicted (szkoda na osobie) the harmed person may demand full or partial compensation and just satisfaction if the circumstances – in particular their incapacity for work or their difficult financial situation – indicate that that is required by the principles of equity.”
The principle of legal certainty, construed as the principle of res iudicata, is regulated by Articles 365 and 366 of the Code of Civil Procedure, of which the relevant parts read as follows:
Article 365.1.
”A final and binding judgment shall be binding not only on the parties and the court that rendered the judgment, but also on other courts, State and public administrative authorities, and other persons in such instances as provided for by the law.
...”
Article 366
“A final and binding judgment shall have the force of res iudicata only with regard to that which constituted the subject matter of the case [that is to say the) basis of the dispute, and only between the same parties [as those that were the parties to the previous dispute].”
The possible grounds for lodging a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court, together with the admissibility criteria, are set out in Articles 398,1 3982 and 3983 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
Article 3981.1.
“A final and binding judgment rendered by a court of second instance, or a decision rejecting a statement of claim, or a decision discontinuing proceedings, which terminate the proceedings, may be appealed against to the Supreme Court by a party [to the case in question], the Prosecutor General, the Civil Rights Ombudsman or the Children’s Rights Ombudsman, unless otherwise provided by law.”
Article 3982.1.
“No cassation appeal may be lodged with the Supreme Court in cases regarding pecuniary interests (sprawy o prawa majątkowe) where the value of the rights disputed in that appeal (wartość przedmiotu zaskarżenia) is lower than fifty thousand Polish zlotys or, in cases pertaining to labour law and social security, lower than ten thousand Polish zlotys. However, in cases pertaining to social security a cassation appeal may be lodged, irrespective of the value of the rights disputed in that appeal, in cases concerning the establishment or suspension of a retirement or disability pension or in cases concerning enrolment in a mandatory social security scheme. Notwithstanding the value of the rights disputed in an appeal, a cassation appeal may also be lodged in cases concerning compensation for damage caused by the issuance of an unlawful final and binding judgment.”
Article 3983.1.
“A cassation appeal to the Supreme Court may rely on the following grounds:
(1) a breach of substantive law due to its incorrect interpretation or incorrect application;
(2) a breach of the procedural law, if such a breach could have a significant impact on the outcome of the case.
The Prosecutor General may rely in a cassation appeal on the grounds specified in paragraph 1 if a decision was issued in violation of the fundamental principles of the rule of law. The Civil Rights Ombudsman may rely in a cassation appeal on the same grounds if a decision was issued in violation of constitutional freedoms or human and civil rights, as may the Children’s Rights Ombudsman if a decision was issued in violation of children’s rights.
A cassation appeal may not be based on allegations concerning the establishment of facts or the evaluation of evidence.”
The issue of the reopening of proceedings is regulated in Article 403 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which reads as follows:
“1. The reopening of proceedings may be requested on the following grounds:
(1) when a judgment was based on a forged or modified document or on a conviction that was later set aside;
(2) when a judgment was delivered as a result of a criminal offence.
The reopening [of proceedings] may also be requested if it is later discovered that a final and binding judgment concerning the same legal relation was issued or if facts or items of evidence which might have affected the outcome of the case but which the party could not have presented during the original proceedings are discovered.
(repealed)
The reopening [of proceedings] may also be requested if the contents of a judgment was affected by a non-final decision issued based on a legislative act that was later declared by the Constitutional Court to be incompatible with the Constitution, a ratified international treaty or a legal act, or [that was] repealed or amended in accordance with Article 4161.”