The case originated in an application (no. 78117/13) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Gyula Fábián (“the applicant”), on 5 December 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Grád, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 read alone and in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention that the suspension of disbursement of his pension for the duration of his postretirement employment amounted to an unjustified and discriminatory interference with his property rights.
On 25 August 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Budapest.
The applicant, already in receipt of an old-age pension, took up employment with Budapest XIII District Municipality as a civil servant, as of 1 July 2012.
On 1 January 2013 an amendment to the 1997 Pension Act entered into force, according to which the disbursement of those old-age pensions whose beneficiaries are simultaneously employed within certain categories of the public sector will be suspended for the duration of their employment. No such restriction was put in place in respect of those who are in receipt of an old-age pension while being employed within the private sector.
In application of this new rule, on 2 July 2013 the disbursement of the applicant’s pension was suspended. The applicant’s administrative appeal to the National Pension Board was to no avail.
The Fundamental Law of Hungary provides as follows:
“(1)  Everyone shall have the right to freely choose his or her work, occupation and to engage in entrepreneurial activities. Everyone shall be obliged to contribute to the enrichment of the community through his or her work, in accordance with his or her abilities and opportunities.
(2)  Hungary shall strive to create the conditions to ensure that everyone who is able and willing to work has the opportunity to do so.”
Act no. LXXXI of 1997 on Social Security Pension Benefits (hereinafter: the “SSPBA”) provides as follows:
“(1)  The disbursement of old-age pension shall be suspended ... if the pensioner is employed as a civil servant, a government official, a senior state official, a public official, an official in charge of public service administration, a judge, an officer of the court or the prosecutor’s office, a professional of the armed forces, or a professional or contractor of the Hungarian Defence Force.
...
(3)  For the period of suspension of the old-age pension, the person concerned shall qualify as a pensioner.
(4)  Disbursement of the old-age pension may be continued at the pensioner’s request, if the beneficiary proves that the employment in subsection (1) above has been terminated.
....”
“(1)  Beneficiaries of old-age pension working in any of the employments listed in section 83/C(1) on 1 January 2013 shall notify the pension disbursement agency thereof by 30 April 2013.
(2)  The old-age pension of persons working in any of the employments listed in section 83/C(1) on 1 January 2013 shall be suspended from 1 July 2013, provided that such employment is maintained on that date.”
The lawmaker’s explanation of section 83/C contains the following passage:
“The amendment introduced the prohibition of double compensation in respect to employment relationships of civil servants, government officials, senior state officials, public officials, officials in charge of public service administration, judges, officers of the court or the prosecutor’s office, professionals of the armed forces, as well as professionals and contractors of the Hungarian Defence Force. Accordingly, persons working in such employments may not receive old-age pension ... in addition to their remuneration, so such payments shall be suspended by the pension disbursement agency for the term of the employment.”