The case concerns the applicant’s complaints under Article 6 § 2 of the Convention (presumption of innocence) and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 (the applicant’s obligation to pay damages as a consequence of the failure to pay taxes by a legal entity of which he was the sole executive body).
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Krasnodar. He was represented by Mr A. Zekoshev, a lawyer practising in Krasnodar.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, then Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, subsequently by Mr A. Fedorov, Head of the Office of the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and most recently by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
From 1 January 2011 the applicant was the managing director of Argo-RusCom Limited Liablity Company (“the LLC”).
On an unspecified date in 2013, the inter-district tax inspectorate conducted an audit of the LLC. According to the audit report, in the years 2010 and 2011 the LLC had evaded payment of value-added tax (VAT) in breach of the Tax Code. In particular, the tax inspectorate established that the LLC had failed to submit in good time the documents justifying the application of zero rate VAT to its transactions. The LLC’s allegations that the relevant documents had been stolen were dismissed as unsubstantiated. The inspectorate recalculated the taxes owed by the LLC and ordered that the latter pay the tax arrears, the interest on that amount and a penalty totalling 14,948,778.61 Russian roubles (RUB). The case was referred to the commercial courts for consideration. The commercial courts confirmed the lawfulness of the inspectorate’s claims. The final decision on the matter was taken by the North Caucasus Circuit Commercial Court on 3 June 2015.
The LLC was unable to pay the amount indicated and on 3 December 2013 the Krasnodar Regional Commercial Court declared the LLC insolvent and opened bankruptcy proceedings in respect of it.
On 2 June 2015 the Regional Commercial Court ordered the company’s liquidation.
On 16 July 2015 the LLC was deregistered.
On an unspecified date the inter-district investigative committee opened an inquiry concerning the tax evasion allegedly committed by the applicant.
The investigator with the investigative committee studied the audit report prepared by the tax inspectorate and repeatedly questioned the applicant and the LLC’s chief accountant.
On 2 June 2014 an investigator ruled that the audit report of the tax inspectorate confirmed that the applicant had evaded payment of VAT owed by the LLC. The investigator refused, however, to institute criminal proceedings, noting that the events in question had taken place more than two years before and that the criminal prosecution was time-barred. The applicant did not appeal.
On 4 March 2015 the inter-district tax inspectorate brought a civil action against the applicant, seeking compensation for damage caused by the criminal offence of tax evasion committed by him in the amount of RUB 14,948,778.61. Relying on Ruling no. 64 of the Plenary of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation on practice in the application of the law on tax crimes, the rules of criminal procedure and Article 199 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, the inspectorate argued that the tax authorities had a right to recover damages caused by a criminal offence of evasion of taxes. They further referred to the general provisions of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation providing for a right to claim damages from a tortfeasor (Article 1064 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation (the “CC”) and an employer’s vicarious liability in respect of the damage caused by its employee (Article 1068 of the CC). Lastly, they submitted that the damage incurred by the State had been caused by the applicant who had been the managing director of the LLC.
On 6 April 2015 the Leninskiy District Court of Krasnodar granted the claims in full. It relied on the audit report establishing that the LLC had evaded payment of taxes and on Ruling no. 64, noting as follows:
“As the court has established and as is apparent from the material in the case file, from 1 January to 31 December 2011 [the applicant] was the managing director of the [LLC]. He had the right to sign financial documents and to submit tax declarations.
The [LLC] failed to comply with its duty to pay value-added tax and tax on profits ...
[The applicant], who was managing director of the LLC, committed illegal acts with a criminal intent to evade the payment of taxes and caused pecuniary damage to the budget of the Russian Federation, which fact was established by the decision on the refusal to open a criminal investigation of 2 June 2014.
According to the said decision, the audit conducted [by the tax inspectorate] established that [the LLC] had failed to pay taxes in the amount of RUB 11,487,367 in respect of the first quarter of 2010 and the first and second quarters of 2011. These violations are documented in the [audit report] dated 13 May 2013.
On 2 June 2014 the senior investigator [of the inter-district investigative department of the regional investigative committee] refused to institute a criminal investigation [on the charge of tax evasion] in respect of [the applicant] in view of [the fact that it was time-barred].
The relevant decision came into force.
The court cannot accept the [applicant’s] argument that his guilt has not been proved given that the criminal proceedings in his case were discontinued on non-exonerating grounds.”
On 9 June 2015 the Krasnodar Regional Court upheld the judgment of 6 April 2015 on appeal.
The applicant lodged a cassation appeal, alleging that the courts had erred in (1) application of substantive law and rules of civil procedure and (2) calculation of the damages. Relying on Article 6 § 2 of the Convention, the applicant argued that, in the absence of a conviction, the courts had wrongfully reasoned that he had committed a crime resulting in damage to the State.
On 30 July 2015 the Regional Court concluded that the lower courts had applied the laws correctly and rejected the applicant’s cassation appeal.
Reiterating his earlier arguments, the applicant lodged another cassation appeal.
On 11 November 2015 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation referred to the findings of the lower courts and rejected the cassation appeal lodged by the applicant.
According to the Government, the judgment of 6 April 2015 was enforced in part. The bailiff’s service recovered RUB 15,871.06 from the applicant. According to the applicant, as at 27 February 2019, RUB 51,571.45 had been recovered from him.
The Constitution of the Russian Federation (Article 49) and the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure (Article 14 § 1) provide that everyone charged with a criminal offence is to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law and declared guilty by an effective court judgment.
Under Article 122 of the Tax Code, non-payment or underpayment of taxes by a taxpayer gives rise to financial liability (penalty).
Article 199 of the Criminal Code provides for criminal liability in respect of tax evasion.
In Ruling no. 64 on practice in the application of the law on tax crimes (adopted on 28 December 2006, in force at the relevant time), the Plenary of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation construed tax evasion (Article 199 of the Criminal Code) as a wilful (deliberate) act aimed at the non-payment of taxes resulting in the relevant taxes not being paid into the State budget (point 3). As regards the non-payment of taxes by a legal entity, its managing director, chief accountant or any other person responsible for tax reporting on behalf of the legal entity could be held criminally liable (point 7).
It is incumbent on the investigator to conduct an inquiry if he or she receives information that a crime has been committed. In the course of the inquiry, the investigator may question the parties concerned, collect evidence, commission forensic expert assessments or audits, and so on. He or she is to advise the parties questioned as to their rights, including the right against self-incrimination and the right to legal assistance. The information obtained in the course of the inquiry may be admitted as evidence (Article 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
The Civil Code of the Russian Federation provides for an obligation of a tortfeasor to compensate for the damage caused to a person or property in full. The law may impose responsibility to compensate for the damage on a person other than a tortfeasor (Article 1064). The CC also establishes that the employer is vicariously liable for the damage caused by an employee (Article 1068).
Pursuant to the Federal Law on Limited Liability Companies (Article 3), the LLC is liable for its obligations. If, as a result of dishonest or unreasonable actions of a person who is competent to manage the LLC’s activities, the LLC is declared bankrupt and its assets are insufficient to satisfy its obligations vis-à-vis its creditors, this person may be found subsidiarily liable for the LLC’s obligations.
When interpreting the relevant provisions of the national legislation on the bankruptcy proceedings in respect of LLCs, the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation considered that, in order to find a person subsidiarily liable in respect of the LLC’s obligations, it is incumbent to establish a cause and effect link between his or her actions and the LLC’s activities resulting in the latter’s bankruptcy (Overview of the judicial practice no. 2 (2016) adopted by the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation on 6 July 2016).