The case originated in an application (no. 17203/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Turkish nationals, Mr Serhat Devecioğlu and Mrs Feriha Devecioğlu (“the applicants”), on 2 May 2003 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. V. Dülger, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicants alleged that the national authorities had deprived them of their property without paying compensation and that there were no effective remedies in domestic law to challenge the authorities’ act and to obtain compensation. They relied on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and Article 13 of the Convention.
On 14 August 2007 the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicants were born in 1967 and 1940 and live in Muğla and  respectively.
In 1926, the Turkish State (the Treasury) sold a plot of land known as the Yana Farm, located in Balıkesir, to an individual who later sold it to the applicants’ predecessors (“the Yavaş family”).
On 12 September 1986 the Forest Cadastral Commission (“the FCC”), a Government agency, conducted a boundary marking exercise (tahdit çalışması). The purpose of this exercise was to detect forest areas which had not been included on the cadastral map. Following this exercise the FCC established that a portion of the Yana Farm had been unlawfully designated as agricultural land. The FCC reclassified it as forest land. Accordingly, on 31 July 1987, the FCC initiated a revocation procedure for partial annulment of the title deed.
On 11 November 1987, the applicants’ predecessors, the Yavaş family, brought an action in the  since a portion of their registered land had been classified as forest land. They asked the court to annul the results of the boundary marking exercise and to reclassify their land as outside the forest area.
On 24 October 1988 the court conducted a survey of the land with the assistance of three experts on forest, agriculture and cadastral engineering. The forest engineer drew up a sketch map of the area and divided it into plots named (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F) and (G). Having examined the sketch map the court found that it was consistent with the general plans and the land.
On 9 August 1990 the Marmaris Cadastral Court ruled in favour of the applicants’ predecessors, the Yavaş family, with respect to the plots shown as (A), (B), (C) and (F) on a sketch prepared by court-appointed experts. However, it dismissed the request as regards plots (D) and (G), finding that they were part of the State forest. The Forestry Directorate appealed.
On 16 March 1992 the Court of Cassation quashed the above ruling considering that the  had erred in its assessment of the nature of the land. It observed that, even if the natural flora had been destroyed, the land remained forest land. It further noted that the first-instance court had relied on the title deeds submitted by the litigants and that the measurement of that land had been enlarged from 8,000 sq. m to 8,640 sq. m by the judgment of the  dated 8 September 1960. However, given that the Forestry Directorate was not a party to those proceedings, the finding of the  did not have any binding effect for the purposes of the current proceedings. The Court of Cassation thus remitted the case to the  for further examination.
On 15 June 1994 the applicants purchased the Yana Farm from the Yavaş family. The relevant page of the log kept at the land registry office does not contain any annotation concerning the proceedings in question.
On an unspecified date, following the purchase of the Yana farm by the applicants, the Marmaris Land Registry invited the applicants to intervene in the proceedings. The court then joined the applicants’ case to that initiated by the Forest Directorate, who alleged that a portion of plot no. 142/2 was within forest boundaries.
On 18 June 1994 the  carried out a second survey of the disputed land with the assistance of new experts.
On 4 May 1995 the Marmaris Cadastral Court dismissed the applicants’ case on the basis of the report prepared by the experts, who had concluded that the disputed land in question was part of forest land and that the previous group of experts had erred in their assessment. The court then ordered the registration of the portion of land, indicated as plot (A) in the sketch-map and measuring 1,106.91 sq. m, with the title of the Treasury as forest land. Plot (A) was thus separated from plot no. 2 owned by the applicants and joined to plot no. 3 owned by the Treasury as public forest.
On 12 December 1995, the Court of Cassation quashed this ruling on the grounds of insufficient factual examination. In addition, the court ruled that the right of appeal of the applicants (who had in the meantime inherited the farm) was time-barred with regard to plots (D) and (G). The parties accepted therefore that plots (D) and (G) were part of the public forest.
Thereafter, proceedings involving re-examinations by the Court of Cassation and the  continued and a new sketch of the disputed land was prepared. The new sketch map qualified certain portions of the land as (D1) and (F1).
Ultimately, on 24 November 1999, the  found that plots (A), (B), (C), (D1), (F) and (F1) were part of forest land. It noted however that plots (C) and (E) were agricultural land. The court dismissed the applicants’ case and ruled that plot (D1), measuring 1106.91 sq. m, should be registered with the title of the Treasury and that the remaining land, measuring 19,1768.09 sq. m, should be registered in the name of the applicants (half the land for each applicant). The applicants and the Forestry Directorate appealed.
On 30 October 2000 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicants’ appeal. However, it upheld the Forestry Directorate’s appeal only in respect of plot (F1). The court considered that the first-instance court had failed to rule on plot (F1) although it had found that that plot formed part of forest land.
On 25 December 2000 the applicants applied to the Court of Cassation for rectification of the above decision with regard to plot (F1).
On 13 June 2002 the  ordered the registration of plot (F1) in the name of the Treasury. It noted that the judgment concerning plots (A), (B), (C), (D) (D1), (E), (F) and (G) had already become final and that therefore there was no need to give a new ruling.
On 7 March 2002 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicants’ request for rectification of the decision dated 25 December 2000. This decision was served on the applicants on 11 November 2002.
The applicants have limited the current case before the Court to plot (F1).
The Turkish Constitution reads in its relevant part:
Article 169
“A. Protection and Development of Forests
The ownership of State forests shall not be transferred to others. State forests shall be managed and exploited by the State in accordance with the law. Ownership of these forests cannot be acquired by way of prescription [...].”
The Turkish Civil Code provides the following relevant provisions concerning the registration of immovable property and limitation of rights upon it:
Article 997
“Land registry records are kept in order to indicate the rights upon immovable property...”
Article 1004
“Immovable property is registered in the land registry log books in the region where they are situated.”
Article 1007 § 1
“The State is responsible for the damage resulting from the keeping of land registry records...
Cases involving the responsibility of the State are dealt with by the courts where the [property] was registered.”
Article 1008
“The rights mentioned below regarding immovable property are registered in the land registry log book:
Property;
Right of easement or immovable obligations; and
Liens”
Article 1010
“The following reasons limiting power of disposition can be annotated in the land registry log book:
Court decisions relating to the protection of rights in dispute;
...
The limitation of power of disposition, when registered, can be raised against those who later obtained rights over the property.”
Article 1023
“The rights of third persons who acquire a property or right in rem, relying on the records of the land registry log book and in good faith, shall be protected.”