The case originated in an application (no. 27227/08) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 6 June 2008 by S.C. Antares Transport S.A. (“the first applicant”) and S.C. Transroby S.R.L. (“the second applicant”), both Romanian commercial companies located in Râmnicu-Vâlcea.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Nicolae, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention that the loss of their transport licences amounted to an unjustified deprivation of possessions.
On 25 October 2013 the above-mentioned complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants are commercial companies authorised to provide services in the area of passenger transport. They are located in Râmnicu-Vâlcea.
On 23 September 2004 Vâlcea County Council adopted a decision which set out a programme of passenger transport for the local area for a period of three years. Within the programme, the Drăgăşani – Băbeni – Râmnicu-Vâlcea route was considered as an individual route. Following a public tender, an association consisting of two companies was granted a licence to transport passengers along that route.
On 15 April 2005 Vâlcea County Council modified its previous decision and adopted a new programme of passenger transport for a period of three years, covering 2005 to 2008. Within the new programme, the Drăgăşani – Băbeni – Râmnicu-Vâlcea route was grouped together with six other routes. Another public tender took place, and the applicant companies submitted a tender for the group. They subsequently received licences to operate public transportation services for the seven routes in the group.
On 24 May 2005 one of the two companies which lost their licence for the Drăgăşani – Băbeni – Râmnicu-Vâlcea route asked the courts to annul Vâlcea County Council’s decision of 15 April 2005, and to oblige the local authorities to adopt a new decision in which the route in question could again be considered as an individual route.
The first applicant company requested (and was granted) leave to intervene in the proceedings in order to defend its own interests. Through its submissions, the applicant company argued that the decision adopted by the council on 15 April 2005 was in accordance with the law, and asked the Argeş County Court to dismiss the action.
On 13 February 2006 the Argeş County Court held that, by grouping routes together, the county council had acted arbitrarily and had limited access for other competitors in the public transport market. The court considered that the routes had been grouped together without any economic or geographical considerations. The court therefore ordered the county council to re-analyse route no. 047 (the Drăgăşani – Băbeni – Râmnicu-Vâlcea route), and to proceed to a new public tender of the route as an individual route. The court used the following terms:
“We consider that, by grouping together these routes, the creation of a monopoly on the road transport market was encouraged, thereby breaching the principles of free competition.
In conclusion, the court holds that it is necessary to partially revoke decision no. 63/15.04.2005 on the approval of the programme for passenger transport... for the period 2005 to 2008 in respect of offer 27, group of routes no. 11, route no. 047 Drăgăşani– Băbeni– Râmnicu-Vâlcea.
Considering that ... Order no. 1842/2001 was repealed by Order no. 1987/2005 ..., it follows that the defendant should re-analyse route 047 Drăgăşani-Băbeni-Râmnicu-Vâlcea as an individual route in view of these legal provisions and, taking into account the results, proceed to a new public tender.”
The first applicant company lodged an appeal on points of law (recurs) against this judgment, arguing that the plaintiff had not proved the existence of a legitimate interest for its request, and that the partial annulment of a public tender would be unlawful.
On 28 June 2006 the Piteşti Court of Appeal rejected the first applicant company’s appeal on points of law with final effect. The court explained that there were preconditions imposed by law which had to be fulfilled before a decision to group together certain transport routes could be taken by a local authority. Bearing in mind that in the current case those requirements had not been observed, the lower court had correctly annulled the administrative decision in question in the context of the request before it, namely in respect of route no. 047. The Court of Appeal explained that the lower court had ordered the county council to conduct an analysis of whether or not route no. 047 might be grouped together with other routes, in compliance with the legal provisions in force. Lastly, the court held that non-compliance with those obligations would give those whose interests had been negatively affected the right to request reparation for any consequent damage.
On 6 July 2006 Vâlcea County Council adopted a new decision; modifying the programme of public transport for the period 2005-08 by putting out to public tender all seven routes from group no. 11 as individual routes. Consequently, on 26 July 2006 the applicant companies received a letter from the Romanian Traffic Authority (Autoritatea Rutieră Română) informing them that they had to hand over their licences for the entire group of seven routes within thirty days of the final decision in a new public tender.
.  On 15 June 2007 the new public tender was organised for the seven routes in question. The applicant companies did not participate.
On 2 October 2006 the applicant companies lodged administrative proceedings requesting the annulment of the decision made by Vâlcea County Council on 6 July 2006. They argued that the Argeş County Court, by its judgment of 13 February 2006, had ordered the analysis as an individual route of only one route out of the group of seven. They further alleged that, by withdrawing their licences for the remaining six routes and organising a new public tender for all of the routes in the group, the authorities had acted unlawfully.
On 23 January 2007 the Vâlcea County Court rejected the applicant companies’ complaint. The court held that the contested decision had been adopted in accordance with the judgment of 13 February 2006, but also in compliance with new regulations adopted by the Ministry of Transport; regulations which no longer provided for the possibility of grouping routes together for economic or geographic purposes.
The applicant companies’ appeal on points of law against that judgment was rejected with final effect by the Timişoara Court of Appeal on 6 December 2007. The Court of Appeal considered that the lower court had made a correct analysis of the facts.
.  The president of the panel of three judges added a separate dissenting opinion to the judgment on the appeal on points of law. He considered that, by adopting the decision of 6 July 2006, Vâlcea County Council had not properly enforced the judgment of 13 February 2006, and had therefore breached the applicant companies’ right to property guaranteed by Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention. The judge explained that the applicant companies had participated in a public tender, and had won the right to exploit the group of seven routes in question. Although the county council had been ordered by final judgment to reanalyse only one of the routes above as an individual route, they had adopted without any legal basis a new decision which considered all of the routes individually.
.  On 5 October 2006 the first applicant company requested before the administrative court the annulment of the Romanian Traffic Authority’s decision of 26 July 2006 to withdraw its licences for the entire group of routes. The first applicant company also requested that the enforcement of that decision be suspended pending the delivery of a final judgment in the case.
.  The first applicant company argued that the contested decision prevented it and its associate (the second applicant company) from participating in the next public tender for the same route. The applicant companies further argued that the withdrawal of their licences had not been in compliance with Article 65 of Order no. 1987/2005, which set out the grounds on which licences could be withdrawn.
On 18 December 2006 the Piteşti Court of Appeal rejected the action as submitted by the first applicant company. The court held that the applicant had not proved the alleged damage caused by the decision of the Romanian Traffic Authority, since it could participate in the new tender. In addition, there was no proof that the applicant company would be prevented from participating in the new tender. The court further explained that, should the applicant company consider itself prejudiced by the administrative act which was in dispute, it could request damages from those responsible for any consequent loss.
The first applicant company lodged an appeal on points of law against that judgment. It alleged that the licences for the entire group of routes could not be lawfully withdrawn, since not all of them had been annulled by a court judgment. The first applicant company argued that, in accordance with Article 66 of Order no. 1987/2005, a company whose licence for a certain route had been withdrawn could not participate in a new tender for the same route.
.  On 25 April 2007 the High Court of Cassation and Justice decided to allow the first applicant company’s request, and partially annulled the decision of the Romanian Traffic Authority, which was upheld only in respect of the licence for route no. 047. The High Court considered that the licences held by the applicant company for the other six routes of offer 27, group no. 11 constituted “possessions” within the meaning of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, and that there was no reason to order their remittal through an administrative act.
Law no. 554 of 2004 on administrative disputes as in force at the relevant time, provided as follows:
“(1)  Anyone whose rights or legitimate interests have been breached by a public authority through an administrative act...may request before the administrative courts the annulment of the act in question, the recognition of the right or the legitimate interest in issue, and reparation for the damage caused.”
In a decision issued on 19 February 2009 the Cluj Court of Appeal explained the practice of the domestic courts with respect to requests for compensation for the damage caused by an administrative decision (Decision no. 716 of 19 February 2009, Decizii relevante 2009, trimestrul 1, www.curteadeapelcluj.ro). The Cluj Court of Appeal stated as follows:
“From the text of the Constitution and of Law no. 554/2004 it results that in order to request pecuniary compensation from a state authority three cumulative conditions must be fulfilled: the existence of a damage; the existence of an unlawful administrative decision; a causality link between the unlawful administrative decision, annulled by the courts, and the damage incurred by the plaintiff.”
Ministry of Transport Order no. 1987 of 2005, which regulates road transport services, came into force on 5 December 2005 and replaced Order no. 1842 of 2001 in its entirety. In accordance with Order no. 1987 of 2005, route licences are issued by the Romanian Traffic Authority following public tenders organised by county councils. The relevant provisions read as follows:
“A local office of the Romanian Traffic Authority may withdraw a route licence upon:
a)  the transport operator ceasing to operate;
b)  the transport licence being withdrawn;
c)  the transport operator no longer having capacity to transport, or the number of vehicles required for the route;
d)  the conditions of contract set at the time of the tender for the licence being breached more than 10 times;
e)  [the licence] being obtained by the provision of false documents or information;
f)  [the licence] being given to another transport operator for that operator’s use;
g)  the conditions upon which the licence was granted no longer being fulfilled.”
“(1)  In the event of a route licence being withdrawn, the transport operator shall be notified by the local office of the Traffic Authority, and shall be obliged to continue its activity on the route in question for a period of up to 30 days following the date of the next public tender. ...
(4)  The transport operator whose route licence has been withdrawn cannot participate in the next public tender for the same route.”