The case originated in an application (no. 59271/11) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian joint-stock company, Dumagas Transport S.A. (“the applicant company”), on 1 September 2011.
The applicant company was represented by Mr A. Fleancu, a lawyer practising in Craiova. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms A. Panova, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 10 October 2018 the Government were given notice of the application.
On 22 October 2018 the Romanian Government were informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings in accordance with Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 of the Rules of Court. On 4 January 2019 they informed the Court that they would not avail themselves of this possibility.
The applicant company has its registered seat in Branişte. It runs transport and logistics services.
On 9 February 2011 three of its lorries, travelling from Turkey to Romania, were stopped for inspection at the Bulgarian-Turkish border. The Bulgarian customs officials discovered large quantities of undeclared perfumes and cigarettes. It was established for the purposes of the ensuing criminal proceedings (see below) that the value of the smuggled goods totalled 56,210 Bulgarian levs (BGN), the equivalent of about 28,750 euros (EUR). Those goods were seized, and the lorries were seized as well as physical evidence. The remaining merchandise, which had not been the object of any offence, was returned to the applicant company.
The applicant company was the owner of one of the seized lorries and the lessee of the two others, on the strength of financial lease contracts concluded in 2008 and 2009. These contracts stipulated that after the expiry of the respective lease periods the applicant company could acquire ownership. The applicant company continued to pay the monthly instalments due under those contracts until 2016. Expert valuations commissioned by the Bulgarian authorities showed that the value of the three lorries totalled BGN 205,100 (EUR 105,000).
Criminal proceedings for smuggling – an offence under Article 242 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 14 below) – were opened against the three drivers.
After the applicant company submitted requests under Article 111 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 15 below) for the release of the lorries, in three decisions dated 21 February 2011 a prosecutor from the Yambol Regional Public Prosecutor’s Office refused such release. He pointed out that, since the offences committed by the three drivers had been “proven in an undisputable manner”, the lorries were to be forfeited, in accordance with Article 242 § 8 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 14 below).
The applicant company lodged appeals, which were dismissed in three decisions of the Yambol Regional Court of 28 February 2011. In one of the cases the domestic court pointed out that physical evidence could be released before the end of the relevant criminal proceedings only where this would not hinder those proceedings, which was not the case. In the two other cases the applicant company’s appeals were found to be inadmissible since it had not been shown that the person having lodged them had been authorised to act on its behalf.
In the meantime, the three drivers entered into plea agreements with the prosecution authorities, confessing to having committed offences under Article 242 § 1(d) of the Criminal Code and accepting suspended prison sentences. The terms of the agreements included the forfeiture of the lorries, under Article 242 § 8 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 14 below).
The plea agreements were approved by the Yambol Regional Court in three decisions given on 2 and 17 March and 8 April 2011. Those decisions were not subject to appeal and became immediately enforceable.
Subsequently, the applicant company wrote to the Yambol Regional Public Prosecutor’s Office with a request to apply for the re-opening of the criminal proceedings. In a decision of 31 May 2011 and two further decisions of 15 June 2011 prosecutors from that office found that there were no grounds to seek re-opening. One of the reasons put forward was that the forfeiture of the lorries had been in compliance with Article 242 § 8 of the Criminal Code, and in particular the proviso that such forfeiture was not to be carried out where the value of the vehicle used for smuggling clearly did not correspond to the seriousness of the offence. It was noted that the seriousness of the offence was determined with reference not merely to the value of the smuggled goods, but also to all other relevant circumstances. Similar statements were made in three decisions of prosecutors from the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office dated 1 and 29 September and 17 October 2011, pursuant to further requests by the applicant company for the reopening of the proceedings.
Article 242 of the Criminal Code criminalises smuggling. Its paragraph 1(d) provides that transporting across the border large quantities of undeclared goods for trade or production purposes, which the person is unauthorised to carry, is punishable by up to ten years’ imprisonment and a fine of between BGN 20,000 and BGN 100,000. Article 242 § 8 allows in addition the forfeiture to the State of a vehicle which has served for the transportation of smuggled goods across the border, even if it is not the property of the offender, except where the vehicle’s value clearly does not correspond to the seriousness of the offence.
Article 111 of the Code of Criminal Procedure stipulates that physical evidence must be retained until the end of the criminal proceedings. It can be released to those entitled earlier if that does not hinder the establishment of the facts. The prosecutor’s refusal to release the evidence can be appealed against before the first-instance court, whose decision is final.
Plea bargaining is regulated by Articles 381 et seq. of the Code of Criminal Procedure. A plea agreement between the prosecution and the accused is to be confirmed by a court, at a hearing in which the prosecutor, the defence lawyer and the accused are to be present. The court is in particular required to satisfy itself that the agreement does not breach the law.
The remaining relevant domestic law and practice have been summarised in Ünsped Paket Servisi SaN. Ve TiC. A.Ş. v. Bulgaria (no. 3503/08, §§ 13-26, 13 October 2015).