The case originated in two applications (nos. 39783/05 and 40527/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Ms Irya Yakovlevna Liseytseva (“the first applicant”) and Mr Sergey Mikhaylovich Maslov (“the second applicant”), on 8 September 2005 and 28 May 2010 respectively.
The first applicant was not represented by a lawyer before the Court. The second applicant was represented by Ms T.S. Tarasova, a lawyer practising in Arkhangelsk. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
On various dates the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the applications to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the applications at the same time as their admissibility (former Article 29 § 3).
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of application no. 39483/05, but the Court rejected this objection.
The first applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Petrozavodsk, in the Republic of Kareliya. The second applicant was born in 1956 and lives in Mezen, in the Arkhangelsk Region.
The first applicant was an employee of the municipal unitary enterprise “Avtokolonna 1126” (Auto Transport Column 1126) in Petrozavodsk, the Republic of Kareliya.
“Avtokolonna 1126” was set up by a decision of the administration of the Town of Petrozavodsk (“the town administration”). It provided public transport services in the town on a commercial basis. The company had “the right of economic control” (право хозяйственного ведения) over the assets allocated to it by the town administration in order to carry out its statutory activities. Legal provisions on the status of municipal unitary enterprises and the right of economic control are summarised in paragraphs 5575 below.
At the request of the company, on 29 December 2001 the town administration withdrew unspecified assets of an aggregate value in excess of 25,000,000 Russian roubles (RUB) from the company’s economic control and immediately allocated them to the same company for temporary use free of charge under a loan agreement.
Under several agreements between the company and the town administration, including one dated 21 January 2002, the company undertook to provide transport services to certain sections of the population free of charge, and the town administration was to reimburse it for the expenses incurred out of the budget allocated for that purpose by the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Kareliya or the federal budget. According to a letter from the Committee of Housing and Communal Services of Petrozavodsk dated 19 March 2003, at some point the respective budgets accumulated a considerable debt towards the company owing to a shortage of funds. Consequently, the company was unable to pay its employees in due time. The town administration requested the legislative body of the Republic of Kareliya to consider the allocation of additional funds to cover the company’s debt in 2004, but to no avail.
On an unspecified date the administration ordered the restructuring of the company in the form of a spin-off and transferred the assets mentioned in paragraph 8 above to the newly created municipal unitary enterprise “Avtokolonna 1126 Plus”. The debt accumulated in respect of the unpaid salaries was not transferred and remained with the applicant’s employer.
On 6 July 2003 the Commercial Court of the Republic of Kareliya declared the respondent company insolvent, and a liquidation procedure commenced.
The applicant sued her employer for salary arrears.
On 20 June 2003 the Petrozavodsk Town Court awarded her RUB 5,421.89 in salary arrears, compensation for non-pecuniary damage and court expenses. The judgment was not appealed against and became final ten days later. On 4 July 2003 the bailiffs’ service received the writ of execution in respect of the award.
On 22 June 2003 the applicant was dismissed from the company in view of its upcoming liquidation (see paragraph 10 above).
By a final judgment of 25 November 2003 the Petrozavodsk Town Court granted her new action and ordered the respondent company to pay her RUB 19,445.53 in salary arrears for a different period of time, severance pay and compensation for non-pecuniary damage. The applicant obtained a writ of execution in respect of the award.
By a final judgment of 16 April 2004 the same court, in separate proceedings, awarded the applicant RUB 4904.95 in compensation for loss of salary, based on the average wage, and compensation for nonenforcement of the above-mentioned two judgments as well as nonpecuniary damage. On 17 May 2005 the writ of execution was forwarded to the bailiffs’ service.
At some point the bailiffs discontinued the enforcement proceedings in respect of at least two judgments (22 June 2003 and 16 April 2004) and forwarded the writs to the liquidator.
By separate judgments of 21 and 24 June 2004 and 12 and 13 August 2004 the Commercial Court of the Republic of Kareliya ordered the Federal Treasury and the Republican Treasury to reimburse the company the cost of the transport services it had provided free of charge under the respective agreements (see paragraph 9 above) and rejected a similar claim against the town administration.
At some point the liquidator received the writ of execution in respect of the judgment of 25 November 2003.
According to the liquidator’s notes on the respective writs of execution, at some point the applicant received RUB 4,358.98 of the amount awarded on 20 June 2003, RUB 8,782.78 of the amount awarded by the judgment of 25 November 2003 and RUB 4,604.95 of the award made on 16 April 2004. The remainder of the judgment debts has not been paid to the applicant.
On 4 October 2006 the Commercial Court of the Republic of Kareliya discontinued the insolvency proceedings and ordered the respondent company’s liquidation. 	The creditors’ claims, which had not been satisfied during the liquidation procedure, including the remainder of the applicant’s claims, were considered as settled. On 15 October 2006 the liquidation was recorded in the Register of Legal Entities, and the company ceased to exist.
In 2005 the applicant lodged an action against the town administration, claiming that it was liable to repay her the remaining judgment debt plus compensation for the delayed enforcement of the court orders and non-pecuniary damage. She argued that the insolvency of the debtor company had been caused by the actions of the town administration. First, it had failed to reimburse the expenses the company had incurred for providing transport services, as stipulated by the respective agreements (see paragraph 9 above). Second, the company’s inability to meet the creditors’ claims had been caused by the transfer of the assets to a different company carrying out the same functions. As a result, the debtor company had become unable to continue to carry out its activities as defined in its articles of association.
On 21 January 2005 the Petrozavodsk Town Court dismissed the action. The court established that the federal and republican authorities owed the applicant’s former employer RUB 1,883,370 for services provided at a reduced price. However, with reference to the Commercial Court’s findings (see paragraph 18 above) the court concluded that the debt had been accumulated as a result of the federal and republican authorities’ inaction and therefore it could not be attributed to the town administration. As regards the transfer of the assets, the court found as follows:
“The restructuring («реорганизация») of the municipal unitary enterprise ‘Avtokolonna 1126’ in the form of a spin-off and the creation of a separate unitary enterprise, ‘Avtokolonna 1126 Plus’, was within the property owner’s rights. [The applicant] failed to prove the existence of a causal link between the restructuring ... and the enterprise’s insolvency”.
The court further observed that, in any event, the applicant’s claim was premature, since the insolvency proceedings had been underway at the material time. On 22 March 2005 the Supreme Court of the Kareliya Republic upheld the judgment on appeal.
Once the debtor enterprise was liquidated, the applicant lodged a similar claim with the Justice of the Peace of the 10th Court Circuit of Petrozavodsk. In addition to her earlier submissions (see paragraph 22 above) she reiterated that the debtor company had reported to the owner and the latter had been fully aware of its financial difficulties. However, no measures had been taken to remedy the situation.
On 21 May 2007 the Justice of the Peace rejected her claims, largely referring to the findings of the Petrozavodsk Town Court of 21 January 2005 (see paragraph 23 above). She found that even though the liquidation proceedings had been terminated, the applicant had failed to adduce any additional evidence to demonstrate that the owner had caused the company’s insolvency. The Justice of the Peace noted that the company had been a separate legal entity liable for its debts with all its assets, and therefore rejected the applicant’s argument about the town administration’s inaction as irrelevant.
On 12 September 2007 the Petrozavodsk Town Court endorsed those findings as regards both the failure of the authorities to compensate the cost of the transport services and the restructuring of the company. The court noted, in addition, that the withdrawal of the assets on 29 December 2001 had taken place pursuant to the company’s own request and that, moreover, those assets had been returned to it for free temporary use, which had permitted it to continue its activities. The court further found the applicant’s arguments about the authorities’ inaction ill-founded and emphasised that the applicant had failed to submit evidence in support of her claims.
The applicant was an employee of the municipal unitary enterprise “Zhilishchno-Kommunalnoye Khozyaystvo of Mezen” (“Housing and Communal Service of the Town of Mezen”, hereafter “the company”) in the Arkhangelsk Region.
The company was set up by decision of the administration of the Mezen District. It had the right of economic control over the assets allocated to it by the district in order to meet its statutory objectives. In accordance with the company’s articles of association, it was a commercial organisation performing the following activities, among others: renovation and maintenance of the municipal housing stock; heating and water supply; maintenance of the sewage systems in Mezen; cartage and passenger transport; funeral services; maintenance of municipal boiler plants, artesian wells and related infrastructure, as well as heating supply systems; production of fast-moving consumer goods; and disposal of dry waste and household waste,
According to its articles, the assets of the company consisted of the profit generated by its activities, capital investments, and grants from the federal, regional and local budgets and other sources. The company’s financial resources were made up of profits, amortisation charges, loans and other revenues, as well as “grants from the local budget to cover any losses incurred through the provision of housing and communal services”.
The company planned its activities and development itself. It proposed prices and the tariffs for its products and services in accordance with the domestic legislation and submitted them to the district administration for approval. The plans were based on contracts with consumers, including State bodies and suppliers, “concluded on a commercial basis”.
The basic salaries of the employees of the housing and communal sector for 2005-07 were set by the Sectoral Tariff Agreement for the Housing and Communal Sector of the Russian Federation (Отраслевое тарифное соглашение по организациям жилищно-коммунального хозяйства Российской Федерации) concluded between the employees of the “essential public services sector” represented by the trade union, and the employers, represented by the Communal Enterprises Union. The agreement applied to the municipal authorities that empowered the parties to make such an agreement, as well as to all entities operating in the housing and communal sector, unless they explicitly refused to apply it. No such refusal was made by the applicant’s employer.
The district administration was responsible for setting the tariffs of the company’s services and was also a major consumer of its services. The tariffs in place until 2005 were based on 5 per cent profitability. According to the submissions of the director of the company which employed the applicant in the subsidiary liability proceedings brought by the applicant (see paragraph 48 below), as a result of the application of those tariffs the enterprise had become unprofitable; the loss in profits amounted to RUB 300,000 and was not reimbursed by the administration. The administration failed to pay RUB 2,500,000 for the company’s services. According to its director, the company was put in a difficult financial situation as a result of the actions of the owner.
On 23 December 2005 the Head of the Mezen district administration ordered the restructuring of the company in the form of a spin-off, creating a new municipal unitary enterprise “MUP ‘Mezenskiye Teplovyye Seti’ (Mezen Heating Supply Systems) of the Mezenskiy District” (hereafter, “MUP ‘MTS’”).
On the spin-off balance sheet approved by the Head of the Mezen district administration on 20 April 2006, the unpaid salary debt was not transferred to the newly created company.
On 24 May 2006 the Head of the Mezen district administration ordered the withdrawal of coal and all other assets, except for the company’s authorized capital, from the company’s economic control and their allocation to MUP “MTS”. The director of the company which employed the applicant became director of MUP “MTS”.
On 13 July 2006 the Head of the Mezen district administration ordered the applicant’s employer’s liquidation.
On 29 May 2007 the Commercial Court of the Arkhangelsk Region declared the respondent company insolvent, and the liquidation procedure was set in motion.
The applicant sued his employer for salary arrears, claiming that his salary rate was below that provided for in the respective Sectoral Tariff Agreement (see paragraph 32 above). The liquidator accepted the claims. On 19 June 2007 the Justice of the Peace of the Court Circuit of the Mezen District of the Arkhangelsk Region awarded the applicant RUB 80,892.63 in salary arrears against his employer.
The judgment was not appealed against and became final.
On 16 July 2007 the bailiffs’ service initiated the enforcement proceedings in respect of the judgment. On 19 July 2007 the bailiffs terminated the enforcement proceedings and forwarded the writs of execution to the liquidator.
At some point before 1 February 2009 (date of the liquidator’s report, see paragraph 45 below) the applicant’s claims were included in the second priority line of the register of creditors’ claims.
According to the Government, on 1 October 2007 the applicant petitioned the Commercial Court of Arkhangelsk with a request to order the liquidator to enforce the judgment in his favour.
On 4 October 2007 the court returned the petition unexamined, referring to section 60 of the Insolvency Act (see paragraph 120 below). The parties have not submitted a copy of any document produced by the court in that respect, or a copy of the applicant’s petition.
On 1 February 2009 the liquidator produced a report stating, inter alia, that the assets of the debtor company had not been found and the receivables had not been established, “for lack of financial records”.
On 24 February 2009 the Commercial Court of Arkhangelsk terminated the insolvency proceedings and ordered the respondent company’s liquidation. The creditors’ claims which had not been satisfied during the liquidation procedure due to the debtor’s shortage of funds, including the applicant’s claims, were considered as settled. The court further ordered that the enforcement proceedings in respect of that debt be terminated.
The applicant lodged a court action against various respondents claiming, inter alia, that the town administration was liable to repay him the unpaid judgment debt, as well as compensation for non-pecuniary and pecuniary damage resulting from the non-enforcement. He argued that the insolvency of the debtor company had been caused by the actions of the district administration.
On 16 September 2009 the Mezenskiy District Court of the Arkhangelsk Region heard the parties, including the applicant, the district administration representative and the head of the liquidated company who was, at the time of the events, employed as the director of MUP “MTS” (see paragraph 34 above) and granted the applicant’s claims in part. The court reiterated that the debtor company had been set up by the district administration, which, as its owner, had been entitled to decide on its restructuring and liquidation under Article 295 § 1 of the Civil Code. The owner could not be held liable for the insolvent company’s debts unless the insolvency had been caused by the owner’s actions. The court established that as a result of the administration’s tariff-setting policy (see paragraph 33 above) the company had been put in a pre-insolvency situation. Furthermore, the court emphasized that the district administration had withdrawn all assets from the company except for its authorized capital, which resulted in the company’s inability to continue its activity in accordance with the goals and objectives assigned to it. With reference to the Court’s case-law (Shlepkin v. Russia, no. 3046/03, 1 February 2007; Grigoryev and Kakaurova v. Russia, no. 13820/04, 12 April 2007; and Aleksandrova v. Russia, no. 28965/02, 6 December 2007) the District Court found that the administration had subsidiary liability for the insolvent company’s debts, ordered that the judgment debt be recovered from the district administration at the expense of the district treasury and rejected the remainder of the applicant’s claims. In particular, the court found that the newly created company was not liable for the debts of the applicant’s employer since they had not been transferred to it in the spin-off procedure.
On 17 December 2009 the Arkhangelsk Regional Court quashed the judgment on appeal and remitted the case for a fresh examination. The regional court found that it was for the applicant to demonstrate that the insolvency had actually been caused by the owner’s actions. However, he had failed to do so. Turning to the tariff-setting issue (see paragraph 33 above), the regional court noted that under the domestic law the owner was not obliged to finance the company directly. The regional court further considered that the assets had not actually been withdrawn from the company which employed the applicant, but that the company itself had transferred them to the newly created company on the spin-off balance sheet after the restructuring. There was nothing in the case to suggest that the lawfulness of the transfer of the assets had at any point been challenged in court. Furthermore, Russian employment law had not contained any provisions on the subsidiary liability of owners for the debts of municipal unitary enterprises. On the other hand, the first-instance court had failed to examine the issue of MUP “MTS”‘s liability for the debts of the restructured company.
On 19 February 2010 the Mezenskiy District Court rejected the applicant’s claims. The court found that, as a result of the withdrawal of all assets from MUP “MTS”, the latter had become unable to continue its activities, which indeed constituted a reason for its insolvency. However, the court went on to find that
“... the insolvency occurred through no fault of the owner, since they [sic] had been bound by the federal law. Therefore, one of the criteria for the application of subsidiary liability, namely, fault on the part of the owner, is missing.”
In so far as the applicant’s claims for compensation for delayed enforcement were concerned, the court noted, in addition, that he had failed to raise that issue before the main debtor, that is, the employer company, and was therefore prevented from making such claims in the subsidiary liability proceedings. Lastly, the claims lodged against the newly created company could not be granted since the debt in respect of the salary arrears had not been transferred to it.
The applicant appealed, arguing, inter alia, that the liquidator had not been heard by the first-instance court and the documents on the debtor company’s remaining assets had not been available to him.
By a final judgment of 6 May 2010 the Arkhangelsk Regional Court upheld the lower court’s findings of 19 February 2010 on appeal. The regional court rejected the applicant’s argument regarding the unavailability of the company’s documents as irrelevant, having noted that the claimant had to demonstrate that the insolvency had been caused by the owner’s actions and not by the company’s own management “and, in any event, not vice versa”. The court endorsed the remainder of the lower court’s findings.
Article 49 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation provides that a legal entity enjoys the civil rights corresponding to the purpose and aims of its activity, stipulated in its constitutional documents, and discharges the duties related to that activity. Commercial organisations, with the exception of, inter alia, unitary enterprises, possess the civil rights and discharge the civil duties indispensable for the performance of any kind of activity that is not prohibited by the law.
The Civil Code of the Russian Federation defines State and municipal unitary enterprises as commercial organisations that do not exercise a right of ownership in respect of the property allocated to them by their owners (Article 113 § 1 of the Civil Code and section 2 of Federal Law no. 161-FZ of 14 November 2002 on State and Municipal Unitary Enterprises, hereafter “the Unitary Enterprises Act”). The property of the unitary enterprise is indivisible. Unitary enterprises cannot create subsidiary companies (дочерние предприятия) (section 2 of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
Only State-run and municipal enterprises can be set up in the form of unitary enterprises (Article 113 § 1 of the Civil Code). Under section 8(4) of the Unitary Enterprises Act, a State or municipal unitary company may be created in order to:
“- ensure the use of estate the privatization of which is prohibited, including the assets necessary to ensure the security of the Russian Federation;
- conduct activities to carry out social tasks (including the production of specific goods and services for a minimum price) and organise and conduct purchasing and commodity interventions to ensure the national food security;
- conduct activities reserved exclusively for State unitary companies, as defined by federal laws;
- conduct scientific and technical activities related to the security of the Russian Federation;
- design and produce certain types of goods within the sphere of interests of the Russian Federation and which guarantee the security of the Russian Federation;
- produce specific types of goods excluded from circulation or of limited circulation.”
A unitary enterprise may acquire and make use of pecuniary and nonpecuniary rights and bear responsibilities, and be a claimant and a defendant in courts (section 2 of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
The State or municipal authority retains ownership of the property but the unitary enterprise may exercise the right of economic control (право хозяйственного ведения) or operational management (право оперативного управления) over it (Article 113 § 2 of the Civil Code and section 2 of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
The following summary of the domestic law provisions concerns only enterprises with the right of economic control over the assets allocated to them.
A unitary enterprise with the right of economic control over the assets allocated to it is set up by a decision of the State or the competent local self-government body if the law does not stipulate otherwise (Article 114 § 1 of the Civil Code).
A company’s articles of association are its constitutional documents and are approved by the State body or local self-government body (Article 114 of the Civil Code and section 20 of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
The articles should contain information on the size of the company’s authorised capital, its sources, and the manner in which it was set up (Article 113 § 1 of the Civil Code). The owner sets up the company’s authorised capital and may decide to increase or reduce it (sections 14 and 15 of the Unitary Enterprises Act). If, at the end of the fiscal year, the value of the net assets of the company proves to be less than the size of its authorised capital, the founder is under the obligation to reduce the authorized capital in conformity with the procedure established by law. If the value of the net assets falls below the amount fixed by law, the company may be liquidated pursuant to a court decision (Article 114 of the Civil Code).
The Unitary Enterprises Act stipulates that a company’s assets consist of the property allocated to it and under its economic control, the profit made as a result of its activity and other sources in accordance with the law (section 11 of the Act).
The unitary enterprise creates a reserve fund from the net profit it generates, as well as other funds in accordance with its articles (section 16 of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
The owner has the right to obtain a part of the profit generated by the company (Article 295 § 1 of the Civil Code and section 17(1) of the Unitary Enterprises Act). Unitary enterprises are required to make yearly transfers of part of the profit that remains after the payment of taxes and other compulsory payments to the respective budget in an amount and in accordance with a procedure determined by the respective State or municipal authority (section 17(2) of the Unitary Enterprises Act, as well as Articles 51, 57 and 62 of the Budget Code of the Russian Federation, which define the respective payments as non-tax revenues).
The owner of the property under the economic control of a unitary enterprise defines the purpose and aims of the company (Article 295 of the Civil Code). The articles of association of the unitary enterprise should contain information on its purpose and aims (Article 113 § 3 of the Civil Code and section 9 of the Unitary Enterprises Act). The State or municipal unitary enterprise may dispose of assets only in a manner which does not prevent it from carrying out its activities in accordance with its statutory purpose and aims. Transactions made in violation of this requirement must be declared void (section 18(3) of the State Unitary Enterprises Act).
The owner oversees the use of the property assigned to the company in conformity with its stipulated purpose and the maintenance of that property (Article 295 § 1 of the Civil Code).
As clarified by § 10 of Ruling no. 10/22 of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia adopted at the Plenary session of 29 April 2010, transactions of the type mentioned above must be declared void irrespective of whether the owner consented to them.
The owner of the property under the economic control of a unitary enterprise may decide to restructure or liquidate the company (Article 295 of the Civil Code and section 29 of the Unitary Enterprises Act). The restructuring may take the form of consolidation, a merger, split, spin-off or transformation into a different legal entity (sections 29-35 of the Act). In particular, in the cases of a split or spin-off, the owner must approve the balance sheet of the respective operation (sections 32 and 33 of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
The owner’s consent must be obtained for any transaction that may lead to the encumbrance or alienation of real estate (Article 295 § 2 of the Civil Code and section 18(2) of the Unitary Enterprises Act). The unitary enterprise can independently dispose of the rest of the property under its economic control, except in the cases established by law or other normative acts (Article 295 § 2 of the Civil Code and section 18(1) of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
In the absence of the owner’s consent, the unitary enterprise cannot make transactions related to, inter alia, the provision of loans and guarantees, the obtaining of bank guarantees or other encumbrance, assignments of claim or debt transfer agreements, or to enter into a “simple partnership” (unincorporated venture) contract (section 18(4) of the Unitary Enterprises Act). The owner must approve any loan agreement (section 24(2)) and any major transaction by the company (крупная сделка), which involves assets of a value exceeding ten per cent of its authorized capital or 50,000 times the minimum monthly wage established by law (section 23(1) and (3) of the Act).
The company’s financial documents are subject to a compulsory annual audit and must be forwarded to the competent State and municipal authorities (section 26 of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
The owner sets the company’s the economic performance targets and oversees its achievement of those targets (section 20 of the Act).
The gains, products and profits generated by the use of the property under the economic control of a unitary enterprise, as well as property acquired by the enterprise under a contract or on another basis, are placed under the economic control of the enterprise in accordance with the provisions of the Code and other laws (Article 299 § 2 of the Civil Code).
The right of economic control can be terminated on the same grounds and according to the procedure set out in the laws on the termination of property rights, as well as in cases where the owner legitimately seizes assets from the unitary enterprise (Article 299 § 3 of the Civil Code). The company’s right to property may be extinguished, in particular, where the owner renounces that right (Articles 235 § 1 and 236 of the Code).
By Ruling no. 6/8 of 1 July 1996 the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia reiterated that the owner’s rights in respect of the assets allocated to a state or municipal unitary company under the right of economic control were listed in Article 295 § 2 of the Civil Code and emphasised that the owner was not entitled to seize, lease or otherwise dispose of such assets. Acts of disposal by the State and local authorities of the assets allocated to the unitary enterprise under its economic control had to be declared invalid pursuant to a claim by the respective enterprise (§ 40 of the Ruling). According to Ruling no. 10/22 of 29 April 2010 (cited in paragraph 68 above), the owner cannot dispose of such assets irrespective of the consent of the enterprise (§ 5 of the Ruling).
By Rulings no. 8-O of 25 February 1998 and no. 10/22 of 29 April 2010 the Plenary Supreme Commercial Court emphasised that unitary enterprises enjoyed the same rights as the owners to seek court protection of the assets placed under their economic control, including the right to bring a vindicatory or negatory action (actio negatoria) against the owner.
By judgment no. 6709/97 of 21 April 1998 the Presidium of the Supreme Commercial Court found that where real estate is acquired by a unitary enterprise as a result of its economic activity, the owner’s consent to a transaction involving that real estate is not required.
In case no. Ф08-1332/2002 municipal unitary enterprise O. sold unfinished premises to a private company. The administration of district K., the owner of the company’s property, challenged the validity of the contract since it had not been approved by the owner. The lower courts rejected the action, stating that the company had built the premises at its own expense and could therefore dispose of them irrespective of the owner’s consent. By final judgment no. Ф08-1332/2002 of 30 April 2002 the Federal Commercial Court of the North-Caucasus Circuit quashed the lower court’s findings with reference to Article 299 § 2 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 74 above), having found, inter alia, that the gains, products and profits generated by a municipal unitary enterprise as a result of its use of the assets placed under its economic control should, in turn, also be placed under the economic control of that enterprise, and thus are also governed by Article 295 § 2 of the Civil Code, which explicitly prohibits any transactions involving real estate in the absence of the owner’s consent.
On the one hand, until 2008 it had not been uncommon for the domestic commercial courts to accept an enterprise’s renouncement of assets as a lawful ground for their removal. For instance, by final judgment no. Ф1893/08-C06 of 25 March 2008 the Federal Commercial Court of the Ural Circuit summarised the lawful grounds for the removal of assets as follows: (a) the liquidation or (b) the restructuring of a unitary enterprise with the right of economic control, (c) the use of the assets in noncompliance with the unitary enterprise’s statutory purpose and aims or (d) the unitary enterprise’s renouncement of the assets. In that case, the court disallowed the liquidator’s action lodged within the insolvency proceedings in respect of municipal unitary enterprise N. challenging the owner’s decision to restructure the company and to transfer its assets to a different unitary company. The court noted that the company itself had requested the assets to be withdrawn from its economic control, and therefore the owner had lawfully decided to transfer the assets within the meaning of Article 299 of the Civil Code taken in conjunction with Article 236 (see paragraph 75 above). The same test was also applied by the Federal Commercial Court of the East-Siberian Circuit in case no. 69576/08-Ф02-847/2009 concerning municipal unitary company “Hotel K.”‘s challenge of a lease agreement concluded by the owner and a private company in respect of property placed under the hotel’s economic control, although in that later case the court found no evidence of the company’s renouncement of the assets, and found that the owner had not been competent to enter into the agreement in question.
Since late 2008 domestic commercial courts took a different approach regarding the validity of the transactions involving the withdrawal and transfer of the assets. First, neither the Civil Code nor the Unitary Enterprises Act provided for the owner’s right to withdraw the assets. Second, section 18(3) of the Unitary Enterprises Act prohibited a unitary enterprise with a right of economic control to renounce title to assets since as a result of such a renouncement and the ensuing removal of the assets the company would no longer be able to perform its statutory activities in compliance with its designated purpose and aims. For instance, in case no. 32-4047/2008-4/99 a liquidator of a municipal unitary company in charge of water supply for the area requested that the owner’s decision of 2006 to withdraw the company’s assets be declared invalid. The firstinstance court rejected the action on the ground that the transfer had taken place pursuant to the company’s own request and had therefore been lawful within the meaning of Article 299 in conjunction with Article 235 § 1 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 75 above). However, the appeal court – and subsequently the Federal Commercial Court of the North Caucasus Circuit acting as a cassation instance – granted the company’s claim and declared the withdrawal unlawful since it precluded the company from a possibility to further perform its statutory activities (cassation judgment no. Ф08-2397/2009 of 9 June 2009). By decision no. ВАС11340/09 of 16 September 2009 the Supreme Commercial Court rejected the owner’s application for supervisory review, having found the cassation court’s interpretation to be both correct and consistent with the Supreme Commercial Court’s recent case-law. Similar reasoning was applied by the Supreme Commercial Court in a number of subsequent cases (see, for instance, decisions no. ВАС-6841/11 of 16 June 2011 and no. ВАС-7685/11 of 30 June 2011 rejecting applications for supervisory review, and several other cases).
In a limited number of cases, a prosecutor acting on behalf of the employees of a municipal unitary company requested that the owners’ orders to transfer assets and dismiss personnel be declared unlawful. Such an action was granted, for instance, on 13 October 2010 by the Regional Court of the Yevreyskaya Autonomous Region. The case concerned a municipal water supply company. Referring to the company’s financial difficulties, the owner ordered that all its assets be removed for further transfer to a different legal entity, and instructed the head of the enterprise “to prepare orders for the employees’ dismissal”. The court rejected that argument and set aside the owner’s order, since it had not been demonstrated that the company’s management of the assets had not been economically rational, or that it had failed to meet its statutory goals. The withdrawal prevented the company from further performing its statutory activities and resulted in the “mass dismissal” of employees in violation of their employment rights.
The director of a unitary enterprise is appointed by, and reports to, the property owner (Article 113 § 4 of the Civil Code and section 21 of the Unitary Enterprises Act). The owner may sue the director for damage caused to the enterprise (section 25 of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
Article 278 of the Labour Code of the Russian Federation, as amended on 30 June 2006, provides that the employment contract of a director of an organisation may be terminated by the owner’s decision. A decision to dismiss the director of a unitary enterprise must be taken in accordance with the procedure established by the Government of the Russian Federation.
Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation No. 234 of 16 March 2000, as amended on 4 October 2002, governs the employment contracts and appraisal of the directors of federal state unitary enterprises. Section 2 of the Decree provides for the following specific grounds for dismissal of a director of a State unitary enterprise: failure to meet its economic targets, perform the company audit in a timely manner or comply with the decisions of the Government; making transactions involving the assets under the economic control of the company in violation of the laws or the special legal capacity of the company as established by its articles of association; and failure to pay salaries for a period of more than three months where the fault lies with the director. The specific conditions of employment and appraisal of the directors of municipal unitary companies are defined by the respective municipal authorities.
The unitary enterprises in question may be declared insolvent in accordance with the insolvency procedure applicable to private companies. That procedure is established by the relevant provisions of Federal Law no. 127-FZ of 26 October 2002 On Insolvency (Bankruptcy) (“the Insolvency Act”) which replaced the earlier Insolvency Act of 8 January 1998 (see, for a summary of the provisions of the 2002 Insolvency Act governing the definition of the state of insolvency, an insolvency petition and the various solutions available to a court in resolving a bankruptcy case, OAO Neftyanaya Kompaniya Yukos v. Russia (dec.), no. 14902/04, §§ 413, 416 and 419-26, 29 January 2009).
Under section 142(1) of the Insolvency Act, the liquidator or the persons entitled to discharge the debtor’s obligations must settle the claims of creditors in compliance with the register of creditors’ claims. The amount of those claims must be determined in the manner set out in the Act. The register of creditors’ claims should be closed two months after the publication of information on the debtor’s having been declared insolvent and the beginning of the liquidation procedure. Creditors’ claims should be met in accordance with the priority ranking set out in section 134 of the Act.
Section 142(9) of the Act stipulates that creditors’ claims which cannot be settled owing to the insufficiency of the debtor’s assets should be deemed settled. Creditors’ claims which were not acknowledged by the liquidator should also be deemed settled if the creditor has not applied to a commercial court or if such claims have been declared unfounded by the court.
In the event of liquidation the legal person ceases to exist without succession (Article 61 of the Civil Code and section 35(3) of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
“Current payments” are monetary obligations and mandatory payments that have occurred after the acceptance of an application to declare a debtor bankrupt and monetary obligations and mandatory payments with a due date which falls after the date of institution of the bankruptcy proceedings (section 5(1) of the Insolvency Act). Creditors’ claims for current payments shall not be included in the register of creditors’ claims. Current payments creditors cannot be parties to the insolvency proceedings (section 5(2) of the Insolvency Act).
Section 134(1) of the Insolvency Act provides that creditors’ claims in respect of current payments should be settled from the insolvency estate as a priority over claims which had arisen before the debtor entity was declared insolvent. Section 134(4) provides for the priority ranking of creditors’ claims in respect of current payments. In particular, claims relating to disbursement of severance benefits and remuneration of persons who are – or have been – employed under a contract are to be satisfied as a second priority.
Unitary enterprises are liable for their debts, and all the property in their possession may be used to satisfy the creditors’ claims. Unitary enterprises are not liable for the obligations of the owner of the property allocated to them (Article 113 § 5 of the Civil Code and section 7(1) of the State Unitary Enterprises Act).
Article 114 § 7 of the Civil Code provides that an owner of property placed under a unitary enterprise’s control is not liable for the debt of the unitary enterprise except in the cases stipulated by Article 56 § 3 of the Code.
Under Article 56 § 3 of the Code subsidiary liability for the legal entity’s obligations may be imposed upon the owner of the legal entity’s property or by other persons who have the right to issue binding instructions to the given legal entity, or may determine its actions in any other way, if the insolvency of a legal entity has been caused by such persons, in the event that the legal entity’s assets prove to be insufficient. Similarly, section 7(2) of the Unitary Enterprises Act stipulates that the owner of property under the economic control of a unitary enterprise is not liable for the debts of the unitary enterprise unless the insolvency of the enterprise has been caused by the owner’s actions.
The State or municipal owner of the property may, but is not obliged to, pay the debts of the unitary enterprise within the framework of insolvency proceedings (sections 113 and 125 of the Insolvency Act).
Section 10(4) of the Insolvency Act as in force until 5 June 2009 provided that the owner of the assets allocated to a unitary enterprise could be held liable in subsidiary liability proceedings for the debts of the company where the debtor’s funds were insufficient and where the insolvency was “the fault of the owner”.
According to Ruling no. 6/8 of 1 July 1996 (see paragraph 76 above), it had to be demonstrated that the insolvency had actually been caused by the actions or instructions of the person or persons being sued. Claims for subsidiary liability had to be lodged by the liquidator (§ 22).
By Ruling no. 29 of 15 December 2004 “On Certain Issues Relating to Application of the Federal Law On Insolvency (Bankruptcy),” the Plenary Supreme Commercial Court reiterated that requirement and specified that where such a claim had not been lodged within the liquidation procedure, subsidiary liability proceedings could be brought by any creditor or competent authority under Article 56 § 3 of the Civil Code (§ 7).
On 28 April 2009 the Insolvency Act was amended by Federal Law no. 73-FZ “On Amendment of Certain Legislative Acts of the Russian Federation, in force as of 5 June 2009 (hereinafter, “the 2009 amendments”).
In particular, the amendments extended the scope of subsidiary liability to a new category of “controlling persons” (amended section 10 of the Insolvency Act). A “controlling person” is any person who can, or could within two years prior to the filing of a petition for insolvency, give binding instructions to the debtor or otherwise affect the debtor’s activities (section 2). If damages were inflicted on the creditors’ assets as a result of such instructions being carried out by the debtor, the controlling person bears subsidiary liability for monetary obligations of the debtor if the debtor’s assets are insufficient to satisfy all the creditors’ claims. However, the “controlling person” is not liable if it can prove that it acted reasonably and in good faith in the debtor’s interests (section 10(4) of the Insolvency Act, as in force at the material time.). The head of a legal entity has subsidiary liability for the insolvent entity’s debts if he or she fails in his or her statutory duty to keep financial and other documents containing information on the debtor’s assets and obligations (section 10(5) of the Act, as in force at the material time).
Section 10(6) of the Insolvency Act as amended in 2009 stipulates that an application («заявление») for subsidiary liability of a controlling person may be lodged by a liquidator on his own initiative or on the initiative of an assembly of creditors or a committee of creditors before the liquidation procedure is terminated. Section 142(12) of the Insolvency Act, as amended in 2009 and as in force at the material time (see paragraph 99 above) provided that where a bankruptcy estate was insufficient to meet the insolvency creditors’ claims, the liquidator, a competent authority or the insolvency creditors could lodge an application for subsidiary liability before the end of the liquidation procedure.
The Explanatory Note justifying the introduction of the above amendments (no. 125066-5, introduced to the State Duma on 12 November 2008) emphasised that the issue of proving fault on the part of directors had been – and remained – a most complex one. Therefore, directors would be presumed to be liable where they failed to keep the required documentation. In fact, the management of a company normally became aware of the legal entity’s financial difficulties long before a petition for insolvency was actually lodged. This contributed to a certain “asymmetry” in so far as creditors’ and managers’ access to information was concerned. The lack of effective measures of protection of creditors’ interests had led to a violation of their rights, and that was why a redistribution of the burden of proof had been proposed.
By Information letter no. 137 of 24 April 2010 the Presidium of the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia clarified that the above amendments were only applicable where the specific actions triggering the application of the respective substantive provisions (such as the giving of binding instructions or the approval of a transaction) had taken place before the respective amendments’ entry into force. The procedure set out in section 10(6-8) of the Insolvency Act was to be applied to any dispute where the claim was introduced after the amendments’ entry into force.
On 28 June 2013 section 10 of the Insolvency Act was further amended by Federal Law no. 134-FZ (in force as of 30 June 2013). In particular, amended section 10(4) of the Insolvency Act introduced the presumption that the insolvency of a legal entity can be considered to have been caused by the controlling persons’ actions where a transaction – or the approval of a transaction by the debtor – by such person had impinged upon the creditors’ pecuniary rights. To be absolved of subsidiary liability, the controlling person must demonstrate that the insolvency did not occur through any fault of its own. The controlling person will not be considered at fault if it can demonstrate that it acted reasonably and in good faith in the debtor’s interests.
In case no. Ф08-717/2006 examined by the Federal Commercial Court of the North-Caucasus Circuit a local authority had allocated assets to a State unitary enterprise. The latter became insolvent, and the assets were included in the insolvency estate. The authority requested that the assets owned by it be excluded from the estate, arguing that execution on its property would amount to its de facto subsidiary liability. By a final judgment of 15 March 2006 the court reiterated that creditors’ claims in the event of insolvency were to be satisfied at the expense of the company’s assets, including those placed under its economic control. Therefore, execution on the debtor unitary enterprise’s assets was to be made irrespectively of the owner’s consent and did not imply, as such, the owner’s subsidiary liability at that stage (that is, before the end of the liquidation procedure).
By final judgment no. A31-802/20 of 21 January 2005 the Federal Commercial Court of the Volgo-Vyatskiy Circuit found that only the liquidator could bring such an action in the interests of all the creditors, and not the creditors themselves.
An insolvency creditor of a bankrupt private company brought a subsidiary liability claim against the company’s founder under Article 56 § 3 of the Civil Code after the debtor’s liquidation. On 15 June 2012 the Federal Commercial Court of the North Caucasus Region in case no. A32-21726/2011 rejected the creditor’s claim, having found, referring to sections 10 and 142(12) of the amended Insolvency Act, that such actions could only be brought during the liquidation procedure. On 19 November 2012 the Supreme Commercial Court rejected an application for supervisory review of that judgment (decision no. ВАС-11459/12).
On 29 October 2007 the Supreme Commercial Court found that it was for the claimant to demonstrate that the respondent had caused the debtor’s insolvency, and, accordingly, rejected the creditor’s claim for failure to produce such evidence (judgment no. ВАС-13052/07). In a more recent case a State unitary enterprise sued the owner of a limited liability company, claiming him to be liable for the company’s debts, referring to a transaction made by the owner before the 2009 amendments’ entry into force. On 12 December 2012 the Federal Commercial Court of the Eastern Siberian Circuit considered that a person claiming damages under section 10 of the Insolvency Act as in force at the material time (see paragraph 96 above), should have proved the following elements: (a) that the respondent’s actions were unlawful; (b) that the damage had actually been caused and in the amount claimed; and (c) a causal link between the respondent’s actions and the damage incurred. The court therefore rejected the company’s claim for lack of evidence that the owner’s actions were unlawful. On 22 February 2013 the Supreme Commercial Court rejected an application for supervisory review of the judgment (case no. ВАС-1900/13).
By a final judgment of 27 December 2012 in case no. A6530483/2007 the Federal Commercial Court of the Povolzhskiy Circuit rejected the liquidator’s request to hold the owner of a municipal unitary enterprise’s assets liable within insolvency proceedings. The liquidator argued that in 2006 the owner had withdrawn the assets of the debtor (the enterprise was a heating provider). Referring to Article 56 § 3 of the Civil Code and section 10(4) of the Insolvency Act, the court summarized the factors to be taken into account as follows: (a) whether there was a right to give binding instructions or otherwise determine the debtor’s actions; (b) whether a specific action had been taken in the exercise of that right; (c) whether there was a causal link between the action and the insolvency; and (d) whether the owner was at fault. The claim was rejected for the liquidator’s failure to prove the existence of a causal link. On 22 March 2013 the Supreme Commercial Court rejected an application for supervisory review of that judgment (case no. ВАС-2539/13).
A liquidator claimed that the local administration had subsidiary liability for the debts of a municipal unitary enterprise, since in 2010 the administration had withdrawn the enterprise’s assets (in that case, the heating systems of a local public school) and transferred them to the treasury. In the domestic courts’ view, in order to attract the subsidiary liability of the “controlling person”, a claimant had to demonstrate a causal link between that person’s actions and the debtor’s insolvency. However, it transpired from the case materials that the company had accumulated a considerable debt towards its creditors in 2007-2008, that is, before the assets’ withdrawal. The claim was accordingly rejected in the final instance by the Federal Commercial Court of the North-Western Circuit (judgment no. А66-11446/2009 of 14 August 2012). The Supreme Commercial Court rejected an application for supervisory review of the judgment (decision no. ВАС-15302/12 of 21 November 2012).
By judgment of 10 December 2008 no. Ф10-5558/08 of the Federal Commercial Court of the Central Circuit rejected the subsidiary liability claim by a liquidator of a municipal unitary company against the owner. The court found that, although the owner had indeed removed assets from the company and transferred them to a different legal entity, the following elements were to be proved to hold the owner subsidiary liable: a causal link between the removal and the insolvency, and the owner’s fault. The claimant’s argument that the aggregate value of the removed assets would have been be sufficient to pay the company’s debts was rejected by the court, for his failure to demonstrate the causal link between the assets removal and the insolvency. On 2 March 2009 the Supreme Court of Russia rejected an application for supervisory review of that judgment (case no. 2245/09). In a number of domestic judgments and decisions, mostly adopted since late 2010, regional commercial courts were satisfied that there existed a causal link between the removal of the assets and the insolvency of the company and, accordingly, held the owner to have subsidiary liability for the insolvent companies’ debts under Article 56 § 3 of the Civil Code. For instance, by a final judgment of 4 September 2012 the Commercial Court of the Kareliya Republic granted the liquidator’s claim for the subsidiary liability of the municipality, the owner of assets allocated to the municipal unitary company which supplied the heating in the respective district. The court found that though the company was operating in compliance with its purpose and aims, at some point the owner had withdrawn the major assets from its economic control and transferred them to other legal entities. As a result, the company had become unable to perform its statutory functions and had had to dismiss nearly all its personnel (judgment no. A264073/2011). On the other hand, where a unitary enterprise had had considerable financial difficulties and the withdrawal of its assets by the owner had not had a decisive impact on its insolvency, the company’s creditor’s claims were rejected by the domestic courts (and upheld on 19 April 2013 by the Supreme Commercial Court’s rejection of an application for supervisory review; case no. ВАС-5058/13).
Until 1 February 2008 enforcement proceedings were governed by Federal Law on Enforcement Proceedings no. 119-FZ of 21 July 1997 (“the Enforcement Act of 1997”). Section 22 of that Act provided that enforcement proceedings were to be suspended where a commercial court had initiated the insolvency proceedings before the determination of the respective case by the court. Section 23 stipulated that enforcement proceedings were to be terminated where the assets of an organisation under liquidation were insufficient to satisfy the creditors’ claims. Decisions to suspend or terminate enforcement proceedings were subject to appeal (section 24 of the Enforcement Act of 1997).
As of 1 February 2008, the Enforcement Act of 1997 was replaced by Federal Law on Enforcement Proceedings no. 229- FZ of 2 October 2007 (“the Enforcement Act of 2007”).
The Act provides that once a legal entity is declared insolvent and liquidation proceedings (конкурсное производство) are initiated, the execution of the writs of execution should be discontinued and the writs of execution transferred to the liquidator (конкурсный управляющий). The enforcement should not be discontinued in respect of writs of execution concerning acknowledgment of property rights, compensation for nonpecuniary damage, vindication of illegally possessed property, application of the consequences of invalid transactions, and current payments (section 126(1) of the Insolvency Act and section 96(4) and (5) of the Enforcement Act of 2007). A bailiff, acting upon a creditor’s application, is entitled to verify the correctness of the execution of the writs forwarded to the liquidator (section 96(6) of the Enforcement Act of 2007).
By Ruling no. 59 of 23 July 2009 the Plenary Supreme Commercial Court of Russia emphasised that the transfer of the writs of execution to the liquidator does not absolve the insolvency creditors or a competent authority of the responsibility to lodge the respective claims with the courts on the basis of section 142(1) of the Insolvency Act (see paragraph 87 above). A liquidator, acting in the creditors’ interests, is under the obligation to immediately notify the claimants of the receipt of the respective writs of execution. The time-limit for making such a claim starts running from the date of that notification (§ 15 of the Ruling).
Section 1 § 1 of Federal Law № 68- FZ of 30 April 2010 (in force as of 4 May 2010) on compensation for violation of the right to trial within a reasonable time or the right to enforcement of a judgment within a reasonable time (“the Compensation Act”) entitles a concerned party to bring a court action for compensation for a violation of his or her right to enforcement within a reasonable time of a domestic judgment establishing a debt to be recovered from the State budget.
By Ruling no. 130/64 of 23 December 2010 the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia jointly decided that the Compensation Act did not apply to claims for compensation for delayed enforcement of judgments against private individuals or organisations not in receipt of budget funds.
Article 6 of the Budget Code of the Russian Federation contains a list of entities “in receipt of budget funds” (получатели бюджетных средств). The list includes, in particular, public institutions and does not contain any reference to unitary enterprises.
The decisions of the bailiffs may be challenged in court (section 121 of the Enforcement Act of 2007, section 24 of the Enforcement Act of 1997, and Article 441 of the Code of the Civil Procedure referring to Chapter 25 of the Code). In accordance with Chapter 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which deals with challenging State authorities’ acts or inaction in court, where a court finds that the complaint is well founded, it orders the State authority concerned to remedy the breach or unlawfulness found.
Under section 60 of the Insolvency Act the creditors of an insolvent company can make complaints to a commercial court about the liquidator’s acts or omissions within the insolvency proceedings. Applications by persons not entitled to make such complaints, or lodged in violation of the rules of procedure, should be returned to the claimants without examination (section 60(4) of the Act).
Section 142(11) of the Insolvency Act provides that where the creditors’ claims have not been satisfied in full within the liquidation procedure, the creditors are entitled to claim execution upon any of the debtor company’s assets which were unlawfully acquired by third persons.
Chapter 59 of the Civil Code (“Liability for damage”) contains provisions on compensation for pecuniary and nonpecuniary damage. Damage caused by unlawful action or inaction on the part of State or local authorities or their officials is subject to compensation from the Federal Treasury or a federal entity’s treasury (Article 1069 of the Civil Code). Compensation for damage caused to an individual by unlawful conviction, prosecution, detention on remand or prohibition on leaving his or her place of residence pending trial is granted in full regardless of the fault of the State officials concerned and following the procedure provided for by law. Damage caused by the administration of justice is compensated if the fault of the judge is established by a final judicial conviction (Article 1070 §§ 1 and 2 of the Civil Code).
A court may hold the tortfeasor liable for non-pecuniary damage caused to an individual by actions impairing his or her personal nonproperty rights or affecting other intangible assets belonging to him or her (Articles 151 and 1099 § 1 of the Civil Code). Compensation for nonpecuniary damage sustained through an impairment of an individual’s property rights is recoverable only in cases provided for by law (Article 1099 § 2 of the Civil Code). Compensation for nonpecuniary damage is payable irrespective of the tortfeasor’s fault if damage was caused to an individual’s life or limb, sustained through unlawful criminal prosecution, dissemination of untrue information and in other cases provided for by law (Article 1100 of the Civil Code).
The earlier Insolvency Act of 8 January 1998 contained specific provisions on “objects of communal infrastructure of vital importance to a region”. In the event of a legal entity’s insolvency, such assets were to be transferred to a municipal authority (section 104 § 4) in their current state (по фактическому состоянию) without further conditions. Assessing the compatibility of the respective provisions with the Constitution of the Russian Federation, the Constitutional Court observed, in Ruling no. 8-П of 16 May 2000 (see, for a summary of the ruling, Yershova v. Russia, no. 1387/04, §§ 42 and 43, 8 April 2010), inter alia:
“Communal infrastructure which is of vital importance to a region and which constitutes a debtor’s estate is being used not only in the owner’s private interests but also in the public interests protected by the State. Therefore, the relations concerning its functioning and use for a designated purpose are public in nature”.
The Insolvency Act replaced that concept with that of “socially important assets” (section 132). They include educational and medical institutions and communal infrastructure related to essential public services (относящиеся к системам жизнеобеспечения), such as water, heat, gas and energy supply, water and sewage disposal, lighting and provision of urban amenities, which are “vital for the daily needs of citizens” (see section 132(4) of the Insolvency Act as in force until 30 December 2008 and section 129(6) of the Act as amended on 30 December 2008). They are not to be included in the insolvency assets («конкурсная масса») (section 132) and should be sold at auction, provided that the purchaser undertakes to ensure their maintenance and use in accordance with their stipulated purpose (section 132(4)). If they are still not sold at a second auction, they are to be transferred to the municipal property (section 132(5)). The social housing fund (жилищный фонд социального использования) is to be transferred to the owner (ibid.)
According to the Concept of State Property Management and Privatisation in the Russian Federation (“the 1999 Concept”), approved by Government Decree no. 1024 of 9 September 1999, which defines the main directions and principles of reform in the sphere of State property management, at the material time there were 13,786 unitary enterprises in Russia. That number was considered excessive. The right of economic control was criticized in the 1999 Concept as providing the entity enjoying that right with virtually unlimited opportunities for managing the property, whilst the list of the owner’s rights was restricted. The directors of the companies were under no obligation to obtain the owner’s approval, except for transactions concerning real estate. Interference with a company’s activity on the part of an owner was unlawful. The owner was unable either to control the company’s compliance with its performance criteria or to define those criteria; no system of audit existed, and the legal framework defining the purpose and aims of the companies’ activity was insufficient.
The Concept of the Development of Civil Legislation of the Russian Federation (“the 2009 Concept”, approved on 7 October 2009 by the Council on the Codification and Development of Civil Legislation advising the President of the Russian Federation,) describes a unitary enterprise as “the only form of commercial company which does not own its assets and enjoys special (purpose-related) legal personality”. It goes on to specify that such companies “cannot make the majority of their transactions without the owner’s approval. Furthermore, unitary enterprises may dispose of their assets only in so far as the respective transactions do not deprive them of the possibility to conduct their activities in accordance with their purpose and aims. Otherwise, the transactions may be declared void (section 18(3) of the Unitary Enterprises Act). As a result, other parties to the contracts [involving the] enterprises are under a constant threat in that any transaction may be challenged by the owner of the assets, whilst the owners themselves are virtually free of liability for the results of their ‘management’. The very notion of the ‘enterprise’ as a subject of law was inherited from the Soviet legal system, [which was] based on the State planning economy. The existence of unitary enterprises is therefore deprived of any future prospect and it would be preferable to replace them with other types of commercial organisation. Federal unitary enterprises with the right of operational management could be kept in certain particularly important economic spheres”.
The Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts adopted by the International Law Commission (ILC) in 2001 (Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 2001, vol. II, Part Two), and their commentary, are codified principles developed in modern international law in respect of the State’s responsibility for internationally wrongful acts. The relevant provisions of the Articles are as follows:
“The conduct of a person or entity which is not an organ of the State under article 4 but which is empowered by the law of that State to exercise elements of the governmental authority shall be considered an act of the State under international law, provided the person or entity is acting in that capacity in the particular instance.”
“The conduct of a person or group of persons shall be considered an act of a State under international law if the person or group of persons is in fact acting on the instructions of, or under the direction or control of that State in carrying out the conduct.”
In the commentary to Article 8 the ILC observed:
“More complex issues arise in determining whether conduct was carried out “under the direction or control” of a State. Such conduct will be attributable to the State only if it directed or controlled the specific operation and the conduct complained of was an integral part of that operation. The principle does not extend to conduct which was only incidentally or peripherally associated with an operation and which escaped from the State’s direction or control” [§ 3 of the commentary to Article 8]. ... In any event it is a matter for appreciation in each case whether particular conduct was or was not carried out under the control of a State, to such an extent that the conduct controlled should be attributed to it [§ 5 of commentary to Article 8]. ... Questions arise with respect to the conduct of companies or enterprises which are State-owned and controlled. If such corporations act inconsistently with the international obligations of the State concerned the question arises whether such conduct is attributable to the State. In discussing this issue it is necessary to recall that international law acknowledges the general separateness of corporate entities at the national level, except in those cases where the ‘corporate veil’ is a mere device or a vehicle for fraud or evasion. The fact that the State initially establishes a corporate entity, whether by a special law or otherwise, is not a sufficient basis for the attribution to the State of the subsequent conduct of that entity [§ 6 of commentary to Article 8].”
For a summary of other relevant provisions of the Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts and the ILC Commentary thereto, see Kotov v. Russia [GC], no. 54522/00, §§ 3032, 3 April 2012).