The case concerns the annulment of a contract by which the applicant had bought a building from the local authorities allegedly outside the limitation period, on grounds not imputable to the applicant and without the payment of any compensation for the renovation of that building.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Queensland, Australia. She was represented by Mr V. Gribincea, a lawyer practising in Chişinău.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr O. Rotari.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 16 March 2004 the Pojăreni Local Council decided to put up for sale a building measuring 400 sq. m. (“the building”) formerly used for village festivities (Casă de cultură). The reason for the sale was the high degree of deterioration of the building and the lack of resources available to restore it. The building had been partially destroyed by fire, lacked windows and doors, the roof was damaged and it had no working electricity or heating and no water supply. For the purpose of the sale, the local council decided to change the use of the building from that of a building with a social-cultural purpose to a simple building. An auction was organised, but since nobody showed an interest in participating, the local council decided to sell the building directly to any interested person, a possibility provided for by law in such situations. Following direct negotiations with the applicant, it was agreed to sell the building to her for the price of 49,000 Moldovan lei (the equivalent of some 3,474 euros (EUR).
On 28 April 2004 a contract between the applicant and the Mayor of Pojăreni village was signed before a public notary. The next day the contract was registered at the local cadastral office. On 16 December 2004, following a request by the Pojăreni Local Council, the Ialoveni County Council adopted a decision validating the sale of the building to the applicant.
In 2004 and 2005 the applicant renovated and modified the building after receiving all the necessary authorisations for the works from the Pojăreni Local Council. The Government disputed the fact that the applicant had received all the necessary authorisations. The surface of the building was increased to 461 sq. m. After the termination of the works, part of the building was used as a home for the applicant’s family while the rest was used for different businesses. Also, in 2004 the applicant purchased from the village the land on which the building was located and carried out works for its development. According to an expert report, the applicant invested MDL 2,144,254 (the equivalent of EUR 126,132 at the time) in the renovation works.
On 15 June 2007 the Prosecutor’s Office requested the new Pojăreni Local Council to annul the decision of 16 March 2004 and the contract between the village and the applicant of 28 April 2004. The prosecutor indicated that the initial value of the building, as indicated in the Register of Immovable Property, had been MDL 533,889. Its value at the date of the sale had been MDL 52,011 while the Local Council had sold it for MDL 49,000 without conducting an auction as required by law.
On 2 July 2007 the Pojăreni Local Council annulled its decision of 16 March 2004 and the Mayor’s decision of 28 April 2004 to conclude a contract of sale with the applicant.
On 31 July 2007 the Prosecutor’s Office initiated a court action against the Pojăreni Local Council and the applicant, seeking the annulment of the contract of sale of 28 April 2004. In its action, the Prosecutor’s Office argued that the building had been sold without an auction and that the price paid by the applicant had been lower than the initial value indicated in the Register of Immovable Property, which was over MDL 500,000. The Prosecutor’s Office did not seek the annulment of the land purchase contract.
The applicant lodged a counterclaim, seeking the annulment of the decision of the Pojăreni Local Council of 2 July 2007.
On 28 April 2010 the Ialoveni District Court dismissed the action lodged by the Prosecutor’s Office. It found in the first place that the action had been lodged outside the three years’ limitation period. Moreover, the action was found to be ill-founded because the applicant had acted as a bona fide buyer and any mistakes on the part of the Pojăreni Local Council concerning the price of the property or the sale procedure could not be imputed to her. The Prosecutor’s Office appealed against this judgment.
On 14 December 2010 the Chișinău Court of Appeal quashed the above judgment and ordered a rehearing of the case. The Court of Appeal found, inter alia, that the first instance court had failed to deal with the applicant’s counterclaim.
On 13 December 2012 the Ialoveni District Court again dismissed the action lodged by the Prosecutor’s Office. It relied on the same arguments as in its first judgment of 28 April 2010. The court also upheld the counterclaim lodged by the applicant and quashed the decision of the Pojăreni Local Council of 2 July 2007. The Prosecutor’s Office appealed against this judgment and argued, inter alia, that its action concerned the declaration of the absolute nullity of the contract of sale and that therefore, in accordance with the provisions of Article 217 of the Civil Code, it could not be limited in time. The prosecutor also mentioned that the former Mayor of Pojăreni had been found guilty in criminal proceedings of abuse of power in relation to the transaction with the applicant.
On 28 February 2013 the Chişinău Court of Appeal dismissed the prosecutor’s appeal and upheld the judgment of 13 December 2012. The Prosecutor’s Office lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court of Justice.
On 6 November 2013 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the prosecutor’s appeal on points of law, quashed the judgment of the Chişinău Court of Appeal and ordered a re-examination of the case by the Court of Appeal.
On 17 December 2013 the Chişinău Court of Appeal upheld the prosecutor’s appeal and reversed the judgment of the Ialoveni District Court of 13 December 2012. The court held that the building bought by the applicant from the Pojăreni Local Council was part of the public domain which could not be sold to a private individual. Therefore, the court considered that there was no time limit to challenge such a transaction. The court declared the sale contract null and void but did not order the reinstatement of the parties in their initial positions. The court ruled that the applicant had to initiate a new set of proceedings in order to recover whatever she had invested in the building. The court also rejected the applicant’s counterclaim.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the above judgment and argued, inter alia, that the building in question had never been part of the public domain and indicated that, had the building been part of the public domain, the cadastral authority would not have registered the transaction. The applicant indicated that there existed a widespread practice of local authorities selling former cinemas, kindergartens and other similar buildings which were no longer in use. The applicant stressed therefore that the prosecutor’s action was time-barred.
The applicant also argued that she was a bona fide buyer and that her good faith had never been questioned during the proceedings. Even assuming that the local authorities had failed to observe the procedure for the sale of the building or that they had negotiated too low a price, that could not be imputed to her.
The applicant finally submitted that the Court of Appeal had failed to order the restitution of the price she had paid for the building and to compensate her for the renovation of the building. Moreover, the building had been extended by some 60 sq. m., and the court had not made any ruling concerning the new part of the building. The obligation of the applicant to initiate new proceedings in order to recover her investment in the building amounted to an excessive burden on her and it was contrary to the law.
On 2 April 2014 the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law and stated, inter alia, that her submission concerning the failure of the Court of Appeal to order compensation for her investment in the building was inadmissible because she had not relied upon that argument before the first-instance court.
On 19 May 2014 the applicant lodged a civil action against the Pojăreni Local Council and the Prosecutor General’s Office to recover the money invested in the renovation of the building.
On 6 April 2015 the Prosecutor’s Office initiated criminal proceedings against the applicant on charges of alleged forgery of the Pojăreni Local Council’s decision to allow her to use a part of the building as a living space.
On 11 December 2015 the Prosecutor’s Office initiated another set of criminal proceedings against the applicant. This time the accusation against the applicant was that one of the plans of the building annexed by her lawyer to her action of 19 May 2014 (see paragraph 21 above) bore a forged signature.
On 27 December 2018 the Pojăreni Local Council lodged a court action against the applicant seeking the annulment of the contract of sale of 2004 by which the applicant had bought the plot of land on which the building was located.
On 28 May 2019 the Ialoveni District Court dismissed the applicant’s action against the Pojăreni Local Council and the Prosecutor’s Office concerning the recovery of the money invested in the renovation of the building. No reasoned judgment was issued by the court, in spite of the fact that the applicant requested one.
The criminal proceedings against the applicant were suspended on the ground that her whereabouts were not known and they remain suspended to date. According to the applicant, her Australian address was known to the authorities and during her last visit to Moldova in 2015 nobody had informed her about the proceedings.
The applicant did not challenge the judgment of 28 May 2019 and decided not to oppose the action of the Pojăreni Local Council seeking the annulment of the contract of sale of the plot of land beneath the building.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code read as follows:
“Article 217. The absolute nullity of a legal act
(1)  The absolute nullity of a legal act can be invoked by any person having an interest. The court can invoke it on its own motion ...
(3)  An action to declare the absolute nullity is not limited in time.”
“Article 219. Effects of legal acts that are void
1  A legal act that is void shall be inoperative retroactively, with effect from the time of its conclusion. ...
Each party must return everything received on the basis of a legal act that is void; if restitution cannot be made, the party must pay the monetary value of the [other party’s] contribution.
A party, and any third party to a legal act who has acted in good faith has the right to be compensated for damage caused by the legal act that is void .”
Article 267. The limitation period
“The general limitation period for protection through a court action of a person’s rights is three years...
Article 296. Assets belonging to public domain and to private domain
(1)  Assets belonging to the state or to administrative territorial units shall be deemed assets belonging to the private domain, unless they have been transferred to the public domain by law or by a legally provided procedure.
(2)  The public domain of the state or of administrative territorial units shall comprise assets determined by law and assets that by their nature are of public use or interest...
(3)  Underground, air space, water and forest resources .., natural resources of the economic zone and continental plateau, communication networks, as well as other assets set by law constitute exclusive objects of public property.
(4)  Assets of the public domain cannot be sold, they cannot be seized and there is no statute of limitations to claim them back. The right of ownership over these assets does not cease to exist as a result of non-use and cannot be acquired by third persons through adverse possession.”
Under Article 3 (c) of the Law on publicly owned goods of administrative-territorial units, the goods owned by administrative-territorial units may include plots of land, immovable property, infrastructural objects and other goods.
According to the explanatory judgment of the Plenary Supreme Court of Justice No. 1 of 7 July 2008, when declaring a contract null and void in accordance with Article 219 of the Civil Code, the courts must reinstate the parties in their initial positions, irrespective of whether the parties requested this.