The case originated in an application (no. 7365/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Leonid Decev (“the applicant”), on 4 February 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr Ştefan Urîtu, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Vladimir Grosu.
On 20 November 2007 the Acting President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Comrat.
On 29 November 2006, during a press conference, the Governor of the Gagauzia region of Moldova, Mr G.T., made a statement which the applicant considered defamatory. He instituted civil defamation proceedings against G.T. which ended on 19 December 2001 with a final judgment of the Court of Appeal in his favour. The court found the statement defamatory and ordered G.T. to retract it and to pay the applicant non-pecuniary damages of 122 euros (EUR).
The applicant obtained an enforcement warrant and, on 1 March 2002, requested that the judgment be enforced, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 10 below). However, in May 2002, a bailiff refused to enforce the judgment on the ground that the defendant did not have a domicile in Comrat (the main town in Gagauzia region). It does not appear that the enforcement was formally discontinued by a court decision, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 10 below).
In the meantime, defendant G.T. ended his mandate as Governor of the Gagauzia region and, in February 2001, was elected MP in the Moldovan Parliament on the Communist Party ticket – this is the party in power to date. In 2002 Mr G.T. was re-elected Governor of the Gagauzia region also as a representative of the Communist Party and simultaneously appointed to the central Government of Moldova. He occupied the above positions until 2006 and 2007 respectively and had offices both in the building of the Government in Chişinău and in Comrat.
According to the applicant, he complained on several occasions to the competent authorities about the non-enforcement of the final judgment favourable to him, however to no avail. He sent the Court a copy of a letter dated 24 January 2005 he had written to the Minister of Justice. The Minister of Justice forwarded his letter to the Comrat Office of Enforcement of Judgment but no action followed. Further correspondence took place in 2008, but also to no avail.
The final judgment of 19 December 2001 has not been enforced to date.
Article 338. Issue of an enforcement warrant
Article 343. The request for enforcement
Article 367. The examination of issues relating to the discontinuation of enforcement proceedings
Article 149. Enforcement of a judgment which obliges a defendant to take an action
Article 320. Non-compliance with a court judgment