The case originated in an application (no. 50187/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Yadigar Mirzayev (“the applicant”), on 14 November 2006.
The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the failure to enforce the judgment of 23 December 2003 violated his right to a fair trial and his property rights, as guaranteed by Article 6 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 19 November 2007 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in .
By an order of the Azizbeyov District Executive Authority (“ADEA”) of 18 January 1994, the applicant was issued an occupancy voucher (yaşayış orderi) to a flat in a recently constructed residential building in .
On the same day, the applicant became aware that the flat was occupied by S. and his family, who were internally displaced persons (“IDP”) from Lachin, a region under the occupation of the Armenian military forces following the Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict over NagornoKarabakh.
According to the applicant, despite his numerous demands, S. refused to vacate the flat, pointing out that he was an IDP and had no other place to reside in.
On an unspecified date in 2003, the applicant lodged an action with the Surakhany District Court asking the court to order the eviction of S. and his family from the flat.
On 23 December 2003 the Surakhany District Court granted the applicant's claim and ordered that S. and his family be evicted from the flat. The court noted that S. and his family were IDPs who had illegally settled in the flat in 1993. The court held that, pursuant to the occupancy voucher issued to him by the ADEA on 18 January 1994, the applicant was the lawful tenant of the flat and, as such, had a right to demand S. to vacate it. Moreover, the court noted that, in accordance with the domestic law, IDPs could be allowed to temporarily settle of their own will only if this did not infringe the rights and lawful interests of other persons; otherwise, the local executive authorities had to ensure their resettlement in other accommodation. In the present case, since the applicant's property rights had been infringed, the Surakhany District Executive Authority (“SDEA”) was ordered to provide S. and his family with other accommodation.
No appeals were filed against this judgment and it entered into legal force. However, S. refused to comply with the judgment and, despite the applicant's complaints to various authorities, it was not enforced.
On 22 February 2005 the Department of Judicial Observers and Enforcement Officers of the Ministry of Justice informed the applicant that it was impossible to execute the judgment of 23 December 2003, because the local authorities could not find other accommodation for S. and his family. In such circumstances, the authorities were barred from taking any measures to evict IDPs from their temporary place of residence.
On 24 March 2005 the SDEA informed the applicant that, at that time, there were more than 25,000 IDPs temporarily settled in the Surakhany District. These IDPs lived in various flats, hotels, administrative buildings and other premises. For this reason, there was no more available accommodation in the district in which S. and his family could be resettled. Therefore, it was impossible to execute the judgment of 23 December 2003.
Following the applicant's repeated complaints, on 5 May 2006 the SDEA again informed the applicant that, due to the continuous lack of any other accommodation where S. and his family could be moved, it was impossible to execute the judgment.
At the time of the latest communication with the applicant, the judgment of 23 December 2003 remained unenforced.
Azerbaijani citizens are entitled to obtain a right of use of apartments owned by the State or other public bodies, under the terms of a tenancy agreement (Articles 10 and 28). A decision on granting an apartment is implemented by way of issuing the citizen with an occupancy voucher (yaşayış sahəsi orderi) from the local executive authority (Article 48). The voucher serves as the sole legal basis for taking possession of the apartment designated therein (Article 48) and for concluding a tenancy agreement (yaşayış sahəsini icarə müqaviləsi) between the tenant and the housing maintenance authority (Article 51). The right of use of apartments is granted for an indefinite term (Article 10).
Individuals residing, pursuant to a tenancy agreement, in apartments owned by the State and other public bodies have a right to transfer those apartments into their private ownership (Article 1). Such privatisation is voluntary and free of charge (Article 2). The right to privatise a State-owned apartment free of charge may be exercised only once (Article 7).
IDPs are defined as “persons displaced from the places of their permanent residence in the territory of the  to other places within the territory of the country as a result of foreign military aggression, occupation of certain territories or continuous gunfire” (Article 2). The IDPs may be allowed to temporarily settle on their own only if the rights and lawful interests of other persons are not infringed. Otherwise, the relevant executive authority must ensure resettlement of the internally displaced persons in other accommodation (Article 5).
Article 4 of the IDP Settlement Regulations provides as follows:
“In order to prevent the eviction of the internally displaced persons from dwellings in which they settled during the period of 1992-1994, the legal force of the occupancy vouchers issued by the relevant authorities to individual citizens in respect of those dwellings shall be temporarily suspended...”
Article 4 of the IDP Resettlement Regulations provides as follows:
“In cases where the temporary settling of internally displaced persons breaches the housing rights of other individuals, the former must be provided with other suitable accommodation.”
In the order, inter alia, the relevant state organs of the Republic of Azerbaijan are instructed that until the return of the IDPs to their native lands or until their temporary settlement in new houses, the eviction of the IDPs from the public apartments, flats, land and other premises, regardless of their ownership, that they resided in from 1992 to 1998 shall not be allowed.
Interested persons may lodge an action against a decision and action (omission) of the relevant executive authorities, local self-administration authorities, other authorities and organisations or their officials (Article 296).