The case originated in an application (no. 10441/06) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Anatoliy Andriyovych Pichkur (“the applicant”), on 21 November 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Shapoval, a lawyer practising in Hannover, Germany. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms V. Lutkovska, from the Ministry of Justice.
On 21 September 2010 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaint concerning discriminatory deprivation of retirement pension to the Government.
Mrs G. Yudkivska, the judge elected in respect of , was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28 of the Rules of Court). The President of the Chamber decided to appoint Mr Stanislav Shevchuk to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 1(b)).
The applicant was born in 1938 and lives in Bremen, Germany.
In 1996, after having worked for forty years in Ukraine, the applicant retired and began receiving a retirement pension.
From 1999 the applicant authorised his mother to receive his pension.
In August 2000 the applicant emigrated to Germany. Prior to his departure, he was supposed to inform the local department of the Pension Fund that he was leaving for permanent residence abroad and to receive six months’ pension payments in advance, with subsequent termination of all pension payments during the whole period of his stay abroad (see Relevant domestic law below). However, the applicant did not follow this procedure and his mother continued to receive his pension after his departure. The monthly amount of the applicant’s pension varied from 107 Ukrainian hryvnias (UAH), which was equivalent of around 21 euros (EUR) at the material time, in February 2001 to UAH 365.41 (EUR 58) in September 2005 and totalled in UAH 10,872.40.
On 23 September 2005, on discovering that the applicant was no longer resident in Ukraine, the Zaporizhzhya Leninskiy District Department of the Pension Fund (hereinafter “the Pension Fund Department”) took a decision in accordance with Section 49 § 1 (2) of the General State Pension (Obligatory Insurance) Act to terminate pension payments to the applicant with effect from 1 September 2005 on the ground that he lived permanently abroad.
At the request of the Pension Fund Department, on 6 April 2006 the Zaporizhzhya Leninskiy District Court (hereinafter “the District Court”) ordered the applicant to pay back the amount of UAH 10,872.40 Ukrainian hryvnias unlawfully received after his emigration. This judgment was upheld by the higher courts and became final, but remained unenforced.
On 8 September 2008 the Zaporizhzhya Leninskiy District Police Department refused to institute criminal proceedings against the applicant for allegedly unlawful receipt of pension between 2001 and 2005 for lack of corpus delicti in his actions.
On 7 October 2009 the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional the provisions on the basis of which the applicant’s pension payments had been terminated (see Relevant domestic law below).
On 12 October 2009, following the above decision of the Constitutional Court, the applicant requested the Pension Fund Department to restore his pension payments. By a letter of 10 February 2010 the Pension Fund Department, referring to the Pension Fund letter of 28 December 2009 concerning the procedure for application of the decision of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, informed the applicant that the above decision of the Constitutional Court applied only to those who had left for abroad after 7 October 2009 and that therefore there were no legal grounds for the restoration of his pension payments. On 3 September 2010 the applicant challenged the above interpretation of the Constitutional Court decision by the Pension Fund before the Kyiv Administrative Court, which rejected his complaint as submitted too late.
On 20 October 2009 the applicant applied to the District Court for revision of its judgment of 6 April 2006 on the grounds of newly discovered circumstances, referring to the decision of the Constitutional Court of 7 October 2009. On 2 December 2009 the Zaporizhzhya Regional Prosecutor’s Office (the ZRPO) made a similar application to the same court, acting in the applicant’s interests. On 29 June 2010 the court rejected the applications, on the ground that the decision of the Constitutional Court had no retroactive effect and could not qualify as a newly discovered circumstance. On 14 October and 22 November 2010 the Zaporizhzhya Regional Court of Appeal and the Higher Administrative Court upheld the decision of the first-instance court.
On 12 February 2010 the Zaporizhzhya Leninskiy District Prosecutor instituted proceedings in the interests of the applicant in the District Court against the Pension Fund Department, seeking resumption of pension payments to the applicant.
On 15 April 2011 the District Court found for the applicant and ordered the Pension Fund Department to resume payment of pension to the applicant with effect from 7 October 2009, the date of the Constitutional Court decision.
On 26 April 2011 the Pension Fund Department appealed against the judgment of 15 April 2011.
On 21 June 2011 the Dnipropetrovsk Administrative Court of Appeal upheld the decision of 15 April 2011.
Since 1956 the pension payments had been regulated by the State Pension Act of 14 July 1956. Section 6 of the Act provided that the pensions were to be paid from the funds allocated in the State budget, including the funds of State social security, which were formed from the contributions of enterprises, institutions and organisations without any deductions from the salaries. As a general rule, under Section 7 of the Act, the men were entitled to old age pension when they attained the age of 60 and had been working for at least 25 years. For women the retirement age was 55 and the work record was at least 20 years.
In May 1990 the new pension act – the Pension Benefits Act was enacted. It introduced the Pension Fund of the USSR which was separated from the State Budget and was formed from the different types of contributions, including obligatory social security contributions of enterprises and individuals alike (Article 8 the Act). After dissolution of the Soviet Union, a similar provision was introduced in the Ukrainian Pensions Act of 1991 (see below).
Relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
Article 9
“International treaties that are in force and are agreed to be binding by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine are part of the national legislation of Ukraine...”
Article 24
“Citizens have equal constitutional rights and freedoms and are equal before the law.
There shall be no privileges or restrictions based on race, colour of skin, political, religious and other beliefs, sex, ethnic and social origin, property status, place of residence, linguistic or other characteristics...”
Article 46
“Citizens have the right to social protection that includes the right to subsistence ... in old age...”
Relevant sections of the Act provides:
Section 8.  Funds for pension payment. Exemption of pensions from taxation
“...The Pension Fund of Ukraine is an independent financial and banking system, is not part of the State budget of Ukraine, is formed from funds that are paid by enterprises and organizations ... from insurance payments of citizens engaged in entrepreneurial activity, from obligatory insurance contributions of citizens, as well as from the funds of the State budget of Ukraine...”
Section 92.  Payment of pensions to citizens who have left for abroad.
“Pensions shall not be granted to citizens who have left for permanent residence abroad.
Pensions granted in Ukraine before the recipient leaves for permanent residence abroad shall be paid for six months in advance, before the recipient departs for abroad. While a citizen is abroad only pensions granted for occupational disability or illness shall be payable.
The procedure of transferring pensions granted for professional disability or illness to other countries shall be established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine.”
Sections 49 and 51 of the Act provided, in so far as relevant, as follows:
Section 49.  Termination and resumption of pension payments
“1.  The payment of pension shall be terminated by a decision of the territorial bodies of the Pension Fund or by a court:
...
2)  for the duration of residence of the retired person abroad, unless otherwise stipulated by international treaties of Ukraine ratified by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine......”
Section 51.  Payment of pension in the event of emigration
“In the event of departure of a retired person for permanent residence abroad, a pension granted in Ukraine shall be paid for six months in advance before departure, from the month following the month when the person registered as leaving their place of residence. While he is abroad the pension shall be paid if there is provision to do so in an international treaty of Ukraine ratified by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.”
There is no treaty on social security between Ukraine and Germany.
The subparagraph (2) of paragraph 1 of Section 49 and the second sentence of Section 51 were found unconstitutional in October 2009 (see below).
By this decision the Constitutional Court found the provision concerning termination of pension payments to Ukrainian citizens residing abroad unconstitutional and repealed the relevant provision of section 51 of the General State Pension (Obligatory Insurance) Act. The court noted in particular that:
“The disputed provisions of the Act made the constitutional right to social security dependent on the signing of an international treaty on pensions between Ukraine and the country concerned. Thus the State, despite constitutional guarantees of social security for all who are entitled to a retirement pension, deprived retired people of their rights by law, if they choose as their place of permanent residence a country with which no such treaty has been signed. Given the legal and social nature of pensions, the citizen’s right to receive a pension cannot be associated with such a condition as permanent residence in Ukraine; according to constitutional principles the State is required to ensure this right [to a pension] regardless of where a person who has been awarded a pension, lives, in Ukraine or abroad.”
The Constitutional Court further invited Parliament to review all other relevant legal acts containing similar provisions.
Article 69 of the 1952 International Labour Organisation’s Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention (“the 1952 ILO Convention”) provides that a benefit to which a protected person would otherwise be entitled in compliance with the 1952 ILO Convention (including old age benefit) may be suspended, in whole or in part, by national law as long as the person concerned is absent from the territory of the State concerned. The above provision is echoed in Article 68 of the 1964 European Code of Social Security and Article 74(1)(f) of the 1990 European Code of Social Security (Revised).