The case originated in two applications (nos. 9117/04 and 10441/04) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by forty-one Russian nationals (“the applicants”), whose names and dates of birth are listed in the Annex, on 31 January and 3 February 2004.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants complained, in particular, of the belated enforcement of judgments in their favour and of a breach of their right to freedom of assembly.
On 13 September 2007 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicants live in Vladikavkaz.
The applicants are former policemen. They were all involved in the conflict-resolution and peace-keeping operation in the zone of the armed Ossetian-Ingush conflict in October and November 1992. As a consequence they were entitled to certain social payments.
The applicants sued the Severnaya Osetiya-Alaniya Regional Department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (hereafter “the regional internal-affairs department”) for social-payments arrears. On various dates in 2001 or 2002 the Leninskiy District Court of Vladikavkaz allowed their claims and ordered that the regional internal-affairs department pay the arrears. The dates of the judgments and the amounts of the awards are listed in the Annex.
The applicants submitted the writs of execution to the Ministry of Finance. However the Ministry returned the writs of execution on the ground of lack of funds to pay the judgment debts.
The judgments in favour of all the applicants were eventually enforced between September 2004 and April 2005. The dates of payment in respect of each applicant are listed in the Annex.
All the applicants except Mr Varziev sued the regional internal-affairs department for pecuniary damage incurred through the belated enforcement of the judgments in their favour. On various dates in 2005 the Leninskiy District Court of Vladikavkaz acknowledged that the delays in enforcement had violated the applicants’ rights and awarded each of them a sum to cover inflation losses sustained as a result. The awards were paid on various dates in 2005. One of the applicants, Mr Tsallagov, did not submit the writ of execution to the Ministry of Finance and did not therefore receive his award.
On 15 September 2003 the applicants notified the Vladikavkaz Town Administration of their intention to hold a demonstration in Svoboda Square in Vladikavkaz to protest against the regional internal-affairs department’s failure to settle the social-payments debt. The demonstration was scheduled to start on 30 September 2003 and was announced as being of unlimited duration.
On 24 September 2003 the Town Administration refused to approve the venue and suggested that the demonstration be held in front of the Tkhapsayev theatre.
On 30 September 2003 the applicants began their demonstration in Svoboda Square in front of the Severnaya Osetiya-Alaniya Regional Government building. About one hundred people participated in it. They put up tents and remained in the square day and night. They displayed placards and banners stating their criticisms and demands.
On 3 October 2003 the Vladikavkaz Town Legislature annulled the decision of 24 September 2003 at the request of the regional internal-affairs department “in connection with a risk of terrorist acts in the places of mass gatherings of people”. It asked the regional internal-affairs department to take measures to break up the demonstration and restore public order in Svoboda square.
On 11 October 2003 the Leninskiy District Court of Vladikavkaz declared the demonstration unlawful because it violated the rights of others. The court found that it hampered citizens’ access to public transport and to the cinema and officials’ access to the administrative buildings situated in Svoboda Square. The chanting of slogans by the applicants also disturbed the officials’ work. Moreover, the regional internal-affairs department had information about an expected outbreak of terrorist activities in the region. The mass gathering of people in the vicinity of the administrative buildings increased the risk of terrorist acts and other offences being committed and impeded the conduct of preventive operations by the law-enforcement agencies. The court further noted that the Vladikavkaz Town Administration had ordered that all meetings and assemblies be held in front of the Tkhapsayev theatre; therefore the demonstration in Svoboda Square was in breach of that order. Lastly, the court found that public gatherings of unlimited duration were not authorised by Russian law.
It appears from the videotape and press articles submitted by the applicants that on the same day the police ordered the protesters to disperse. As the protesters refused to stop the demonstration, the police dismantled the tents they had erected. The protesters, however, put the tents back up and continued their demonstration.
On 18 November 2003 the Supreme Court of the Severnaya Osetiya-Alaniya Republic upheld the judgment of 11 October 2003 on appeal.
On 27 November 2003 the Parliament of the Severnaya Osetiya-Alaniya Republic decreed that Svoboda Square in Vladikavkaz was reserved for meetings, assemblies and demonstrations organised at the initiative of the authorities of the Severnaya Osetiya-Alaniya Republic and the town of Vladikavkaz. Other public gatherings were to be held at a venue to be determined by the Vladikavkaz Town Administration.
On an unspecified date in December 2003 the protesters ended the demonstration.
For the relevant provisions of the domestic law regarding the enforcement of final judgments, see Burdov v. Russia (no. 2) (no. 33509/04, §§ 22 and 26-29, 15 January 2009).
Federal Law № 68-ФЗ of 30 April 2010 (in force as of 4 May 2010) provides that in the event of a violation of the right to trial within a reasonable time or of the right to enforcement of a final judgment, Russian citizens are entitled to seek compensation for non-pecuniary damage. Federal Law № 69-ФЗ adopted on the same day introduced the pertinent changes in the Russian legislation.
Section 6.2 of Federal Law № 68-ФЗ provides that everyone who has an application pending with the European Court of Human Rights concerning a complaint of the nature described in the law has six months to bring the complaint to the domestic courts.
The Constitution guarantees the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and the right to hold meetings, demonstrations, marches and pickets (Article 31).
Presidential Decree no. 524 of 25 May 1992 (in force at the material time) provided that the exercise of the right to freedom of assembly should not violate the rights and freedoms of others. It also prohibited the use of that right for the purpose of violently overthrowing the Government, inciting racial, ethnic or religious hatred, or advocating violence or war (section 1).
The Decree of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Council no. 9306-XI of 28 July 1988 (in force at the material time pursuant to Presidential Decree no. 524 of 25 May 1992) provided that organisers of an assembly were to serve a written notification on the municipal authorities no later than ten days before the planned assembly. The notification was to mention the purposes, type, location or itinerary of the assembly, the time of its beginning and end, the expected number of participants, and the names and addresses of the organisers (section 2). The authority was to give its response no later than five days before the assembly. It could, if necessary, suggest another venue or time for the assembly (section 3). An assembly could be banned if its purpose was contrary to the Constitution or threatened public order or the security of citizens (section 6). An assembly was to be stopped at the request of the authorities in the following cases: (1) if no prior notification of the assembly had been given; (2) if a decision banning the assembly had been issued; (3) if the established procedure for the conduct of public assemblies had been breached; (4) if there was a danger to citizens’ life or health; or (5) if the public order was breached (section 7).
Succession is regulated by Part 3 of the Civil Code. It includes the deceased’s property or pecuniary rights or claims but does not include rights or obligations intrinsically linked to the deceased’s person, such as alimony or a right to compensation for damage to health (Article 1112). An heir should claim and accept succession and obtain a succession certificate from a public notary (Articles 1152, 1162). The right to receive salary payments and payments qualifying as such, pension payments and other sums of money payable to the deceased person as a means of subsistence which were not received in his lifetime belongs to the members of the deceased’s family who had been residing with him and any disabled dependants, irrespective of their having resided with the deceased or not (Article 1183 § 1). In accordance with section 63 of the Federal Law on Pension Welfare of Military Service Personnel (1993), as in force at the material time, pension payments due to a pensioner but not received in his lifetime are payable to the members of the deceased’s family if they were in charge of his or her funeral, and shall not be included in the succession.
Application no. 9117/04
Application no. 10441/04