The case originated in an application (no. 21954/16) against North Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Avto Atom Doo Kochani, a company registered in Kochani (“the applicant company”), on 13 April 2016.
The applicant company was represented by Mr T. Nedelkov, a lawyer practising in Bitola. The Government of North Macedonia (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms D. Djonova.
On 21 February 2018 notice of the complaint under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant is a limited-liability company specialising in passenger transport in buses.
It was registered for the purposes of the Value-Added Tax Act (“the VAT Act”) and declared VAT on all outgoing invoices. VAT was also declared on incoming invoices, which made it possible for the applicant company to periodically make deductions from its VAT obligations to the State.
In March and April of 2007 the Internal Revenue Office (Управа за jавни приходи – “the IRO”) conducted an audit of the applicant company with respect to its VAT obligations for 2004 and 2005. It was established that one of its suppliers – one of the petrol stations used by the applicant company (“the supplier”) – had not been registered for the purposes of VAT. The invoices issued by this supplier contained its tax number and had VAT declared on them, so after having paid them in full, the applicant company claimed the related VAT deduction. The applicant company had otherwise fully complied with its VAT obligations.
On 2 May 2007, relying on the findings of the audit, the IRO issued a payment order in respect of the applicant company, imposing an additional VAT demand in the amount of 3,266,792.00 Macedonian denars (MKD). The above amount had, according to them, unlawfully been deducted from the applicant company’s VAT obligation on the basis of invoices issued by the supplier.
The applicant company contested the payment order, but paid the above amount in several instalments in the course of 2007 and 2008.
Following two remittals, on 28 January 2015 its administrative claim was dismissed by the Administrative Court (Управен суд) which held that the applicant company had not been entitled to seek a deduction from its VAT obligation given that the supplier had not been registered for the purposes of VAT. It dismissed the argument that VAT had been declared on the incoming invoices by the supplier as irrelevant.
The Higher Administrative Court (Виш управен суд) dismissed the applicant company’s appeal on 20 October 2015, finding no reason to depart from the above findings.
The supplier was founded on 19 August 2003 and was struck off the list of companies on 30 June 2006. Its founder and sole owner was convicted for failing to register for the purposes of VAT (tax evasion) in a judgment of 25 December 2009 and sentenced to a suspended prison sentence. He paid the tax debt as established in that judgment in the amount of 595,470 MKD (around 9,650 euros (EUR)). The supplier itself was not prosecuted on account of its liquidation.
The relevant parts of sections 33 and 34 of the Value-Added Tax Act (Закон за данок на додадена вредност), as applicable at the time, are summarised in the case of Euromak Metal Doo v. the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, (no. 68039/14, §§ 25, 26, 14 June 2018).
Pursuant to section 55 of the Value-Added Tax Act, an entity which declared VAT on an invoice in spite of failing to register for the purposes of VAT, was obliged to pay the VAT owed (Ако некое лице во фактурата го искаже одделно данокот на додадена вредност иако за тоа не е овластено, тогаш го должи искажаниот износ).