The case originated in two applications (nos. 756/05 and 25761/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”). Application no. 756/05 was lodged by a Ukrainian national, Mr Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Markovtsi (“the first applicant”), on 6 December 2004. Application no. 25761/05 was introduced by a Russian national, Mr Yevgeniy Fedorovich Selivanov (“the second applicant”) on 20 April 2005.
The first applicant was not represented by a lawyer before the Court. The second applicant was represented by Ms V.L. Demidova, a lawyer practicing in Mirnyy, the Sakha (Yakutiya) Republic. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, the former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On various dates the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the applications to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the applications at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
As regards the application no. 756/05, the Ukrainian Government did not exercise their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application no. 25761/05, but the Court rejected this objection.
The first applicant was born in 1970 and lives in . The second applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Lensk, the  (Yakutiya).
In the 1990s the applicants subscribed to a State savings scheme for buying Russian-made cars. The State failed to fulfil its obligation to provide them with cars. The applicants brought court actions against the authorities, seeking to recover the monetary value of the State promissory notes for purchasing of a Russian-made car.
On the dates listed in the Appendix the domestic courts of the Sakha (Yakutiya) Republic upheld their actions and awarded them compensation in the amounts specified below, payable by the Ministry of Finance. On the dates listed in the Appendix the judgments were upheld on appeal by the Supreme Court of the Sakha (Yakutiya) Republic and became final. The enforcement proceedings were opened.
The awards remained unenforced.
On the dates cited in the Appendix the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Sakha (Yakutiya) Republic, upon an application from the Ministry of Finance and by way of supervisory-review proceedings, quashed the judgments in the applicants' favour, re-examined the cases and dismissed the applicants' actions, having found that the lower courts had incorrectly interpreted and applied the domestic law.
The first applicant submitted that he had not been timeously notified of the session of the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the  (Yakutiya) and therefore could not attend it. He received a copy of the judgment several months after the hearing at the Presidium.
On 26 November 2004 the first applicant received 49,259.70 Russian roubles (RUB) of compensation in respect of a part of the promissory note value.
Under section 9 of the Federal Law on Enforcement Proceedings of 21 July 1997, a bailiff must enforce a judgment within two months. Under section 242.2.6 of the Budget Code of 31 July 1998, the Ministry of Finance must enforce a judgment within three months.