The case originated in an application (no. 34799/07) against the Republic of Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Serbian and Croatian national, Mr Blagoja Pejčić (“the applicant”), on 7 August 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr J.M. Borić, a lawyer practising in Belgrade. The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr S. Carić. The Croatian Government exercised their right of third-party intervention in accordance with Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that by refusing to reinstate payment of his military pension the respondent Government had violated his right to property under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention. He further alleged that the length of his proceedings was incompatible with the “reasonable time” requirement of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 29 May 2012 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1) and to grant the case priority (Rule 41 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1925 and lives in Novi Sad, Serbia.
The former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (“the SFRY”) provided for twofold pension insurance – military and civil. The pension rights of military personnel were regulated and secured through the federal authorities (Article 281 § 6 of the 1974 Constitution of the SFRY). The members of the JNA, the armed forces of the former SFRY, paid their contributions to and received their pensions from the JNA Fund based in Belgrade. This was the only pension fund existing at the federal level. On the other hand, each republic had its own pension fund [set up] for the payment of civil pensions (for more information see Janković v. Croatia (dec.), no. 43440/98, ECHR 2000X).
Following the dissolution of the SFRY, the JNA Fund generally stopped paying pensions to pensioners from the newly established states, and in the majority of cases the newly established states took over paying pensions to their citizens (see Janković, cited above, and Kudumija v. Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, and Remenović and Mašović v. Bosnia and Herzegovina, (dec.), nos. 28233/08 et al., 4 June 2013). In 1994, pursuant to the Yugoslav Army Act, the JNA Fund was transformed into the Fund for Social Insurance of Military Personnel of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (succeeded in 2006 by Serbia; “the Military Fund”).
The issue of the former military pensioners remained unresolved between the newly formed states and was thus one of the subjects dealt with in the Agreement on Succession Issues. On 29 June 2001 Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Slovenia signed the Agreement on Succession Issues (“the Succession Agreement“), which entered into force on 2 June 2004. Annex E dealt with pensions. It was based on the principle of acquired rights, in that rights acquired under one system must be acknowledged and respected in another. Under Annex E each successor State assumed responsibility for the regular payment of pensions to its citizens who had been civil or military employees of the former SFRY, irrespective of their current residence, if those pensions were financed from federal funds. In the case of military pensions, if a person was a national of more than one republic of the former SFRY, the pension should be paid by the State where that person resided.
The applicant served as a military officer in the JNA until 1973, when he retired. On 11 June 1973 he was granted a pension by the JNA Fund. At that time the applicant was living in Split, Croatia. The pension continued to be paid to him from the JNA Fund following Croatia’s declaration of independence in 1991.
On 23 November 1993 the applicant requested the discontinuation of payment of the pension from the JNA Fund, since he had been granted a pension in Croatia in accordance with the relevant Croatian legislation at the time, starting from 1 December 1993. On 8 December 1993 the JNA Fund stopped paying the applicant’s pension.
By 18 January 2002 the applicant had taken up residence in Novi Sad, Serbia.
On 31 March 2004 the Split branch of the Croatian Pension Fund stopped paying his pension, because he no longer had residence in Croatia. It held that the payment of pensions abroad was possible under the relevant domestic law only if there was an international treaty or a reciprocal agreement, which did not exist in respect of Serbia.
On 18 January 2005 that decision was upheld by the competent second-instance administrative body and the applicant was advised to request payment of his pension from the Military Fund in Belgrade.
On 11 November 2004 the applicant lodged a request with the Military Fund for the reinstatement of payment of his pension with effect from 1 April 2004.
On 11 March 2005 the Military Fund refused the request finding that, according to section 8(2) of the Decree on the Pension Rights of Military Personnel 1994 and section 82(4) of the Pension and Disability Insurance Act 2003 (see paragraphs 28 and 29 below), the applicant had the right to choose a pension fund only once, and he had already used this right by transferring his pension to Croatia in 1993.
On 31 May 2005 the Appeals Commission of the Military Fund (“the Appeals Commission”) upheld that decision. On 17 June 2005 the applicant initiated proceedings for judicial review before the Court of Serbia and Montenegro.
On 31 January 2008 the Supreme Court (following the transformation of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro and ensuing judicial reform) quashed the decision of 31 May 2005 and remitted the case to the Appeals Commission for reconsideration, advising it to take the Succession Agreement into consideration.
On 15 August 2008 the Appeals Commission rejected the applicant’s appeal finding that, regardless of the Succession Agreement, the applicant was not entitled to a pension in Serbia. It again relied on section 8(2) of the Decree on the Pension Rights of Military Personnel 1994 and section 82 of the Pension and Disability Insurance Act 2003, noting that at the moment of the entry into force of the Succession Agreement the applicant had had residence in Croatia and had been a beneficiary of the Croatian Fund. The Appeals Commission thus found that the applicant was expected to move to Croatia and re-establish residence there, so that he could re-apply for a pension from the Croatian Fund.
On 9 September 2008 the applicant initiated proceedings for judicial review before the Supreme Court. On three occasions thereafter he urged the court to decide on his case and on 22 May 2009 he wrote to the president of the Supreme Court urging her to give his case priority treatment, in view of his age and the importance of the case for him, since it concerned his very subsistence.
On 8 October 2009 the Supreme Court quashed the decision of 15 August 2008, as the Appeals Commission had failed to provide proper reasoning for the assertion that the applicant was only entitled to request the transfer of his pension once.
On 30 October 2009 the Chairman of the Appeals Commission made an official note in relation to the applicant’s request, noting that within sixty days a decision should be drafted allowing his appeal and ordering the Military Fund to recognise his right to a pension. A further note dated 7 December 2009 and also signed by the Chairman of the Appeals Commission suggests that staff members of the Fund, a certain M. and J., had refused to prepare the draft decision as instructed by him, as they considered that the applicant did not have the right to enjoy a pension in Serbia.
On 30 December 2009 the Appeals Commission again rejected the applicant’s appeal and instructed the applicant to move to Croatia. It found that, since the applicant had had residence in Croatia on 2 June 2004 when the Succession Agreement entered into force, the Croatian Fund was solely responsible for the payment of his pension.
On 17 December 2010 the Administrative Court upheld that decision, applying the Pension and Disability Insurance Act. It did not respond to the applicant’s claim that the Succession Agreement had precedence over the domestic laws and by-laws or to his claim that he had established residence in Serbia prior to the entry into force of the said agreement.
On 28 January 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law (zahtev za preispitivanje sudske odluke). On 4 February 2011 the Supreme Court of Cassation rejected his appeal.
On 8 February 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint. It would appear that these proceedings are still pending.
On 1 August 2012, following the changes in the pension system (see paragraph 29 below), the Novi Sad branch of the Fund for Pension and Disability Insurance of the Republic of Serbia, acting of its own motion, established the applicant’s right to receive a pension from that Fund with effect from 1 January 2012. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“It was established that
- ... Blagoja Pejčić was granted a military pension by a decision of 1 January 1973 ...
- payment was effected by the Military Fund in Belgrade until 30 November 1993, when it was terminated at Blagoja Pejčić’s request in order for him to be able to receive a pension from the Croatian Fund, as he had residence in Split, Croatia, at the time.
- the Croatian Fund paid his pension until 1 April 2004, when it was terminated because [Blagoja Pejčić] had moved to Serbia.
- Blagoja Pejčić is a national of the Republic of Serbia and has residence on the territory of the Republic of Serbia.
In view of the established facts, it is concluded that the conditions for establishing the payment of his pension with effect from 1 January 2012 are met ...”
Under Article 194 § 4 of the Constitution international agreements and general rules of international law form part of the legal order in Serbia; ratified international agreements may not be in contravention of the Constitution, while other legislation in the Republic may not be in contravention of ratified international instruments and general rules of international law (Article 194 § 5).
Section 8(2) of the Decree on the Pension Rights of Military Personnel 1994 (Uredba o načinu ostvarivanja i prestanku prava iz penzijskog i invalidskog osiguranja vojnih osiguranika, Official Gazette of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia "OG FRY", no. 36/94) provides that a beneficiary of the military pension who obtains the right to two or more pensions can only enjoy one, of his own choosing.
Section 82(1) of the Pension and Disability Insurance Act 2003 (Zakon o penzijskom i invalidskom osiguranju, Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia ("OG RS"), nos. 34/03, 64/04, 84/04, 85/05, 101/05, 63/06, 5/09 and 107/09), provides that rights arising from pension and disability insurance are to be sought from the fund where the applicant was last insured. Section 83(3) of this Act provides that an insured person can realise the right to a pension with the fund with which he had the longest period of insurance, while paragraph 4 of the same section provides that the right to choose the fund from paragraph 3 can only be exercised once. In the period relevant to the present case the Pension and Disability Insurance Act 2003 was amended several times. The amendment of 1 January 2008 repealed paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of section 83.
With effect from 1 January 2012 the system of separate pension insurance for military beneficiaries in Serbia was abandoned, and the Military Fund ceased to exist. Its rights and obligations were taken over by the Fund for Pension and Disability Insurance of the Republic of Serbia (“the Fund”). Section 79(1) of the Law Amending the Pension and Disability Insurance Act 2003 (Zakon o izmjenama i dopunama zakona o penzijskom i invalidskom osiguranju, OG RS no. 101/10) provides for the Fund to take over the payment of military pensions from the Military Fund with effect from 1 January 2012 for all beneficiaries who had been receiving payment of military pensions up to 31 December 2011.
Section 372 § 1 of the Civil Obligation Act 1978 (Zakon o obligacionim odnosima, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ("OG SFRY"), nos. 29/78, 39/85, 45/89, 57/89 and OG FRY no. 31/93), provides that the negative prescription period for seeking compensation for unpaid periodic benefits (such as pensions) shall be three years following maturity of (the start of entitlement to) each individual benefit.
On 29 October 2004 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the then Serbia and Montenegro expressed the view that the Military Fund should directly apply Annex E to the Succession Agreement when granting requests for reinstatement of payment of military pensions.
On 10 April 2008, in three cases concerning similar issues to those in the present case, the Supreme Court quashed decisions of the Military Fund and Appeals Commission (refusing requests for reinstatement of payment of military pensions to JNA pensioners who had moved from Croatia to Serbia). It held that those bodies did not have subject-matter jurisdiction to deal with the cases since they concerned requests for enforcement of final administrative decisions establishing pecuniary rights (pension rights) which lay within the competence of the civil courts.
Following this ruling, the Belgrade First-Instance Court, in a judgment of 30 June 2010 (case no. P 19327/2010), directly relied on Annex E in a dispute concerning the right to a JNA pension of a plaintiff who had moved from Croatia to Serbia. That judgment was upheld by the Belgrade Appellate Court on 28 April 2011 (case no. Gž.15764/10). The relevant part of the second-instance judgment reads as follows:
“[T]he appeal wrongly disputes the claimant’s right to payment of outstanding pension ... by relying on Article 82 of the Pensions and Disability Insurance Act; therefore the claim in the appeal that the claimant had residence on the territory of the Republic of Croatia and that hence by lodging the request with the Croatian Pension Fund ... he had used his right to choose the fund which would pay his pension ... is unfounded. This is due to what had been indisputably established in the proceedings: the applicant is a national of the Republic of Serbia, he has been resident on the territory of the Republic of Serbia for many years, and ... he lodged a request with the [Military Fund] for the payment of outstanding pension .... [A]pplying the ... provision of Article 2 of Annex E to the Succession Agreement, which has a higher legal force than the provisions of laws and by-laws, the [Military Fund] was under an obligation to pay the claimant the outstanding pension due, and to continue paying it in future.”
On 29 June 2001 Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia, the Republic of Macedonia, the Republic of Slovenia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia entered into the Agreement on Succession Issues (“the Succession Agreement”). The Agreement entered into force on 2 June 2004.
Annex E of the Succession Agreement regulates pensions. Article 1 of this Annex provides that each State should assume responsibility for, and regularly pay, legally grounded pensions funded from the pension funds of the former SFRY republics. The relevant parts of Article 2 of the Succession Agreement read as follows:
“Each State shall assume responsibility for and regularly pay pensions which are due to its citizens who were civil or military servants of the SFRY, irrespective of where they are resident or domiciled, if those pensions were funded from the federal budget or other federal resources of the SFRY; provided that in the case of a person who is a citizen of more than one State ... if that person is domiciled in one of those States, payment of the pension shall be made by that State.”
The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 23 May 1969 (Official Gazette of the SFRY, no. 30/72) provides:
“A party may not invoke the provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to perform a treaty ...”