The case originated in an application (no. 47405/07) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by seven Bulgarian nationals, Ms Madlen Magardich Chengelyan, Ms Viktoria Takvor Chengelyan, Mr Eduard Takvor Chengelyan, Mr Manuk Garo Chengelyan, Ms Anaiys Hampartsum Shirin, Mr Ehisapert Ardavast Hintyan and Ms Asthig Hampartsum Bedrosyan (“the applicants”), on 24 September 2007.
Ms Anaiys Hampartsum Shirin passed away on 19 January 2014. Her heirs, Mr Barkev Kamer Shirin, Mr Kamer Barkev Shirin and Ms Araksi Barkev Shirin-Junglas, expressed a wish to continue the application in her stead.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Ekimdzhiev, Ms K. Boncheva and Ms G. Chernicherska, lawyers practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms A. Panova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that the domestic courts had failed to respect the res judicata effect of an earlier court judgment in judicial proceedings they had initiated in the context of a dispute regarding restitution of property, and that this had resulted in an unlawful interference with their property rights.
On 16 September 2013 the above complaints under Article 6 § 1 and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants were born in 1950, 1979, 1988, 1958, 1947, 1927 and 1932 respectively. They live in Plovdiv, apart from Ms Asthig Hampartsum Bedrosyan, who lives in New York, United States of America. Before her death in 2014, Ms Anaiys Hampartsum Shirin lived in Burgas.
Ancestors of the applicants owned a plot of land measuring 246 square metres in the old part of Plovdiv, which had a two-storey house built on 160 square metres of it. In 1949 the building was declared a cultural monument. In 1966 the property was expropriated and the applicants’ ancestors received compensation. After that, the building was the subject of substantial renovation work, in particular after a fire destroyed part of it in 1978.
After the adoption of the Restitution of Property Expropriated under Building Planning Legislation Act (“the Restitution Act”) in 1992 (see paragraph 15 below), some of the applicants and other heirs of the original owners (from whom the remaining applicants succeeded in the course of the domestic proceedings) applied for the revocation of the expropriation. On 28 June 1993 they were informed that their application had been refused by the mayor of Plovdiv municipality, and on 7 July 1993 they applied for judicial review of that refusal. In a judgment of 9 October 1997 the Plovdiv Regional Court upheld the administrative decision.
However, in a final judgment of 2 October 1998 the Supreme Administrative Court reversed. It found that the applicants’ property had been taken under legislation regulating expropriations made with a view to carrying out public works, namely expropriations intended to be followed by the construction of new buildings or infrastructure. The property in issue, however, had been declared a cultural monument, and had been expropriated to be used as such, thus the expropriation had been in breach of the law. The fact that no construction work had ever been envisaged had to be assimilated to a situation where no public works within the meaning of the Restitution Act had ever been commenced. In addition, the renovation work carried out after the expropriation did not represent “public works” either, as it had only aimed to preserve the building. Lastly, it was noted that the property still existed. All of those factors meant that the preconditions for restitution had been fulfilled. On this basis, the Supreme Administrative Court revoked the expropriation, quashing the mayor’s refusal in that regard.
Following the above judgment, in order to make the restitution effective (see paragraph 16 below), on 21 May 1999 the applicants paid back to the municipality the monetary compensation received by their ancestors at the time of the expropriation. The parties disagreed as to whether the applicants had also received compensation in the form of other property at the time of the expropriation, and whether they had to return that as well.
In 2001 the applicants obtained a notarial deed, which named them as the property’s owners.
Despite the events described above, the applicants could not take possession of the property, because it was being held and used by the Plovdiv municipality, which in 1997 had declared it a public municipal property and had rented a room in the building to an organisation called “13 Centuries Bulgaria” National Endowment Fund (“the Fund”, see paragraphs 19-20 below).
After unsuccessfully attempting to negotiate an agreement, in December 2003 the applicants brought rei vindicatio proceedings against the Plovdiv municipality and the Fund. The action was dismissed by a final judgment of the Supreme Court of Cassation of 8 June 2007. In the first place, the domestic courts found that they were competent to examine the action. According to the second-instance Plovdiv Regional Court, the judgment of 2 October 1998 was open to indirect judicial review, because it was replacing the mayor’s administrative decision on the applicants’ request for restitution, and did not have a res judicata effect in proceedings specifically concerning the right to property. According to the Supreme Court of Cassation, the defendants to the rei vindicatio action, namely the Plovdiv municipality and the Fund, had not participated in the earlier judicial proceedings and therefore were not bound by the judgment of 2 October 1998.
Next, the domestic courts found that the reparation work carried out on the building which the applicants were claiming had been so substantial (the building’s appearance had been preserved, but the internal construction had been largely modified – the roof, some windows and other elements had also been replaced) that, within the meaning of the Restitution Act, it could not be said that the building still existed. In addition, the property was being used for the purpose for which it had been expropriated, namely as “a cultural monument”, which, in the courts’ view, constituted “public works” within the meaning of the same Act. Accordingly, none of the preconditions for restitution had been satisfied.
The Restitution of Property Expropriated under Building Planning Legislation Act (Закон за възстановяване на собствеността върху някои отчуждени имоти по ЗТСУ, ЗПИНМ, ЗБНМ, ЗДИ и ЗС, “the Restitution Act”) was adopted in 1992. In section 1(1) it provided for the revocation of previous expropriations and the restitution of property where certain criteria had been met, in particular where the public works for which the property had been expropriated had not commenced, and where any buildings on the property still existed at the time of the Act’s entry into force.
Restitution could only take effect upon the return of any compensation received at the time of expropriation (sections 5(1) and 6(1) of the Act).
A request for the revocation of an expropriation had to be addressed to the mayor of the relevant municipality, whose refusal (express or tacit) was open to judicial review.
.  Sections 38(1) and 44(1) of the Local Self-Government and Local Administration Act (Закон за местното самоуправление и местната администрация) provide that a mayor is a “body of executive power” of the municipality, who “represents the municipality against individuals and legal entities and before the courts”.
The Fund is an organisation tasked with receiving and managing donations from local and foreign persons made in support of Bulgarian education, science, culture, health and other social activities. It is also financed by the State budget.
Until 2001 its status was regulated by a Council of Ministers decree adopted in 1983, which provided, inter alia, that the Fund was an entity “attached to the Council of Ministers”, that its managing board was to be governed by the Minister of Culture, and that the board’s remaining members were to be appointed by the Prime Minister. In 2001 Parliament adopted the “13 Centuries Bulgaria” National Endowment Fund Act (Закон за Националния дарителски фонд “13 века България”), which provides for a similar scheme: the Fund is governed by a board, which includes the ministers of culture, health, education and labour, and the remaining members are appointed by the Council of Ministers.
The relevant provisions have been summarised in the Court’s judgments in the cases of Kehaya and Others v. Bulgaria (nos. 47797/99 and 68698/01, §§ 34-55, 12 January 2006), and Sivova and Koleva (no. 30383/03, §§ 57-60, 15 November 2011).