The case originated in five applications (nos. 2075/13, 19306/13, 28131/13, 21478/14 and 56107/14) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Ukrainian nationals (“the applicants”), whose personal details and the dates on which they introduced their applications are set out in Appendix I.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that by renewing the procedural time-limit for ordinary appeal without a proper justification and quashing the final judgments in their cases the domestic courts infringed the principle of legal certainty.
On 7 December 2016 the above complaint was communicated to the Government.
On the dates specified in Appendix I the applicants obtained judgments of the first-instance courts which ordered recalculation of their pensions at a higher rate. In some cases the State Bailiff’s Service commenced execution of the judgments.
The defendant pension authorities lodged their appeals outside the statutory limitation period and requested, without providing good reasons (see paragraphs 9-12 and 29-31 below), that the time-limit for lodging an appeal be renewed. The administrative courts of appeal renewed the timelimit (in some applications after a considerable lapse of time), quashed the judgments of the first-instance courts and rejected the applicants’ claims or discontinued the proceedings.
Other information relevant to the applicants’ cases is contained in Appendix I.
The relevant extracts of the Code of Administrative Justice in force at the material time provided the following.
Paragraph 6 of Article 108 provides that if the claim had been returned to the claimant, he or she is not precluded from lodging that claim repeatedly in accordance with the procedure established by law.
Article 183-2 of the Code provides, inter alia, that claims concerning social payments can be considered by summary procedure without summoning the parties. The day after the adoption of a judgment by a first-instance court, copies thereof must be sent to the parties by registered mail. The judgment may be appealed against before a court of appeal. The decision of the court of appeal shall be final.
Article 189 provided that the rules envisaged by Article 108 should also apply to an appeal which did not comply with the procedural requirements.
The revised paragraph 4 of Article 189 with effect from 15 January 2012 envisages that examination of an appeal shall be deferred if it was lodged outside the [10-day] time-limit established by Article 186 and the appellant had not requested the renewal of that time-limit or advanced reasons which had been found inadequate. It allows a thirty-day time-limit running from the date of receipt of the above decision when a request for renewal of the time-limit can be lodged or other reasons can be indicated in the request. A judge rapporteur is to refuse a leave to appeal if no request to renew the time-limit had been lodged or the reasons had been found inadequate. Regardless of the reasons for not complying with the procedural time-limit, a court is to refuse a leave to appeal if a State body or a public authority lodged an appeal more than one year after the challenged decision had been pronounced.
Article 191 of the Code provides that parties other than the appellant have the right to reply to an appeal within the time-limit set by a judge of an administrative court of appeal in the ruling opening the appeal proceedings.
Other provisions of relevant domestic law are set out in Ustimenko v. Ukraine (no. 32053/13, §§ 27-35, 29 October 2015).