The case concerns rent laws in Malta, in particular, the amendments introduced by Act XXIII in 1979 to Chapter 158 of the Laws of Malta, which granted tenants the right to retain possession of premises (rented under title of temporary emphyteusis) under a lease, imposing on the owners a unilateral lease relationship for an indeterminate time at controlled rents.
The applicants were born on different dates between 1927 and 1983 and live in different cities in Malta (see Appendix). The applicants were represented by Dr M. Camilleri and Dr E. Debono, lawyers practising in Valletta.
The Government were represented initially by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General, and subsequently by their Agent, Dr V. Buttiġieġ, State Advocate.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants own property No. 32, St. Scholastica Street, Birgu (“the property”), which the applicants inherited.
On 24 June 1985, the applicants’ ancestor rented (under title of temporary emphyteusis) the property to a third party, for twenty-one years, at 80 Maltese liras (MTL) (approximately 186 euros (EUR)) per year. The Government alleged that, at the time, the property was in a bad state of repair and that the third party had borne the expenses to make it habitable.
In June 2006, on the expiry of the contract of temporary emphyteusis, the third party relied on Act XXIII of 1979 amending Chapter 158 of the Laws of Malta, the Housing (Decontrol) Ordinance, (hereinafter “the Ordinance”) to retain the property under title of lease, at the rent applicable according to law. Thus, the applicants recognised the tenant and the lease at the rent stipulated by law, in their case MTL 160 (approximately EUR 373) per year.
The applicants instituted constitutional redress proceedings claiming that Article 12 of the Ordinance, as amended by Act XXIII of 1979, which granted tenants the right to retain possession of the premises under a lease imposed on them, as owners, a unilateral lease relationship for an indeterminate time without reflecting a fair and adequate rent, in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No.1 to the Convention. They requested the court to award compensation for the damage suffered. The applicants argued that while it was true that at the time when the property was rented out in 1985, the law was already in force, they could not have foreseen the extent of inflation in the property market in the following decades. Moreover, they had no other option than to rent the property under title of temporary emphyteusis, in order to avoid it being requisitioned as was common at the time.
By a judgment of 11 May 2017 the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional competence found a violation of the applicants’ property rights and awarded EUR 10,000 in pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage combined. It accepted that the applicants’ property could have been at risk of being requisitioned, which explained their choice to rent out the property under title of temporary emphyteusis. The regime under which the applicants had rented their property could not be considered proportionate as the applicants received an extremely low amount of rent, i.e. EUR 372.20 annually (which will not change until 2021) while according to the court appointed architect in 2006 the market value was around EUR 4,692 annually, in 2011 it was EUR 4,947 annually and in 2015 EUR 5,100 annually. In awarding damage it also took account of the fact that it was ordering that the tenant would no longer be able to benefit from the amended law as well as the fact that the applicants’ ancestor had freely set the original rental value. It ordered that costs be paid by the defendant.
On appeal by both parties, by a judgment of 13 April 2018 the Constitutional Court revoked the first-instance judgment and rejected the applicants’ claim. The court considered that the applicants had not proved that they had had no other choice but to rent their property. While it was true that there was a possibility of requisition, they had not shown that there was a probability of this occurring. It noted that the applicants were aware of the law at the time when they decided to rent the property and yet they had not demanded a higher rent or any other more favourable conditions which could have prevented a disproportionate result. Moreover, by means of recent amendments the rent payable would be adjusted every three years and the right of the lease being inherited would be restricted. All costs of both instances were to be paid by the applicants.
Following the above-mentioned judgment and the introduction of the application with the Court, the applicants filed a case with the Rent Regulation Board (‘the RRB’) requesting an increase of the rent in question at the rate of 2% of the market value as per the newly introduced Act XXVII of 2018.
Pending these proceedings the applicants and the tenants reached an agreement. As a result the tenants vacated the property in June 2019 and in September 2019 the applicants withdrew their case before the RRB.
On 21 January 2020 the property was sold to a third party.
The relevant domestic law in relation to the present case is set out in Amato Gauci v. Malta (no. 47045/06, §§ 19-25, 15 September 2009), Anthony Aquilina v. Malta (no. 3851/12, §§ 28-29, 11 December 2014) and Portanier v. Malta (no. 55747/16, § 18, 27 August 2019).