The case originated in an application (no. 77508/11) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Czech national, Mr Vasil Sadocha (“the applicant”), on 6 December 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Kasko, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant complained that the confiscation of his lawfully acquired money had been an excessive and disproportionate measure and that he had not been duly summoned to court hearings in his case.
On 16 April 2018 notice of the above-mentioned complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Czech Government were invited to submit written comments, in accordance with Article 36 § 1 of the Convention, but declined to do so.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Olomouc, the Czech Republic.
On 22 July 2011 the applicant travelled from Kyiv Zhuliany Airport to Poland. He went through the “green corridor” carrying 41,000 euros (EUR) in cash in his hand luggage. At the security check, his hand luggage was Xrayed. According to the applicant, once the officer had asked him whether he was carrying any cash he had acknowledged that he had money in his luggage and showed it to the officer.
According to the customs offence report drafted by the State Customs Service on the spot, the applicant had breached customs control procedures in a simplified customs control area by carrying goods (cash) which had been subject to a mandatory declaration and had failed to make a written declaration in respect of the full amount of money he had been carrying on him. He was charged with breaches of Articles 339 and 340 of the Customs Code. The customs officer seized EUR 31,000 as the object of the offence, while allowing the applicant to keep the remaining EUR 10,000.
On 10 August 2011 a hearing was held in the Solomyanskiy District Court of Kyiv (“the District Court”) in the presence of a prosecutor and the applicant’s lawyer. During the hearing the applicant’s lawyer admitted that the applicant had not declared the money to the customs authorities when leaving Ukraine, but submitted that he had not done so because he had not known what amount he had to declare and what amount could be carried on undeclared. The lawyer also informed the District Court that the applicant had obtained the money through a private loan in Kyiv and had been obliged to repay it within two months of borrowing it. He presented to the court a loan agreement between the applicant and K., a physical person residing in Ukraine, dated 22 July 2011. The agreement, which was a handwritten document, suggested that the applicant had borrowed EUR 31,000 from K., for a period of two months, and undertook to pay default interest in the event that he failed to repay the amount on time.
The District Court held on the same date that the customs report was sufficient evidence of the offences and issued a confiscation order for the sum of EUR 31,000. In so deciding it held as follows:
“... the court considers the written evidence presented by the [applicant’s] representative, namely the loan agreement and copies of the receipts for the amount of EUR 21,600, to be irrelevant because the origin of money has no impact whatsoever on the determination of the scope of the [applicant’s] liability. ...
Having examined the case file, the court considers the [applicant’s] guilt is fully confirmed by the available materials, in particular by the customs offence report. ...
When deciding on the punishment for breaches of the customs rules, the court has taken into account the nature of the offence and the way in which it was committed, and information on the character of the offender, and considers it appropriate to order confiscation of goods [from the applicant] as provided for by Article 340 of the Customs Code of Ukraine.”
In his appeal, the applicant’s lawyer complained that the first-instance court had imposed an unfair and disproportionate punishment on the applicant. He noted in particular that the court had failed to duly examine important factors which served as grounds for giving a less strict punishment to the applicant, namely the lawful origin of the money, the lack of an intention to commit an offence, information about the character of the applicant and in particular the fact that he had never committed any administrative offences before, as well as his financial and family situation. Instead, the District Court had given the most severe punishment, having limited its reasoning to general phrases without providing any relevant details. The lawyer requested that the confiscation order be replaced by a fine.
On 12 September 2011 the Kyiv Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”), in the absence of the applicant but in the presence of his two lawyers, dismissed the appeal and upheld the judgment of the District Court. In doing so, it agreed with the District Court’s conclusion that the origin of money was legally irrelevant to the question of the degree of the applicant’s liability. It further noted that the applicant had been obliged to acquaint himself with the relevant custom rules before crossing the Ukrainian border and that he had not been prevented in any way from doing so. The Court of Appeal went on to note that the District Court’s judgment suggested that it had examined and taken into account information about the character of the applicant. As regards the lawyer’s arguments that the applicant had admitted to a negligent failure to declare the relevant amount of money, had never been held administratively liable and had a large family, these factors, according to the Court of Appeal, were not a sine qua non condition for quashing the District Court’s judgment and changing the sanction imposed on the applicant. It noted that confiscation as a sanction was laid down in Articles 339 and 340 of the Customs Code and had been correctly imposed on the applicant with due regard being given to the nature of the offence, the way it had been committed and the available information on the character of the offender. Lastly, the Court of Appeal noted that the applicant had committed a gross violation of customs rules by failing to declare a substantial amount of money, which severely affected the external economic interests and security of Ukraine and encroached on the key elements of the customs regulations. It therefore ruled that there were no grounds to allow the appeal lodged by the applicant’s lawyer.
The judgment of the Court of Appeal was final and not subject to appeal.
The Customs Code (as worded at the material time) provided as follows:
“... The procedure on moving currency across the customs border of Ukraine is determined by the National Bank of Ukraine. ...”
“Punishment for a violation of customs rules cannot be applied otherwise than on the basis of and in accordance with the procedure prescribed by this Code and other laws of Ukraine.”
“Goods which are the direct objects of violations of the customs rules ... are subject to seizure ...”
“Violations of the customs control procedure in a simplified customs control area (corridor), as specified by this Code, that is when an individual who has chosen to go through such a corridor is carrying goods that are either forbidden from or restricted in respect of being carried across the customs border of Ukraine or in quantities exceeding the non-taxable norm set for such goods’ movement across the customs border of Ukraine,
- shall be punishable by a fine of between fifty and one hundred times the minimum tax-free income of a citizen or confiscation of the goods.”
“The non-declaration of goods and vehicles being carried across the customs border of Ukraine ... which are subject to mandatory declaration ...
- shall be punishable by a fine of between one hundred and one thousand times the minimum tax-free income of a citizen or confiscation of the goods or vehicle ...”
The Regulation on Transportation of Cash and Investment Metals across Ukraine’s Customs Border (as worded at the material time), approved by the Decree of the National Bank of Ukraine of 27 May 2008, no. 148, provided as follows:
“1. Individuals may bring up to EUR 10,000 in cash (or the equivalent) into and out of Ukraine without declaring it in writing at the customs office.
Individuals may bring over EUR 10,000 in cash (or the equivalent) into and out of Ukraine subject to making a full declaration in writing at the customs office. ...”