The case originated in an application (no. 44958/05) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Ms Parasca Zaieţ (“the applicant”), on 14 October 2005.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr M. Ardelean, a lawyer practising in Timisoara. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs I. Cambrea, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Relying on Articles 6 and 8 of the Convention the applicant alleged that her right to respect for her family life had been violated because of the unlawful annulment of her adoption. Under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention the applicant complained that as a direct consequence of the annulment of her adoption she had lost title to the five hectares of forest she had inherited from her adoptive mother.
On 6 October 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Săvârșin.
She was adopted on 25 February 1972, at the age of seventeen.
The applicant’s adoptive mother also had another adopted daughter, H.M. The applicant’s mother died in 1986.
In 2003, the two sisters were jointly granted title to ten hectares of forest, based on their entitlement through adoption to inherit land which had been expropriated from their grandmother.
Subsequently, the applicant brought an action for division of the land between the sisters.
While the proceedings were ongoing, H.M. brought an action for annulment of the applicant’s adoption. She claimed that the main aim pursued by her adoptive mother when she had sought to adopt the applicant had been to ensure emotional and financial support for her in old age and help with everyday activities. H.M. averred that the only aim pursued by the applicant in agreeing to the adoption had been to obtain inheritance rights.
The applicant submitted that the main reason why her sister had lodged the action for the annulment of her adoption had been to preclude her from inheriting half of the ten hectares of land and to keep all the property inherited from their adoptive mother for herself. In this respect she claimed that the lawfulness of the adoption order had never been questioned before, although it had been issued thirty-two years previously. She concluded that the misunderstandings which had arisen between her and her sister after the death of their adoptive mother could not justify the annulment of an adoption concluded in accordance with the law.
In his final oral submissions before the first-instance court the applicant’s lawyer raised the objection of lack of locus standi of the plaintiff. He contended that H.M. had not proved a legitimate and current interest in seeking the annulment of her sister’s adoption.
On 7 December 2004 the Suceava County Court dismissed the applicant’s objection and declared the applicant’s adoption void, finding that it had not had a purpose envisioned by the Family Code. It held that the only aim of the applicant’s adoption had been the fulfilment of the patrimonial interests of the adoptive mother and the adopted child, and that it had not been intended to ensure a better life for the applicant.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, maintaining that she had lived with her adoptive mother since she was nine years old, although the adoption order had only been issued in 1972 when she was seventeen. She submitted that the family relationship established between her and her adoptive mother since she was nine had been proved by witness statements which were in the case file, and that it was also attested to in the report drafted by the authorities when they carried out a social investigation in connection with her adoption.
The judgment of the court of first instance was upheld by a decision of the Suceava Court of Appeal rendered on 15 April 2005. A dissenting opinion to that decision stated that the adoption had not been improper, as its main aim had been the welfare of the applicant, who had been born into a family with eight children and a difficult financial situation.
The relevant provisions of the Family Code concerning adoption were repealed by Government Emergency Ordinance no. 25/1997, (GEO no. 25/1997) published in the Official Gazette no. 120 of 12 June 1997. The relevant provisions concerning the annulment of adoption were as follows:
“(2) An adoption may be cancelled at the request of an adoptee who has reached the age of ten, or the Child Protection Commission in the adoptee’s area if the annulment of the adoption is in the best interests of the adoptee.”
The Adoption Act (Law no. 273/2004) repealed GEO no. 25/1997 and entered into force on 1 January 2005. The relevant provisions, as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“(1) A court may annul an adoption order if the adoption was sought for a reason other than the protection of the best interests of the adoptee or if the conditions provided for by law were not observed.
(2) The court may dismiss a request for the annulment of an adoption if it considers that maintaining the adoption is in the best interests of the adoptee.”
“Any interested person may request the annulment of an adoption. After the adoptee obtains his or her full legal capacity, he or she is the only person who can challenge the validity of the adoption.”
“(1) Adoption confers on the adopter in respect of the adopted person the rights and obligations of every kind that a father or mother has in respect of a child born in lawful wedlock.
Adoption confers on the adopted person in respect of the adopter the rights and obligations of every kind that a child born in lawful wedlock has in respect of his father or mother.
(2) When the rights and obligations referred to in paragraph 1 of this article are created, any rights and obligations of the same kind existing between the adopted person and his father or mother or any other person or body shall cease to exist. Nevertheless, the law may provide that the spouse of the adopter retains his rights and obligations in respect of the adopted person if the latter is his legitimate, illegitimate or adopted child.
In addition the law may preserve the obligation of the parents to maintain (in the sense of l’obligation d’entretenir and l’obligation alimentaire) or set up in life or provide a dowry for the adopted person if the adopter does not discharge any such obligation.
(3) As a general rule, means shall be provided to enable the adopted person to acquire the surname of the adopter either in substitution for, or in addition to, his own.
(4) If the parent of a child born in lawful wedlock has a right to the enjoyment of that child’s property, the adopter’s right to the enjoyment of the adopted person’s property may, notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this article, be restricted by law.
(5) In matters of succession, in so far as the law of succession gives a child born in lawful wedlock a right to share in the estate of his father or mother, an adopted child shall, for the like purposes, be treated as if he were a child of the adopter born in lawful wedlock.”
The legal and social changes that have occurred in Europe since the first Council of Europe Convention on child adoption have led a large number of States parties to amend their adoption laws. As a result, certain provisions of the 1967 Convention have gradually become outdated. With that in mind, a revised Convention was drawn up in line with the social and legal developments whilst taking the child’s best interests into account.
The Council of Europe’s European Convention on the Adoption of Children (Revised) was opened for signature on 27 November 2008. Romania signed it on 4 March 2009 and ratified it on 2 January 2012.
“(1) Upon adoption a child shall become a full member of the family of the adopter(s) and shall have in regard to the adopter(s) and his, her or their family the same rights and obligations as a child of the adopter(s) whose parentage is legally established. The adopter(s) shall have parental responsibility for the child. The adoption shall terminate the legal relationship between the child and his or her father, mother and family of origin.”
“(1) An adoption may be revoked or annulled only by decision of the competent authority. The best interests of the child shall always be the paramount consideration.
(2) An adoption may be revoked only on serious grounds permitted by law before the child reaches the age of majority.
(3) An application for annulment must be made within a period prescribed by law.”