The case originated in an application (no. 69419/13) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Ramūnas Činga (“the applicant”), on 24 October 2013.
The applicant was represented by Ms R. Laurinavičienė, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė.
The applicant alleged that the communications necessary for the normal functioning of the house were in the land he had to return to the State and that the amount awarded to him was too low.
On 22 June 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Zujūnai.
In 1988 the applicant was provided with a plot of land of 0.15 hectares for residential purposes.
In 1992 the authorities allocated him an additional plot of land of 0.05 hectares and similar additional plots were allocated to another twentyfour people.
On 15 April 1993 the applicant purchased a total of 0.2 hectares of land from the State. At that time there was no detailed plan of Vilnius County. Nevertheless, the plot of land assigned to the applicant was approved by the county’s chief architect.
The applicant obtained an official permit for the construction of a house on the land and has been living there since 2004. The house is the permanent residence of the applicant and his family. The plot of land of 0.05 hectares, which has been allocated to the applicant in 1992 (see paragraph 7 above), is where waste water treatment equipment, the gas and water supplies and an electricity meter were installed.
In 2006 two neighbours started court proceedings against the applicant. They claimed that 0.05 hectares of the applicant’s land occupied part of a street and that the applicant had built a concrete fence around it, making it impossible to use the street. They asked the court to establish an easement (servitutas) for access to it.
On 26 September 2006 the Vilnius District Court held that the neighbours’ rights had not been breached because they had access to their own land. However, the court ordered the applicant to give one of the neighbours access to an electricity meter.
The applicant’s neighbours appealed but on 4 January 2007 the Vilnius Regional Court upheld the decision of the court of first instance. The court held that in accordance with the provisions of domestic law, an easement could be established only if it was impossible to use property in any other way (see paragraph 42 below). This meant that an easement could only be established if it was objectively necessary. The fact that the neighbours had to use another road and that entry to their own property was more difficult was not grounds to limit another person’s property rights, namely those of the applicant.
The applicant’s neighbours lodged an appeal on points of law, and on 19 November 2007 the Supreme Court found that there were two civil cases regarding the same situation and suspended the proceedings until the other case had finished (see paragraph 15 below).
On 29 May 2009 the Supreme Court upheld the Vilnius Regional Court’s decision of 4 January 2007. The court found that the applicant had purchased the plot of land of 0.2 hectares in 1993. The lawfulness of the purchase agreement had been proven by the domestic courts (see paragraph 17 below). The fact that the applicant was a bona fide owner of the land had not been denied and could only be so by reopening the proceedings involved. The court thus held that the mere fact that the applicant’s neighbours wanted to use his land because it was more convenient was not enough to establish an easement.
In October 2007 the prosecutor’s office started court proceedings and asked the domestic courts to annul the decisions of the national authorities and the purchase agreement that had entitled the applicant to 0.05 hectares of land, to apply restitution, to return the plot of land of 0.05 hectares to the State and to pay the applicant 15 Lithuanian litai (LTL, approximately 4.34 euros (EUR)) in compensation. The prosecutor argued that the authorities had breached domestic law by allocating the applicant a plot of land of 0.05 hectares, thus it had to be returned to the State. The prosecutor also noted that the applicant had paid 1,500 roubles for the land, which amounted to approximately LTL 15. The prosecutor also stated that he had only found out about the violation on 30 August 2007, when he had received a report from an expert.
On 11 April 2008 the Vilnius District Court held that the land had been sold to the applicant in breach of the provisions of domestic law (see paragraph 65 below). The contested decisions had been related to property rights over the land, which was a legitimate interest of the community as a whole, and thus the prosecutor’s claim was related to the public interest. The applicant was ordered to return the plot to the State, with the State having to repay him the LTL 15. The parts of the order allocating the additional plot of 0.05 hectares to the applicant and the relevant part of the purchase agreement were annulled.
The applicant appealed. On 10 December 2008 the Vilnius Regional Court noted that according to the prosecutor and the court of first instance any breach of legal norms regulating the division of land was a breach of the public interest. However, twenty-five people altogether, including the applicant, had been allocated additional plots at the time (see paragraph 7 above), but the prosecutor had only found a breach of the public interest in the applicant’s case. The court also found that when the applicant had been allocated the first plot of land (see paragraph 6 above), there had been no other plots demarcated and the land in front of his had been vacant. He thus could not have anticipated that the additional plot of 0.05 hectares would occupy part of the road because the road had not existed at the time the detailed plan had been drawn up or when the applicant had purchased the land (see paragraph 8 above). The court stated that the mechanism of allocating the additional plot to the applicant had been breached, but that he was a bona fide owner. Mistakes had been made by the authorities and taking the land from the applicant would have disproportionate consequences for him. The court observed that the applicant’s neighbours could easily access their land using other roads and their rights had not been breached. Consequently, the court overturned the first-instance decision and dismissed the prosecutor’s complaints. The case file contains no information of whether there was an appeal on points of law.
The prosecutor applied to reopen the proceedings that had ended on 10 December 2008 (see paragraph 17 above). He argued that the Vilnius Regional Court had made a mistake in its application of the law and submitted that the additional plot of land should only have been allocated to the applicant after land reform plans had been carried out. Moreover, the allocation of 0.05 hectares to the applicant had been against the public interest because he had constructed a concrete fence on the road. The prosecutor added that an appeal on points of law had in fact been submitted after the appeal decision, but had been rejected by the Supreme Court.
On 4 December 2009 the Vilnius District Court held that an application to reopen proceedings could only be lodged against a decision that had been appealed against (see paragraph 57 below). The prosecutor had alleged that the Vilnius Regional Court rather than the District Court had made a mistake. If the prosecutor’s request were to be satisfied and proceedings reopened, the court of first instance would have to decide on the lawfulness of a decision by a higher court and domestic law did not provide for the possibility of a court of first instance annulling decisions made on appeal. As a result, the prosecutor’s application to reopen the proceedings was dismissed.
The Prosecutor General lodged a separate complaint. On 25 May 2010 the Vilnius Regional Court held that proceedings concerning a decision by an appellate court could not be reopened. Otherwise, appeals on points of law would be useless and the reopening of proceedings would be used as an opportunity to make proceedings more protracted. Moreover, there was a three-month time-limit to apply to reopen proceedings (see paragraph 58 below). The disputed decision had been adopted on 10 December 2008 and the prosecutor had sought to reopen proceedings on 8 July 2009, therefore the time-limit had been missed. As a result, the court upheld the Vilnius District Court’s decision of 4 December 2009.
The Prosecutor General lodged an appeal on points of law. On 21 December 2010 the Supreme Court decided that the Prosecutor General could apply to reopen proceedings in all cases that had been terminated by a first-instance or appeal decision (see paragraphs 56 and 57 below). Moreover, the mere fact that a district prosecutor had brought civil proceedings did not mean that the Prosecutor General had to know about it. The court thus held that those processes (see paragraphs 18 above and 24 below) had been different and that the time-limit to apply to reopen proceedings had not been missed. Finally, the Supreme Court observed, without further specifications, that the lower courts had failed to properly assess the circumstances which had led to an alleged violation of the public interest and remitted the application to reopen proceedings for fresh examination by the appellate court.
On 14 July 2011 the Vilnius Regional Court held that the firstinstance decision (see paragraph 19 above) had lacked reasons for why a clear mistake in the application of the law had been made (see paragraph 57 below) and without them the appellate court could not decide whether the Prosecutor General’s request to reopen proceedings had been examined properly. The court thus decided to return the case to the Vilnius District Court.
On 25 October 2011 the Vilnius District Court held that an application to reopen proceedings on the grounds of a mistake in the application of the law required not only that the mistake had to be clear, but also be one of substance (see paragraph 57 below). A clear mistake could be a failure to apply a required legal rule, a failure to properly interpret the substance of a legal rule, an obvious misinterpretation of the circumstances and so on. In the case in question, the Prosecutor General’s application could not lead to a conclusion that the proceedings had to be reopened. The Vilnius Regional Court’s decision (see paragraph 17 above) had been wideranging, it had given well-grounded responses to every violation of domestic law alleged by the Prosecutor General and had come to a reasoned conclusion. Reopening proceedings would thus lead to a repeated assessment of the facts and would be contrary to the domestic law and the main purpose of reopening proceedings. There was no information that the Prosecutor General had lodged an appeal on points of law against the Vilnius Regional Court’s decision (see paragraph 17 above). Even if an appeal on points of law had been submitted and rejected, that meant that the court of cassation had not considered that there had been grounds to examine the case. As a result, the Prosecutor General’s request to reopen the proceedings was dismissed.
The Prosecutor General submitted a separate complaint. On 9 March 2012 the Vilnius Regional Court held that the conclusions of the lower court that there was no public interest at stake had been unfounded. Violations of domestic regulations had already been found and those regulations were necessary in the process of the sale or rent of State property. Violations of such regulations were directly related to a breach of the public interest. The court thus decided to reopen the proceedings.
On 15 June 2012 the Vilnius District Court ruled that the decision of 11 April 2008 to oblige the applicant to return 0.05 hectares of land to the State and to pay him LTL 15 had been justified. The court held that the additional plot of 0.05 hectares had been allocated to the applicant in breach of the requirements of domestic law and that by holding that the rights of the applicant’s neighbours had not been breached and that the applicant had been a bona fide party to the purchase agreement, the Vilnius Regional Court had made a clear mistake in the application of the law. The court thus annulled the Vilnius Regional Court’s decision of 10 December 2008 and upheld that of the Vilnius District Court of 11 April 2008 (see paragraph 16 above).
The applicant submitted a separate complaint. On 25 January 2013 the Vilnius Regional Court upheld the decision of the court of first instance (see paragraph 25 above). It also held that the applicant’s argument that he could not have known that part of his land would block the road was not convincing enough as there had been a plan of the whole of the Zujūnai settlement and it had been obvious that there was a continuing road which was part of the 0.05 hectares of land in question. The court further held that the applicant had not been diligent enough and that ignorance of the law could not absolve someone of responsibility (see paragraph 37 below). The fact that the applicant had to return 0.05 hectares of land to the State did not prevent him from asking for an easement over the part of the State land where his waste water equipment and gas and water supplies were installed. The court thus rejected the applicant’s argument that the order to return 0.05 hectares of land to the State prevented him from using his house.
The applicant lodged two appeals on points of law. The Supreme Court dismissed the first one as not raising important legal issues but merely disputing the facts established by the lower courts on 22 February 2013. The second appeal on points of law was dismissed on 26 April 2013. The Supreme Court accepted that if a person’s appeal was dismissed as not raising important legal issues, he or she could, within the time-limit prescribed by law, submit another appeal on points of law having corrected the deficiencies. However, it found that in the applicant’s case, the deficiencies of the first appeal on points of law had not been corrected, although the applicant had modified his arguments; therefore the complaint was repetitive and could not be accepted in accordance with the existing regulations (šiuo atveju kasacinio skundo trūkumai nepašalinti, skundas pripažintinas pakartotiniu, pagal nustatytą reglamentavimą jis negali būti priimtas).
In April 2013 the applicant applied for a suspension of the execution of the decisions of the Vilnius District Court of 15 June 2012 and of Vilnius Regional Court of 25 January 2013 (see paragraphs 25 and 26 above). He also sought to have the proceedings reopened. The applicant submitted that unless the execution of the decisions was suspended, he would have to initiate new proceedings for an easement.
On 26 April 2013 the Vilnius District Court rejected the applicant’s request to suspend execution, holding that his arguments did not constitute sufficient grounds.
On 2 August 2013 the Vilnius District Court rejected the applicant’s request to reopen the proceedings. It held that his argument that new circumstances had arisen was unfounded. The allegedly new circumstances were the fact that a general plan of the settlements of 1986 had not been registered in the State Register. The court observed that the applicant had been represented by a professional lawyer and must have been able to familiarise himself with the general plan and information about its registration. Furthermore, the fact that the plan had not been registered was not important to the examination of the case. The register had only been established in 1992 and had started functioning in 1996.
The applicant submitted a separate complaint. On 27 February 2014 the Vilnius Regional Court upheld the decisions of the lower courts and decided to terminate the applicant’s appellate proceedings.
The plot of land of 0.05 hectares was entered in the State Register as State property in May 2013.
In January 2015 the authorities conducted an examination of the use of the 0.05 hectares of land and found that the applicant had not removed the fence, trees, a shed and paving stones from the plot.
In September 2015 the authorities examined a March 2015 request from the applicant to purchase the plot of land of 0.05 hectares. The authorities stated that the plot could not be purchased as that would be contrary to domestic law (see paragraph 63 below). The same month the applicant was asked to remove the constructions described in the land examination document. It appears that the removal had to be conducted at the expense of the applicant.
In March 2016 the authorities held that the constructions had not been removed.
In February 2017 the applicant requested that the authorities rent the plot to him. In March 2017 the authorities replied that State land could be rented out if there were constructions on it that were owned by private individuals or legal entities. Such objects did not include temporary constructions, engineering systems, buildings that did not have a clear functional dependency or use, or other constructions designated as serving as dependencies of a main construction. The authorities held that the waste water treatment equipment was not an independent object and thus the applicant could not rent the plot of land.
Article 7 reads:
“...
Ignorance of the law shall exempt no one from liability.
...”
Article 23 of the Constitution reads:
“Property shall be inviolable.
The rights of ownership shall be protected by law.
Property may be taken over only for the needs of society according to the procedure established by law and shall be justly compensated.”
Article 1.80 provides that any transaction that fails to comply with mandatory statutory provisions is null and void. When a transaction is declared null and void, each party is required to restore to the other everything that he or she received by means of the transaction (restitution). Where it is impossible to restore the assets received in kind, the parties are required to compensate each other in money, unless the law provides for other consequences as a result of the transaction’s being declared void.
Article 4.37 § 1 provides that a property right is a right to manage and use an object without breaching the law and other people’s rights and interests.
Article 4.47 § 1 (1) provides that property rights can be created by purchase agreements.
Article 4.111 § 1 defines an easement as a right to another person’s immovable property, providing someone with a right to use that property, or a restriction of a right to use property in order to ensure its proper use.
Article 4.112 § 1 provides that an easement grants its holder specific rights over property belonging to another person or takes rights away from the owner of a property.
Article 4.117 provides that an easement relating to a road can establish a right to use a pedestrian path, a road for driving or a road to walk animals.
Article 4.123 provides that other easements can also be established, including a right to install underground and overground communications and to service and use them.
Article 4.124 § 1 provides that easements can be created by laws, agreements and court decisions and, as provided for by law, by administrative acts. Article 4.124 § 3 provides that the wishes of the owner of a property must always be considered, except when an easement is created by law or by a court decision.
Article 4.126 § 1 provides that an easement is created by a court decision if there is a dispute between the owners and it would be impossible to use the property otherwise. Article 4.126 § 2 provides that the owner of a property can bring a claim in court in order to create an easement by a court decision.
Article 6.145 § 2 provides that courts may in exceptional cases change the form of restitution or decide not to apply if it would place an excessive burden on one of the parties.
Article 6.146 provides that after a transaction has been cancelled, restitution is to be made in kind, except where that is impossible or would cause serious difficulties for the parties. In the latter case, restitution must be made by the payment of an equivalent sum of money.
Article 6.551 § 2 provides that State land can be rented out without an auction if constructions owned by private or legal persons have been built on it and in other cases provided for by law.
Article 6.271 § 1 of the Civil Code provides that damage resulting from unlawful acts of institutions of public authority must be compensated for by the State from the State budget, irrespective of the responsibility of a particular public servant or other employee of public authority institutions. Damage resulting from unlawful actions of municipal authority bodies must be redressed by the municipality from its own budget, irrespective of whether an employee is at fault. Article 6.271 § 2 provides that for the purposes of the Article, the notion “an institution of public authority” means any public-law body (a State or municipal institution, official, public servant or any other employee of those institutions, and so forth), as well as a private person executing the functions of a public authority. Article 6.271 § 3 provides that for the purposes of the Article, the notion “act” means any act (active or passive) by an institution of public authority or its employees, that directly affects people’s rights, liberties and interests (legal acts or individual acts enacted by the institutions of state and municipal authority, administrative acts, physical acts, and so forth, with the exception of court judgments – verdicts in criminal cases, decisions in civil and administrative cases and orders). Article 6.271 § 4 provides that civil liability on the part of the State or a municipality subject to the Article arises when the employees of public authority institutions fail to act in the manner prescribed by law for those institutions and their employees.
Article 6.272 § 1 provides that damage resulting either from unlawful conviction, unlawful arrest as a suppressive measure, unlawful detention, application of unlawful procedural measures in enforcement proceedings, or unlawful imposition of an administrative penalty (arrest) shall give rise to full compensation by the State irrespective of the fault of the preliminary investigation officials, prosecution officials or courts. Article 6.272 § 2 provides that the State shall be liable for full compensation in respect of the damage caused by the unlawful actions of a judge or a court trying a civil case, where the damage is caused through the fault of the judge himself or of any other court official. Article 6.272 § 3 provides that in addition to pecuniary damage, the aggrieved person shall be entitled to non-pecuniary damage. Article 6.272 § 4 provides that where the damage arises from an intentional fault on the part of preliminary investigation, prosecution or court officials or judges, the State, after compensation has been provided, shall have the right to take action against the officials concerned for recovery, under the procedure established by law, of the sums in question in the amount provided for by the law.
Article 49 § 1 provides that prosecutors can bring a claim in order to protect the public interest in the cases established by law.
Article 50 § 1 provides that when a prosecutor brings a claim in order to protect the public interest, he has the same procedural rights and obligations as any applicant, unless provided differently by law.
Article 315 § 2 (3) provides that appellate proceedings can be terminated if there is no possibility to appeal against the disputed decision in accordance with the law.
Article 365 § 2 provides that the Prosecutor General can ask the court to reopen the proceedings in order to protect the public interest.
Article 366 § 1 (2) provides that proceedings can be reopened if important new circumstances emerge, which the claimant did not know or could not have been aware of during the proceedings. Article 366 § 1 (9) provides that proceedings can be reopened if the court of first instance made a clear mistake in its application of the law and the decision was not reviewed on appeal. The Prosecutor General can also ask the court to reopen the proceedings even if the decision was reviewed on appeal.
Article 368 § 1 provides that a claim to reopen proceedings must be brought within three months of the day the person found out or should have been aware of the circumstances that constitute grounds to reopen proceedings.
Article 370 § 3 provides that a decision to refuse an application to reopen proceedings can be appealed against by lodging a separate complaint. An appeal court decision to refuse an application to reopen proceedings can be appealed against on points of law.
Article 8 § 1 (7) of the Law on the Prosecution Service states that protecting the public interest is a part of a prosecutor’s general duties.
Article 4 § 1 of the Law on Land Reform provides that land reform is executed in accordance with projects for such purposes.
Article 9 § 6 (1) of the Law on Land Reform provides that State land can be rented out if built upon by constructions owned by private or legal persons (except for temporary constructions, engineering systems and buildings that do not have a clear functional dependency or use, or other constructions designated as dependencies of the main construction).
At the material time, Article 13 § 1 of the Law on Land Reform prohibited the sale to private parties of land necessary for the protection of roads.
At the material time, Article 11 of the Law on the Grounds of Local Self-Governance provided that decisions to allocate land to private and legal persons could only be taken by the council of a district, settlement, region or city.
At the material time, Point 10 of Government Resolution No. 89, adopted on 7 February 1992 (Dėl žemės sklypų ne žemės ūkio veiklai bei sodininkų bendrijų narių sodų sklypų pardavimo ir nuomos tvarkos) obliged cities and regions to terminate the allocation of land without competitive offers from the date of adoption of the Resolution.
On 19 June 1996 the Government approved rules for the Register of Territorial Planning Documents (Lietuvos Respublikos teritorijų planavimo dokumentų registro nuostatai).
Point 2.15 of Government Resolution No. 692 of 2 June 1999 (Dėl naujų kitos paskirties valstybinės žemės sklypų pardavimo ir nuomos) states that State land which is to be sold or rented without auction as an intervening plot must be between two private or rented plots; it must not be larger than 0.04 hectares in residential areas and 0.5 hectares in other areas. It must not be possible to demarcate it as a separate plot.
The Supreme Court has held that other avenues to protect civil rights can be applied if restitution is not sufficient for the proper protection of a person’s rights or the public interest. One of those avenues is compensation for damage (decision of 26 November 2009, no. 3K-3-532/2009).
The Supreme Court has noted that if an agreement has been declared null and void, the court involved has to rule on the question of restitution ex officio (decision of 3 January 2006, no. 3K-7-4/2006).
In a case unrelated to the applicant, the Supreme Court examined a claim for pecuniary damages lodged by G. A.V., who had purchased a plot of land from the State. It was later held that the land had been given to him in breach of the domestic law in force at the time. The purchase agreement was annulled, the land was returned to the State and G.A.V. was paid EUR 1,604. G.A.V. complained that since he had lost his property, he should be repaid in accordance with its market value. The court of first instance awarded G.A.V. EUR 66,682 in respect of pecuniary damage and EUR 2,317 in respect of non-pecuniary damage. The appellate court subsequently annulled the award of pecuniary damages. The Supreme Court examined only the applicant’s complaint regarding the annulment of the award for pecuniary damage, as a complaint regarding the award for nonpecuniary damage had not been lodged. The court held that an application for restitution did not deprive an applicant of the right to lodge a claim for damages. However, in the present case, G.A.V. had never been a lawful owner of the plot of land at issue, thus his argument that he had suffered pecuniary damage because he had lost that plot was unfounded. G.A.V. had failed to prove that he had a real opportunity to lawfully acquire the plot of land in question. The Supreme Court thus upheld the appellate court’s decision not to award G.A.V. pecuniary damages (decision of 27 April 2010, no. 3K-3-189/2010).
In another case unrelated to the applicant, A.S. applied to the courts claiming EUR 74,902 in respect of pecuniary damage and EUR 28,962 in respect of non-pecuniary damage. The authorities had provided A.S. and B.R. with two plots of land, which they later sold for EUR 7,241 each. The authorities’ decisions to provide A.S. and B.R. with the plots of land were subsequently annulled and they were ordered to pay EUR 41,705 each. The court of first instance dismissed the applicant’s claim. The Supreme Administrative Court held that the decision not to award A.S. pecuniary damages was well-founded because the restitution proceedings were still ongoing and it was impossible to establish the value of the plot of land that would be provided to A.S. Nevertheless, the court awarded the applicant EUR 2,896 in respect of non-pecuniary damage for the suffering caused to her as a result of the unlawful actions of the authorities (decision of 13 January 2011, no. A-502-99-11).
In another case unrelated to the applicant, company E. sought compensation for the allegedly unlawful actions of the authorities in the area of territory planning. The company claimed compensation for the expenses it had incurred when preparing a detailed plan, archaeological research in the area and a plan of the building complex. The Supreme Administrative Court held that EUR 83,782 of the expenses incurred by the company were justified; however, it held that the company had not been diligent enough and decided to award it EUR 41,891 in respect of pecuniary damage (decision of 15 December 2011, no. A-62-1119-11).