The case originated in two applications (nos. 16806/11 and 61696/11) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Azerbaijani nationals, Ms Rozakhanim Israfilova (“the first applicant”) and Mr Miryusif Agalarov (“the second applicant”), on 28 February and 20 September 2011 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr R. Mustafazada, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
On 4 July 2012 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1950 and 1946 respectively and live in Sumgayit.
The first applicant has tenancy rights to her flat on the basis of an occupancy voucher (yaşayış sahəsi orderi) and the second applicant is an owner of his flat on the basis of an ownership certificate issued by the competent domestic authority (see Appendix - Table I).
In both cases, the applicants’ flats were unlawfully occupied by internally displaced persons (“IDPs”) from different regions of  under occupation by Armenian military forces following the Armenian Azerbaijani conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh.
The applicants lodged separate civil actions before the domestic courts seeking the eviction of the IDPs from their flats.
On the dates indicated in the Appendix, the applicants’ claims were granted by the domestic courts, which ordered the eviction of the IDPs from their flats.
In application no. 16806/11 (lodged by the first applicant) the execution of the judgment was postponed, by virtue of the judgment’s operative provision, until IDPs’ return to their land or their settlement in other temporary accommodation.
No appeals were filed against these judgments and, pursuant to the domestic law in force at the material time, they became enforceable within one month after their delivery. However, the IDP families refused to comply with those judgments and despite the applicants’ complaints to various authorities, the judgments were not enforced.
The applicants instituted court actions against the enforcement authorities complaining of their inactivity and seeking prompt execution of the judgments. On 19 March 2010 the Sumgayit City Court dismissed Ms Israfilova’s claims. On 11 May 2010 the Sumgayit Court of Appeal considered her appeal inadmissible. On 21 May 2011 the Sumgayit City Court granted Mr Agalarov’s claims, ordering immediate execution of the judgement.
The relevant domestic law is summarised in the Court’s judgment in the case of Gulmammadova v. Azerbaijan (no. 38798/07, §§ 18-24, 22 April 2010).