The case originated in an application (no. 48812/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Alla Nikolayevna Kopytok (“the applicant”), on 21 August 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms O. Yegorova, a lawyer practising in Lipetsk. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, an unjustified interference with her right to the peaceful enjoyment of her possessions.
On 15 May 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Lipetsk.
On 18 September 2007 the applicant signed a private contract for the purchase of a flat in Lipetsk. The seller was Ms E.M.T., acting on behalf of herself and her daughter Maria, a minor. The contract stipulated that the property was not “mortgaged, encumbered by any claims of third parties, disputed or charged”.
The flat in question had been allocated as social housing to Ms E.M.T. and her husband, Mr V.A.V., in 1979. They had lived there with their four children: Yelena, Mikhail, Dmitriy and Maria. Mikhail and Dmitriy were given long prison sentences in 1998 and 2004 respectively and were still serving them at the material time. Yelena moved out in 1997 to continue her studies in Dagestan. In 2006, Ms E.M.T and Maria became the sole owners of the property by way of privatisation, while Mr V.A.V., Mikhail, Dmitry and Yelena declined in writing to exercise their right to obtain their shares of the privatised flat.
As the seller Ms E.M.T. delayed submitting the contract for State registration, the applicant sought a court order upholding her full title to the property. The seller Ms E.M.T. brought a counterclaim. She submitted that she was unable to move out because the purchase of the new flat for herself and her daughter Maria had not yet been finalised. However, after Ms E.M.T. failed to appear in court, on 2 April 2008 the Oktyabrskiy District Court in Lipetsk struck out the counterclaim and granted the applicant relief in the form of an order compelling State registration of her full title to the property. On 12 November 2008 the title was registered.
The applicant then sued the former owner Ms E.M.T. and members of her family, seeking termination of their right to use the flat, annulment of the registration of their residence at that address, and their eviction.
On 7 April 2009 the Oktyabrskiy District Court allowed her claim in part. It ordered the eviction of Ms E.M.T. and Maria, as they were no longer owners of the property, but dismissed the claim in respect of Yelena, Mikhail and Dmitriy on the following grounds:
“According to the parties, the contested property contains personal belongings and chattels of the defendants [Mikhail, Dmitriy and Yelena]; it appears from their written statements that, in declining their shares of the contested property during its privatisation, they did not intend to stop using the flat. Since there was no arrangement between the owner of the contested property and the defendants regarding the discontinuation of the right to use the property, the court considers that [Mikhail, Dmitriy and Yelena] had a right of use over the flat which was identical [in its scope] to that of the owner; accordingly, there are no legal grounds for allowing [the applicant’s] claim to declare their right of use over the flat terminated.
A change in ownership of the contested property cannot serve as an independent ground for terminating [their] right to use the flat ...
The plaintiff’s argument to the effect that [Mikhail, Dmitriy and Yelena] do not actually live in the contested property cannot serve as an independent ground for terminating [their] right of use over the flat ...
Since the defendants’ right of use over the flat is not terminated, there are no grounds for ordering their eviction ...”
On 27 May 2009 the Lipetsk Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal, endorsing the District Court’s judgment.
Privatisation of residential property is defined as a free transfer of residential properties into the ownership of social tenants in State and municipal housing (sections 1 and 2). Privatisation requires the consent of all resident adult family members and children aged fourteen to eighteen (section 2).
The Civil Code, as in force at the material time, reads as follows:
“1.  Rights of ownership and other proprietary rights to immovable property, restrictions on such rights, their creation, transfer and termination are subject to State registration in the Unified State Register ... The following rights are subject to registration: the right of ownership, the right of economic control, the right of operative management, the right of inheritable possession, the right of permanent use [over a plot of land], mortgages, [praedial] servitudes, and other rights in cases listed in this Code or any other statute ...”
“1.  The court may declare void ex nunc an agreement which was entered into as a consequence of a significant misconception, at the request of the party acting under such a misconception ...”
“1.  Proprietary rights ... are, in particular, the following: the right of inheritable possession to a plot of land ... ; the right of permanent use over a plot of land ... ; [praedial] servitudes ... ; the right of economic control or operative management ...
Proprietary rights may be held by persons other than the owner of the property.
The transfer of ownership of a property shall not be a ground for terminating other proprietary rights to the property ...”
“1.  Members of an owner’s family living in the residential property which he or she owns have a right of use over the property in accordance with the housing laws ...
The transfer of ownership of a residential house or flat to a new owner shall be a ground for terminating the right of use over the residential property held by the family members of the previous owner, unless statute stipulates otherwise.”
The Housing Code, as in force at the material time, reads as follows:
“1.  The owner’s spouse, children and parents living together with the owner in the residential property which he or she owns shall be considered his or her family members ...
The owner’s family members have the right to use the property in the same way as the owner, unless an agreement between the owner and family members stipulates otherwise ...
If a family relationship with the owner of the property breaks down, the former member of the owner’s family does not maintain the right of use over the property unless an agreement between the owner and former family member stipulates otherwise ...”
Section 19 of the Housing Code Enactment Act (Law no. 189-FZ of 29 December 2004) establishes that Article 31 § 4 of the Housing Code does not apply to the former family members of the owner of a privatised residential property, provided that on the date of privatisation the family members and person exercising the right to privatisation had the same right of use over the property in question, unless otherwise provided for by law or contract.
Article 446 § 1 contains a list of the types of property which are immune from enforcement. The first item on the list is residential property owned by a debtor, provided that it is the sole residence of the debtor and his or her family.
The Questions and Answers (Housing law) section of the Supreme Court’s Case-law Review for the Fourth Quarter of 2005 (approved by the Presidium of the Supreme Court on 1 March 2006) reads as follows:
“Question 45. Does a former family member of the owner of a residential property who did not exercise his right to privatisation retain the right of use over the residential property indefinitely after a change in ownership of the property ... ?
... Consent by the individual living together with the property owner is a mandatory condition of privatisation. It must be borne in mind that, by consenting to privatisation of the property, the individual assumed that his right of use over the property would be indefinite; accordingly, his right must be safeguarded during a transfer of ownership to another party. Any other interpretation would be in breach of Article 40 of the Constitution, which establishes that everyone has the right to housing and that no one may be arbitrarily deprived of housing.
... It follows that a former family member who on the date of privatisation had rights identical to those of the person who subsequently became the owner of the property and who did not exercise his right to privatisation but consented to their being exercised by that other person, may not be evicted from the property after a change in ownership because he has a right of use over the property. It is also necessary to mention that [his] right of use over the property is unlimited in time.”
On 2 July 2009 the Plenary Supreme Court of the Russian Federation issued Ruling no. 14 on certain issues arising in judicial practice in the application of the Housing Code of the Russian Federation. It provides, in the relevant part, as follows:
“18.  ... Paragraph 2 of Article 292 of the Civil Code does not apply to former members of the owner’s family ... since, by giving their consent to privatisation of the residential property – [in the absence of] which privatisation would not have been possible ... – they acted on the assumption that they would retain a right of use over the property indefinitely; accordingly, [their right of use over the flat] must be taken into account when ownership of the property is transferred to another person on relevant grounds (for instance, sale-purchase, exchange, giving, reverse mortgage, inheritance).”
On 24 March 2015 the Constitutional Court gave judgment in a case concerning Mr Bogatyrev, who had bought a flat at auction. The original owners, a husband and wife, had purchased the flat from a housing cooperative, and had later used it as collateral to secure repayment of a loan. They defaulted on the loan and the flat was auctioned off and sold to Mr Bogatyrev. However, when he sought the eviction of the former owners and their family members, the courts agreed to evict the parents but not their adult children. Noting that the children had had a right of use over the flat at the time their parents’ title had been registered, the courts held that their right of use was unaffected by a change in ownership.
The Constitutional Court held that section 19 of the Housing Code Enactment Act was incompatible with the Constitution to the extent that it undermined the effective judicial protection of the rights and lawful interests of a purchaser of residential property who was not and could not be aware that there existed family members of the former owner who had retained a right of use over the property. It directed the legislature to establish an appropriate legal framework for securing maximum transparency of information about any rights that third parties may have to a property, including by means of introducing State registration of such rights and interests in property.