The case originated in an application (no. 48929/12) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Bulgarian nationals, Mr Lyudmil Slavov Kopankov (“the first applicant”), Mr Miroslav Kanchev Kopankov (“the second applicant”), Ms Stanka Nikolova Kopankova (“the third applicant”) and Mr Stanislav Lyudmilov Kopankov (“the fourth applicant”, together “the applicants”), on 27 July 2012.
The applicants were represented by Mr P. Kordov, a lawyer practising in Stara Zagora. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Radkova of the Minsitry of Justice.
The applicants complained, in particular, relying on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and Article 13 of the Convention, that they had been unable to receive compensation for property of theirs expropriated in the 1980s for urban development.
On 10 January 2014 the application was communicated to the Government. Further questions were put to the parties on 7 December 2016.
The first and third applicants were born in 1941, the second applicant was born in 1974, and the fourth applicant was born in 1967. The first, second and third applicants live in Kazanlak and the fourth applicant lives in Sofia.
Ms Maria Kopankova and her grandson, the fourth applicant (son of the first applicant) co-owned a house with a garden in Kazanlak. At the time Ms Maria Kopankova lived in the house with her two sons, the first applicant and Mr Kancho Kopankov, and their families, which included the remaining applicants (the second and third applicants are Mr Kancho Kopankov’s wife and son).
By a decision of the town mayor of 18 July 1988 the property was expropriated under the Territorial and Urban Planning Act with a view to constructing a residential building. The decision stated that each of the two owners (Ms Maria Kopankova and the fourth applicant) were to be compensated with a flat in a building which the municipality planned to construct.
After the expropriation the municipal authorities opened a blocked housing savings account with the State Savings Bank in the name of Ms Maria Kopankova and the fourth applicant and transferred to it 13,420 old Bulgarian levs (BGL) – the equivalent of the expropriated property’s value as assessed at the time.
In 1989 Ms Maria Kopankova and the applicants were moved out of the expropriated property and the house was pulled down. Construction work started on the plot of land and the foundations of a future building were laid. However, the site was soon after that abandoned.
Throughout the years that followed Ms Maria Kopankova and the applicants petitioned on many occasions the municipal authorities to provide them with the compensation due, but to no avail. The mayor never took a decision specifying the exact future flats to be offered in compensation (see paragraph 20 below).
In 1998 Ms Maria Kopankova passed away and was succeeded by her sons, the first applicant and Mr Kancho Kopankov. The latter passed away in 2011 and was succeeded by the second and third applicants.
On 16 February 2009 the applicants and Mr Kancho Kopankov made a request to the mayor under section 9(2) of the transitional provisions of the Territorial Planning Act of 2001 (hereinafter “section 9(2)”) for the revocation of the expropriation order of 18 July 1988. As no response followed, they applied for judicial review of the mayor’s tacit refusal.
The Stara Zagora Administrative Court (hereinafter “the Administrative Court”) gave a judgment on 27 May 2010. It found, firstly, that the fourth applicant and Ms Maria Kopankova, and subsequently her heirs, had not received the compensation due to them, namely two flats. It pointed out in this connection that the transfer of money to a blocked housing savings account in their name (see paragraph 8 above) was not equivalent to the provision of compensation. The Administrative Court found further that the authorities had not “taken possession” of the applicants’ property, within the meaning of section 9(2), because there had been no formal decision to take possession (as had been required at the time), and because in any event the construction work which had started on the plot had eventually been abandoned. Thus, the preconditions for the revocation of the 1988 expropriation under section 9(2) had been fulfilled. On that basis the Administrative Court quashed the mayor’s tacit refusal and revoked the expropriation order.
The judgment above was not appealed against and became final.
In 2011 the applicants brought a tort action against the Kazanlak municipality under section 1 of the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act (see paragraph 23 below). They claimed the value of the house and of other objects (such as trees, the pavement and outbuildings) which had stood on the plot of land and had been destroyed, but for which they had never received any compensation. The applicants also made claims in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
In the context of the ensuing proceedings the Administrative Court, examining the case, appointed experts, who estimated the value of the house and the remaining objects at 37,868 new Bulgarian levs (BGN – the equivalent of approximately 19,370 euros (EUR)).
In a decision of 26 January 2012 the Administrative Court found the applicants’ claims inadmissible and refused to examine them on the merits. It reasoned that the applicants’ situation had been regulated by sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the transitional provisions of the Territorial Planning Act of 2001 (see paragraph 22 below, hereinafter “section 9(1)” and “section 9(2)”), and that the existence of such a special avenue of redress meant that the general tort provisions of the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act did not apply.
These conclusions were upheld in a final decision of 20 April 2012 of the Supreme Administrative Court, which added that since the expropriation of the applicants’ property had been quashed and the expropriation proceedings completed, the municipality could not be liable for any damage stemming from these proceedings. It pointed out in addition that the applicants’ claims did not fall to be examined by the civil courts, under the general rules of tort, and that the administrative courts remained competent to examine them, even though the claims were inadmissible. It thus refused to apply Article 135 § 2 of the Code of Administrative Procedure (see paragraph 25 below) and transfer the case to the civil courts, as the applicants had requested.
The relevant domestic law in force until 1996-98 concerning the expropriation of property for public use and the provision of compensation, especially under the Territorial and Urban Planning Act 1973 (Закон за териториално и селищно устройство), as well and the relevant domestic practice, have been summarised in the Court’s judgments in Kirilova and Others v. Bulgaria (nos. 42908/98 and 3 others, §§ 7279, 9 June 2005) and Lazarov v. Bulgaria (no. 21352/02, §§ 19-20, 22 May 2008). Between 1990 and 1998 the relevant provisions of the Territorial and Urban Planning Act were gradually superseded by other legislation, but it was provided that they would continue to govern expropriation proceedings which had already started.
In particular, the rules above provided that expropriations were to be effected by decisions of a mayor, which had to designate the property to be expropriated and its value, and to specify the manner (property or cash) and amount of compensation due to the dispossessed owner. Where compensation was in the form of other property in lieu, a subsequent supplementary decision of the mayor had to designate the exact property to be given.
In the case of compensation in the form of a flat which was yet to be built, a blocked account was to be opened in the name of the owners with the State Savings Bank and an amount corresponding to the estimated value of the expropriated property was to be deposited in that account. The owners could not withdraw or otherwise use this sum, which was intended to cover, usually in part only, the value of the property to be provided in compensation.
The Territorial Planning Act (Закон за устройство на територията), in force since 2001, contained provisions aimed at finalising expropriation proceedings which had commenced under the Territorial and Urban Planning Act 1973 and had not yet been completed. Section 9(2) of its transitional provisions provided, in particular, that the owners of expropriated property who had not yet received the compensation due to them, and where the authorities had not yet taken possession of the expropriated property, could apply to have the respective expropriation decision revoked. After such a revocation the expropriation proceedings would be closed. Where the authorities had already taken possession of the expropriated property, the former owners could seek under section 9(1) monetary compensation in lieu of compensation in the form of other property. The Supreme Administrative Court has constantly stated that the two provisions are applicable in different circumstances, their applicability depending on whether the authorities have taken possession or not of the expropriated property (Решение № 11381 от 12.12.2002 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 7793/2002 г., II о.; Решение № 9432 от 16.11.2004 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 5152/2004 г., IV о.; Решение № 7342 от 04.06.2009 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 2627/2009 г., II о.; Решение № 15201 от 19.11.2013 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 14811/2012 г., III о.). Requests under sections 9(1) and 9(2) are to be addressed to the mayor of the respective municipality, whose decisions or tacit refusals are subject to judicial review.
Section 1 of the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act (Закон за отговорността на държавата и общините за вреди) provides that the State and the municipalities are liable for damage suffered by private persons as a result of their unlawful decisions or actions committed in the course of or in connection with the performance of their duties. Such claims are examined by the administrative courts, under the rules of the Code of Administrative Procedure.
By contrast, where a tort claim concerns actions of the State or the municipalities which are not related to the exercise of public power (but, for example, to private-law transactions), it is to be examined by the civil courts, under the general rules of tort law.
Article 135 § 2 of the Code of Administrative Procedure provides that where an administrative court concludes that it is not competent to examine a case of which it is seized, it is to transfer it to the tribunal which is competent to do so. On those grounds, the administrative courts have regularly transferred cases brought under the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act to the respective civil courts, considering that those cases did not concern actions of the State or the municipalities related to the exercise of public power and were to be examined under the general rules of tort (see, for example, Определение № 300 от 31.05.2012 г. на АдмС – Пазарджик по адм. д. № 414/2012 г.; Определение № 2892 от 22.06.2012 г. на АдмС – София по адм. д. № 5875/2012 г.).