The case originated in an application (no. 5334/11) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Bulgarian nationals, Ms Donka Ivanova Krasteva (“the first applicant”), Ms Maria Maksimova Piskova (“the second applicant”), Ms Angelina Delova PiskovaIndzhova (“the third applicant”) and Ms Iskra Delcheva Piskova (“the fourth applicant”) (together “the applicants”), on 17 December 2010.
The applicants were represented by Ms M. Hristova and Ms A. Gavrilova-Ancheva, lawyers practising in Sofia. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that they had been unfairly deprived of their title to a plot of land.
On 26 May 2015 the complaint above was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants were born in 1932, 1929, 1965 and 1956 respectively and live in Sofia.
On 15 January 1968 the second applicant, together with the antecedents of the other applicants, bought from the then existing local agricultural co-operative a plot of land situated on the outskirts of Sofia measuring 953 square metres. Until 2002 the applicants or their antecedents enjoyed undisturbed possession of that land.
On 10 May 2002 a group of persons, the heirs of Mr T.S., Mr G.S. and Ms K.S., brought against the applicants a rei vindicatio action, stating that the plot of land was theirs. They stated that the plot, once the property of their antecedents, had been collectivised in the years after 1945, but had been returned to them within the context of the process of the restitution of agricultural land by a decision of the relevant body, the local land commission, dated 27 December 1999. They claimed that under section 10(13) of the Agricultural Land Act (see paragraph 13 below), the fact that the second applicant and the remaining applicants’ antecedents had purchased the land in 1968 could not be held against them.
Initially, the Sofia District Court (its judgement is undated) dismissed the action against the applicants. After an appeal by the heirs of Mr T.S., Mr G.S. and Ms K.S., on 5 November 2009 the Sofia City Court overturned that ruling, allowed the rei vindicatio claim and ordered the applicants to surrender possession of the plot. It found in particular that the land commission’s decision of 27 December 1999 was sufficient to render the claimants the owners of the disputed land. It pointed out that of the two rival claims to the same plot the law – namely section 10(13) of the Agricultural Land Act – gave priority to the one based on restitution, and thus had the effect of rendering devoid of any legal force the contract under which the second applicant and the remaining applicants’ predecessors had bought the plot.
In a final decision of 18 June 2010 the Supreme Court of Cassation declined to entertain a cassation appeal by the applicants.
On an unspecified date soon after that the applicants surrendered possession of the plot.
The Agricultural Land Act (Закон за собствеността и ползването на земеделските земи) was enacted in 1991. It entitled individuals whose land had been collectivised (or their heirs) to request ‒ in certain circumstances ‒ the restoration of their ownership.
.  At the time of its enactment the Agricultural Land Act did not expressly address situations where restitution was sought in respect of plots which had been acquired by third parties after the collectivisation process. In an interpretative decision of 25 June 1996 (Тълкувателно решение № 2 от 25.VI.1996 г. по гр. д. № 2/96 г., ОСГК) the former Supreme Court found that in situations where post-collectivisation buyers had acted in good faith and their title was not otherwise defective, their rights would prevail over the rights of parties subsequently claiming restitution. It held that:
“[t]he legal effect of valid sale contracts, in accordance with the legislation in force at the time, excludes the right of former owners to obtain restitution of agricultural land ...”
.  The situation changed in 1997, when Parliament added subsection 13 to section 10 to the Agricultural Land Act. The new provision stipulated that former owners’ rights to plots which had not been built on were to be restored even in cases where the land in question had been sold or transferred to third parties. It also provided that those third parties could not rely on acquisitive prescription.
.  In a judgment of 14 November 2000 (Решение № 13 от 14 ноември 2000 г. по к. д. № 11/2000 г.) the Constitutional Court dealt with the compatibility of section 10(13) with the constitutional provisions guaranteeing the right to property. It found that it was compatible with these provisions, pointing out that the owners of land occupied by agricultural cooperatives “had never lost their property rights” but during a certain period of time “had merely been unable to exercise them”; that is why any contracts transferring their land could not be held against them, regardless of whether or not the third parties acquiring the land had acted in good faith. As to the provision that third parties who had acquired land could not rely on acquisitive prescription, the Constitutional Court held:
“Through that provision, the legislature has given precedence to the rights of owners of agricultural land included in [agricultural co-operatives] who by virtue of that [act of inclusion] were deprived of the possibility of exercising their property rights and preventing the possible acquisition of their land by third parties through adverse possession over [the rights of] those who have acquired it through such adverse possession.
The [Constitutional] Court finds that a fair balance between the conflicting fundamental constitutional rights has thus been achieved.”
.  Even before the judgment mentioned above, in several earlier judgments the Constitutional Court took the view that the collectivisation of agricultural land had not extinguished the owners’ property rights, but had merely created obstacles to their exercise (Решение № 6 от 5 юли 1992 г. по к. д. № 9/92 г.; Решение № 8 от 19 юни 1995 г. по к. д. № 12/95 г.).
.  However, before 1989 it was considered that agricultural cooperatives could validly sell land to private individuals (Тълкувателно решение № 16 от 11.III.1977 г. по гр. д. № 86/76 г., ОСГК). Moreover, the former Supreme Court found during that period that upon collectivisation co-operatives had become the owners of collectivised land and that former owners’ rights had become extinguished (Решение № 314 от 25.II.1966 г. по гр. д. № 2484/66 г., I гр. о.; Решение № 2119 от 31.X.1966 г. по гр. д. № 1502/66 г., I гр. о.).