The case originated in an application (no. 38677/06) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Vladimir Vasilyevich Budchenko (“the applicant”), on 11 September 2006.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr M. Tarakhkalo, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv, Ukraine. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr N. Kulchytskyy, of the Ministry of Justice of .
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the courts had failed to grant him an exemption from electricity and gas payments as required by law.
On 25 August 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1932 and lives in the town of Gorlivka, Ukraine.
From 1953 to 1966 the applicant worked in a mine.
In 2001-2002 the applicant asked the Lenin Mine (his former employer) and the State mining enterprise Artemvugillya (the Lenin Mine’s legal successor) to explain to him how section 43 of the Mining Act (“Гірничий закон”) (see “Relevant domestic law” below) was to be implemented, and to pay his electricity and gas costs in accordance with this provision. In reply he was informed that persons who were entitled to receive coal free of charge but were living in houses with central heating had the right to exemption from electricity and gas payments, such costs being borne by the mining companies. However, no appropriate legal mechanisms implementing “the methods of calculation and the sources of financing” had been adopted by the Cabinet of Ministers.
In 2003 the applicant complained to a prosecutor’s office that his requests to have his electricity and gas payments covered had been ignored. In a letter dated 13 February 2003 from the Tsentralno-Miskyy District Prosecutor’s Office, the applicant was informed that he was entitled to exemption from electricity and gas payments. Since the Lenin Mine had refused to accept his claims owing to the lack of funds and no compensation mechanism was provided for by law, the applicant was advised to lodge his claims with the court.
In April 2003 the applicant instituted proceedings in the Tsentralno-Miskyy District Court against the State mining enterprise Artemvugillya and local communal heating and gas providers. He claimed that under section 43 of the Mining Act the mine should cover his electricity and gas costs by means of contributions paid into the local budget. He also claimed reimbursement of amounts already paid and asked that the State mining enterprise Artemvugillya settle his heating and gas debts. The applicant also claimed compensation for non-pecuniary damage. He updated his claims in 2004.
On 7 April 2004 the Tsentralno-Miskyy District Court found against the applicant. The court held that the applicant had worked in a mine for more than ten years and thus was entitled to receive free coal for everyday domestic needs. As he lived in a house with central heating, section 43-8 of the Mining Act should apply in his case. However, no mechanism was in place for the implementation of that provision. In particular, there was no procedure for transferring funds from mining enterprises to the local budget. The court also held that the applicant’s request for reimbursement of the amounts already paid had no basis in law.
On 29 July 2004 the Donetsk Regional Court of Appeal upheld that decision.
On 4 April 2006 the Supreme Court rejected an appeal on points of law by the applicant.
In a decision of 1 December 2006 the Tsentralno-Miskyy District Court ordered the applicant to settle his heating debts, noting that section 43 of the Mining Act did not exempt him from paying for heating services. That decision was upheld on 26 June 2007 by the Donetsk Regional Court of Appeal. On 23 October 2007 the Supreme Court of Ukraine rejected a request by the applicant for leave to appeal on points of law.
In a letter dated 4 November 2008 the Gorlivka Town Council informed the applicant that at that date no mechanism had been set up to handle the compensatory payments requested by him.
In letters dated 14 May and 2 July 2009 the Ministry of the Coal Industry of Ukraine informed the applicant that the mechanism for implementing section 43-8 of the Mining Act would be set up pursuant to a corresponding decision by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine.
In a letter dated 17 August 2009 the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy of Ukraine informed the applicant that on 12 August 2009 the Cabinet of Ministers had adopted the corresponding decision, which was subject to approval by the Ministry of Finance.
In a letter dated 4 August 2010 the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy informed the applicant that he had no right to any compensation payments as the mine where he had been working in was in liquidation.
In October 2010 the applicant instituted court proceedings against the Tsentralno-Miskyy Department of Labour and Social Policy of the Gorlivka Town Council requesting recognition of his rights under sections 43-7 and 43-8 of the Mining Act and a declaration that the Department’s inactivity was unlawful.
On 1 November 2010 the Donetskyy Regional Administrative Court refused to examine the applicant’s claim and informed him that it should be lodged before a court of general jurisdiction. That decision was upheld on 7 December 2010 and on 28 September 2011 by the Donetsk Administrative Court of Appeal and by the Higher Administrative Court respectively.
The Mining Act entered into force on 1 December 1999. Parts 7 and 8 of section 43 of the Act that were in force before 2 September 2008 read as follows:
Section 43. Rights and social guarantees of employees of mining enterprises
“Coal-mining enterprises shall provide free coal for everyday domestic needs in the amount determined by collective agreement for the following categories of persons:
pensioners who have worked in coal-mining enterprises for 10 years (men) and 7.5 years (women)...
Persons who have the right to receive free coal but live in houses with central heating shall be exempted from paying for electricity and gas, those costs being borne by the coal-mining (processing) enterprises, which shall transfer the funds to cover the costs to the local budget.”
Pursuant to the “Transitional provisions” Chapter of the Mining Act, the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine had to adopt the relevant legal mechanisms with a view to implementing the Act’s provisions within four months of the date of the Act’s entry into force.
In 2008 section 43-8 was amended as following:
“Persons who have a right to receive free coal but live in houses with central heating shall receive compensation for electricity, gas and heating payments by way of contributions paid from the State budget to the local budget.”
The procedure for granting the above compensation was determined by a decision of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (no. 887 of 12 August 2009).