The case originated in an application (no. 18108/03) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Ms Gabriela Edit Friedrich (“the applicant”), on
The applicant was represented by Mrs Claudia Vasii-Kolla, a lawyer practising in . The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Răzvan-Horaţiu Radu.
On 27 February 2006 the President of the Third Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1932 and lives in .
In 1950, a building situated in Timişoara, Spl. N. Titulescu no. 7, which was the property of the applicant’s husband and mother-in-law, was seized by the State under Decree no. 92/1950 on nationalisation.
On 26 May 1999 by a final decision the Timişoara Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) allowed an action by the applicant for rectification in the Land Register, acknowledged that the nationalisation of the building had been unlawful and ordered restitutio in integrum through the registration of the applicant’s right of property. It considered that the fact that some apartments in the building had been bought by the tenants had no influence on the solution, as the object of the proceedings was the validity of the State’s title and the titles of the buyers were therefore to be evaluated in another set of proceedings.
On 30 September and 30 November 1999 the Timişoara Town Council certified in an official record signed by the applicant that the latter had been allowed to take possession of the building, made up of thirty-one apartments, and of 29.28 sq. m piece of appurtenant land.
On 26 January 2000 the applicant sold flat no. 11 of the building to M.M. and M.D.
On 27 April 2000 O.E., the then tenant of flat no. 11, requested the court to declare the sale null and void, as on 16 January 1997 she had bought that flat from the State under Law no. 112/1995. She also claimed the registration of her right of property in the Land Register.
The applicant lodged a counterclaim requesting the court to declare the sale by the State null and void.
On 20 November 2001 by a final decision the Court of Appeal declared the sale made by the applicant null and void, as it contravened O.E.’s rights, and dismissed the claim by O.E. to register her right of property, as she had not expressly applied to remove the applicant’s title from the Land Register. It also dismissed the applicant’s request for the rescission of the sale by the State on the grounds that O.E. had made the purchase in good faith.
On 4 November 2002 by a final decision the Court of Appeal allowed O.E.’s action for rectification in the Land Register, registered her right of property in respect of flat no. 11 and removed the applicant’s title from the Land Register. The court compared the land titles and considered that the sale by the State had complied with the provisions of
The relevant legal provisions and jurisprudence are described in the judgments Brumărescu v. Romania ([GC], no. 28342/95, §§ 31-33,