The case originated in an application (no. 16259/90) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Cypriot nationals, Mrs Anna Diogenous and Mrs Pandora Tseriotis (“the applicants”), on 23 February 1990.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Demetriades, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z.M. Necatigil.
The applicants alleged that the Turkish occupation of the northern part of  had deprived them of their home and properties.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
By a decision of 8 June 1999 the Court declared the application admissible.
The applicants and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). In addition, third-party comments were received from the Government of Cyprus, which had exercised its right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b)).
The applicants, who are sisters, were born in 1947 and 1952 respectively and live in .
The applicants alleged that their mother, Mrs Lia Lellou Tserioti, had acquired the ownership of the plot of land no. 119 (registration no. 1204, sheet/plan XII/20.E.1, Block D, area: 725 square metres) in the District of Kyrenia in northern . Before 20 July 1974 the applicants' family constructed on this plot, which was located on the beach of Akti Kimonos, a fully furnished three storey house which they used as a secondary residence. This house consisted of 2 garages/playroom/beach facilities on the sea level, a living-dining area with a fire-place, one bedroom, a shower, a kitchen and a large covered veranda on the upper ground floor, four bedrooms with a bathroom on the first floor. In February 1985, the applicants' mother donated the property to her two daughters in equal shares.
In support of their claim to ownership, the applicants produced affirmation certificates issued by the Government of Cyprus.
Since 1974 the applicants had been prevented from having access to and using their house. In particular, they had been prevented from living in it with their family. The applicants alleged that the house had been subsequently occupied by officers and/or other members of the Turkish military forces.