The case originated in an application (no. 55747/16) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Maltese national, Mr Victor Portanier (“the applicant”), on 19 September 2016.
The applicant was represented by Dr I. Refalo, Dr M. Refalo and Dr S. Grech, lawyers practising in Valletta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicant alleged that he was still a victim of the violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 upheld by the Constitutional Court given the low amount of compensation awarded. He also considered that there had been a breach of Article 13 in so far as the Constitutional Court was not an effective remedy as shown by its recurring practice.
On 4 September 2018 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1931 and lives in Swieqi.
The applicant holds the perpetual utile dominium of an apartment in Depiro Street Sliema.
On 5 December 1974 the applicant (and his now late wife) had entered into a contract of subemphyteusis with couple P. for seventeen years at a subground rent of 140 Maltese lira (MTL), approximately 326 euros (EUR), annually. On 10 December 1991 the applicant (and his now late wife) prolonged the contract for another seventeen years, this time at a ground rent of MTL 313, approximately EUR 729 annually.
In 2008 on the expiry of the subemphyteusis, couple P. claimed that by operation of law (Section 12 of Act XXIII of 1979 amending Chapter 158 of the Laws of Malta, the Housing (Decontrol) Ordinance  hereinafter “the Ordinance”), that contract was converted into one of lease. According to law the applicable rent payable by couple P. was EUR 1,186.46 annually.
The applicant and his now late wife (the claimants) instituted constitutional redress proceedings claiming that the provisions of law  which granted an emphyteuta or sub-emphyteuta the right to retain possession of the premises under a lease  imposed on them as owners a unilateral lease relationship for an indeterminate time without reflecting a fair and adequate rent, in breach of, inter alia, Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
By a judgment of 27 October 2016 the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional competence rejected the claims. It considered that when the claimants prolonged the contract of sub-emphyteusis, the 1979 amendments were already in place and thus they could not complain about their effects which had been foreseeable at the time.
The applicant’s wife having passed away pending proceedings, the applicant appealed, relying on Zammit and Attard Cassar v. Malta, (no. 1046/12, 30 July 2015).
By a judgment of 29 April 2016 the Constitutional Court reversed the firstinstance judgment in respect of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and upheld a breach of the applicant’s property rights.
The Constitutional Court found that the claimants had not had a free choice in 1991, since their options at the time were either to renew the subemphyteusis or to transform it into a lease which carried less favourable conditions. Prior to that, when they entered the contract of subemphyteusis in 1974, they expected to get back their property in 1991. This did not happen due to the relevant amendments in the law.
While the interference had been in accordance with the law and pursued a public interest, it could not be said to be proportionate. According to the applicant’s architect, in 2009 the apartment had a sale value of EUR 198,000 and a rent value of EUR 608.19 monthly or EUR 7,298.28 annually. It was of relevance that couple P. had made improvements to the apartment, and yet according to the applicant’s architect the apartment in 2013 was valued for the purposes of sale at EUR 100,000 bearing in mind that it had been leased for a long time. In his view had it been free from lease it would be worth EUR 140,000. According to a courtappointed expert the sale value in 2014 was EUR 152,000. Relying on the sale value of the courtappointed expert the Constitutional Court considered that the rental value must have been around EUR 5,600 annually. When taking into account the improvements made by couple P. and the fact that the property might not have been constantly rented out, the Constitutional Court considered that a fair rent would be between EUR 3,000 and 4,000 annually. Under the contract of lease, couple P. were paying EUR 1,186.46 which, in light of the public interest of the measure, was not entirely disproportionate, amounting as it did to around half of its real rental value. However, the law left little possibility of the applicant ever recovering his property, and the increase in rent every three years, according to law, was of no comfort given that it only reflected inflation increases. Moreover, there existed no mechanism to establish a fair rent in the light of the needs of the owner versus those of the lessee. It followed that Section 12 of the Ordinance did not respect the principle of proportionality required by the Convention and the applicant’s property rights were therefore breached.
The Constitutional Court, bearing in mind that the applicant was due damages since 2008, awarded him EUR 2,500 covering pecuniary and nonpecuniary damage. The Constitutional Court considered that it was not necessary to evict the tenants, but held that the tenants could not rely on Section 12 of the Ordinance to claim title to the property. One sixth of the costs of the entire proceedings (amounting to EUR 1,291.15) were to be paid by the applicant.
On 14 July 2016 the applicant instituted proceedings to evict couple P. By a final judgment of 30 May 2017 the Civil Court (First Hall) in its ordinary competence found in favour of the applicant who obtained the repossession of his property in September 2017. The court found in favour of the applicant on the basis of the order made by the Constitutional Court and the fact that the tenants had no other title to the property.
The domestic law relevant to the time of the present case in relation to the conversion from temporary emphyteusis to lease by means of the operation of Act XXIII of 1979 is set out in Amato Gauci v. Malta (no. 47045/06, §§ 19-25, 15 September 2009).
After the facts of the present case, Act XVIII introducing relevant amendments came into force and in so far as relevant, Section 12B of Chapter 158 of the Laws of Malta, now reads as follows:
“(1) Where a person is in occupation of a dwelling house under title of lease created by virtue of a previous title of emphyteusis or sub-emphyteusis which commenced before the 1st June 1995 through the application of article 5, 12, or 12A the following conditions shall, insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the said articles of this Ordinance apply in respect of such lease as from, the 10th April 2018 notwithstanding the provisions of the said articles of the Ordinance or of any other law.
(2) The owner shall be entitled to file an application before the Rent Regulation Board demanding that the rent be revised to an amount not exceeding two percent per annum of the open market freehold value of the dwelling house on the 1st January of the year during which the application is filed and that new conditions be established in respect of the lease.
(3) The procedure applicable to the hearing of applications before the Rent Regulation Board shall apply to the hearing of an application made under subarticle (1):
Provided that:
(i) the Housing Authority shall be notified with the application and shall have a right to fully participate as amicus curiae in the proceedings; and
(ii) the tenant and the landlord shall always be entitled to the benefit of legal aid in proceedings filed in terms of this article if they are not in full-time gainful employment; and
(iii) at the initial stage of the proceedings the Board shall conduct a means test of the tenant which shall be based on the means test provided for in the Continuation of Tenancies (Means Testing Criteria) Regulations issued under articles 1531F and 1622A of the Civil Code or any regulations from time to time replacing them.
The means test shall be based on the income of the tenant between the 1st January and the 31st December of the year preceding the year when the proceedings are commenced and the capital of the tenant on the 31st December of the said year. The means test shall be conducted with particular reference, inter alia, to regulations 4 to 8 of the said regulations which shall apply mutatis mutandis.
(4) Where the tenant does not meet the income and capital criteria of the means test the Board shall, after hearing any evidence and submissions produced by the parties, give judgement allowing the tenant a period of five years to vacate the premises. The compensation for occupation of the premises payable to the owner during the said period shall amount to double the rent which would have been payable in terms of articles 5, 12 or 12A.
(5) Where the tenant meets the income and capital criteria of the means test the Board shall proceed according to the following sub-articles.
(6) In establishing the amount of rent payable in accordance with sub-article (1) the Board shall give due account to the means and age of the tenant and to any disproportionate burden particular to the landlord and it may determine that any increase in rent shall be gradual. The Board, after briefly hearing the parties and examining any evidence which it considers relevant, may also order that an increased amount of rent be paid whilst the hearing of an application filed in terms of subarticle (1) is pending.
(7) Where an amount of rent is established in terms of sub article (1) that rent shall apply in respect of the lease of the dwelling house, unless the lease is previously terminated, for a period of six years, after which it shall be subject to being revised in accordance with sub-article (1) unless an agreement is reached between the parties.
(8) (a) Upon the happening of a material change in circumstances during the continuance of a lease established in accordance with article 5, 12 or 12A the owner shall be entitled to file an application before the Board demanding that the conditions of the lease be revised on account of their causing a disproportionate burden upon him.
(b) The owner may also demand the dissolution of the lease if he can prove through unequivocal evidence that the tenant is not a person in need of the social protection provided by articles 5, 12 or 12A and by this article:
Provided that:
(i) the provisions of paragraph (a) of this sub-article shall not apply where the hearing of an application under sub-article (1) is pending or has been determined for less than three years;
(ii) the tenant shall always be deemed to be a person not in need of the social protection provided by articles 5, 12, 12A and by this article if the Housing Authority or the landlord offer alternative accommodation suitable to the tenant and guarantees the availability of such accommodation to the tenant for at least ten years for a rent which is not in excess of that which would have been payable by the tenant had the tenant continued the lease under articles 5, 12 or 12A.
(9) (a) Any person who has a right to be recognised as a tenant in terms of the proviso to the definition "tenant" in article 2 shall, unless the said is a person referred to in paragraph (a) of the said definition, only acquire a right to occupy the dwelling house for a period of five years upon the expiration of which he shall vacate the said dwelling house. The compensation for occupation of the dwelling house payable to the owner during the said period shall, unless the occupier meets the income and capital criteria of the means test referred to in paragraph (iii) of sub-article (3), amount to double the rent which would have been payable in terms of articles 5, 12 or 12A.
(b) Any dispute as to whether the occupier meets the criteria of the means test may be referred by either party to the Board by application and the provisions of subarticle (3) shall apply.
(10) The provisions of article 1555A of the Civil Code shall apply in respect of any lease which came into effect by virtue of articles 5, 12, 12A or this article.
(11) The provisions of this article shall also apply in all cases where any emphyteusis, sub-emphyteusis or tenancy in respect of a dwelling house regulated under articles 5, 12, or 12A has lapsed due to a court judgment based on the lack of proportionality between the value of the property and the amount receivable by the landlord and the person who was the emphyteuta or the sub-emphyteuta or the tenant still occupies the house as his ordinary residence on the 10th April 2018. In such cases it shall not be lawful for the owner to proceed to request the eviction of the occupier without first availing himself of the provisions of this article.”