The case originated in an application (no. 13296/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Igor Aleksandrovich Lapin, on 25 April 2003.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by the former Representatives of the  at the European Court of Human Rights, Mr P. Laptev and Mrs V. Milinchuk.
The applicant alleged initially that the competent domestic authorities had failed to comply with a final and binding judgment in his favour and that he had been unsuccessful in various court proceedings against the Ministry of the Defence. Subsequently the applicant also complained that the military prosecution authorities had put pressure on him in connection with his application to the Court.
On 5 September 2006 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in the town of .
The applicant is a retired serviceman. On an unspecified date in 2002 he applied to the commander of military unit no. 19689 and requested documents confirming his priority rights to housing at the place of his choice in connection with his retirement. The applicant also asked for relevant documents which would enable him to get a State housing certificate. This document would allow him to claim a pecuniary compensation from the State partly covering the cost of acquiring the housing of the applicant’s choice.
Having faced the refusal, the applicant then applied to the courts in this connection. By final judgment of the Moscow Regional Military Court of 20 January 2004 the applicant’s claim was granted. The court decided that:
“... the commander of military unit [no. 19689] must prepare the relevant documents and make an application to the competent official for the applicant to be put on the priority list of persons in need of housing ... and ... prepare the relevant documents so that [the applicant] could subsequently receive the State housing certificate for acquisition of housing at the place of his choice ...”
On 10 March 2004 the  issued the applicant with an enforcement writ and by decision of 6 April 2004 the competent bailiffs instituted enforcement proceedings and demanded military unit no. 19689 to comply with it.
By decision of 4 June 2004 the bailiffs considered the court judgment in question had been enforced and discontinued the proceedings accordingly.
On 25 August 2004 the Souzdal District Court of the Vladimir Region quashed the bailiffs’ decision of 4 June 2004 as premature.
On 9 September 2004 the enforcement proceedings were again resumed.
On 25 August 2005 the applicant’s family was entered into the list of priority housing of military unit no. 19689.
On 5 June 2006 the applicant and his family of five was entered as the first candidate into the waiting list of the recipients of the State housing certificate of military unit no. 19689 for the year 2006 with the city of Moscow as the chosen place of future residence.
On 15 November 2006 the enforcement proceedings were terminated, since the judgment in question has been complied with in full.
On 27 November 2006 the applicant was issued with the State housing certificate. He refused to receive it, claiming that the certificate did not cover the entire cost of the flat and that the Ministry of Defence should now resolve his housing problem at its own expense in full.
By letters of 11 May, 5 June, 19 July 2007 the applicant submitted that on 17 April 2007 he had been invited to the Military Prosecutor’s Office for “explanations”.
The respondent Government submitted that this had been unrelated to the proceedings before this Court, since the competent military authorities had been under the impression that the applicant, an active serviceman, evaded his work-related duties.
In relation to those allegations, on 30 March 2007 an investigator of the Tver Military Prosecutor’s office issued a decision not to institute criminal proceedings.
This decision was quashed on 28 May 2007 and, following an additional investigation, the investigator again decided not to institute criminal proceedings in this connection for the lack of evidence of any crime.
The applicant was also unsuccessful in three sets of court proceedings against various military authorities and the Ministry of Defence, which ended with final judgments dated 4 February, 4 March 2003 and 18 January 2005 respectively.
According to Articles 13, 209 and 338 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Гражданский процессуальный кодекс РСФСР), in force at the material time, a court judgment, which has become final, is binding and must be executed.
Section 9 of the Law on Enforcement Proceedings of 21 July 1997 (Закон об исполнительном производстве) provides that a bailiff’s order on the institution of enforcement proceedings shall fix a time-limit for the defendant’s voluntary compliance with the writ of execution. The time-limit cannot exceed five days. The bailiff shall also warn the defendant that coercive action will follow, should the defendant fail to comply within the time-limit.
Government’s Decree no. 168 dated 19 March 2002 defined a State housing certificate as an official document confirming personal entitlement of a participant of the relevant State programme to receive a social benefit in the form of a sum of money from the Federal budget for the acquisition of a residence/housing.