The case originated in an application (no. 41845/12) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lebanese and Guatemalan national, Mr Lorence El Ozair (“the applicant”), on 18 May 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr S.D. Lungu, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr V. Mocanu of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 29 May 2018 the Government were given notice of the complaint concerning an alleged breach of the applicant’s right to respect for his possessions on account of the sanctions imposed on him by the Customs Office for failure to declare a sum of cash upon exiting the country. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court dismisses it.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Bucharest.
In the night of 16-17 October 2010, prior to embarking a flight to Lebanon, the applicant was stopped by a customs officer before exiting the customs control area. When asked, the applicant declared that he was carrying 13,500 US dollars (USD), that is to say a little less than the maximum amount allowed of 10,000 euros (EUR) (see paragraph 13 below). His luggage was searched by the customs officer in the applicant’s presence. An additional sum of USD 80,000 was found hidden in a shoe.
The money found in the luggage was confiscated on the spot and the applicant was fined 8,000 Romanian lei (RON), approximately EUR 1,800 at that time.
On 2 November 2010 the applicant lodged an application with the Buftea District Court, seeking annulment of the administrative-offence report. He argued that he had that money from selling a car and his share in a flat in Bucharest. He presented copies of the respective sales contracts.
The District Court dismissed the action in a decision of 15 March 2011. The court established that the applicant had intended to hide the amount of USD 80,000 in order to avoid declaring it. The court further considered that the fine inflicted on the applicant had been proportionate to the seriousness of the deed and reiterated that the confiscation of the amount over the legal limit of EUR 10,000 was expressly provided by law and was thus mandatory.
The applicant appealed, and in a final decision of 19 January 2012 the Bucharest County Court upheld the previous decision on the same grounds as those given by the District Court. As for the sanctions applied, the court found as follows:
“Even assuming that this sum of cash is not related to any illegal activity, as [the applicant] avers, this fact is irrelevant, in so far as the legislature criminalised the very act of failing to declare in writing, to the Customs Office, sums of cash of a value equal or more than that set by [the relevant EU] Regulation, independent of the source of that sum of cash.
As for the penalty applied, the court considers that it was correctly individualised, bearing in mind the seriousness of the deeds committed.”
The relevant provisions of Government Decision no. 707/2006 on the Rules of enforcement of the Customs Code read as follows:
Article 653
“The following is considered an administrative offence and shall be sanctioned with a fine between [RON] 3,000 and 8,000 ...:
...
(i)  failure by natural persons who cross the border to abide by the obligation prescribed under Article (3) of Regulation (EC) No 1889/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council, to declare in writing to the customs authorities of cash in national and/or foreign currency equal or higher than the limit prescribed by that Regulation, carried upon themselves, in their means of transportation or in their attended or unattended luggage, as well as in parcels. Cash undeclared in writing and exceeding the limit prescribed by [Regulation (EC) No 1889/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council] shall be confiscated.”
A comprehensive presentation of the relevant provisions of EU law and practice and of the international standards on money laundering can be found in Grifhorst v. France (no. 28336/02, §§ 27-56, 26 February 2009).
In particular, the relevant provisions of Regulation (EC) no I1889/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2005 on controls of cash entering or leaving the Community read as follows:
Article 3
Obligation to declare
“1.  Any natural person entering or leaving the Community and carrying cash of a value of EUR 10 000 or more shall declare that sum to the competent authorities of the Member State through which he is entering or leaving the Community in accordance with this Regulation. The obligation to declare shall not have been fulfilled if the information provided is incorrect or incomplete.”
Article 4
Powers of the competent authorities
“1.  In order to check compliance with the obligation to declare laid down in Article 3, officials of the competent authorities shall be empowered, in accordance with the conditions laid down under national legislation, to carry out controls on natural persons, their baggage and their means of transport.
In the event of failure to comply with the obligation to declare laid down in Article 3, cash may be detained by administrative decision in accordance with the conditions laid down under national legislation.”
Article 9
Penalties
“1.  Each Member State shall introduce penalties to apply in the event of failure to comply with the obligation to declare laid down in Article 3. Such penalties shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
By 15 June 2007, Member States shall notify the Commission of the penalties applicable in the event of failure to comply with the obligation to declare laid down in Article 3.”
In addition on 30 January 2019 the Court of Justice of the European Union (“the CJEU”) examined an application for a preliminary ruling on whether national legislation allowing, in addition to the imposition of a penalty of a term of imprisonment or a fine, the undeclared sum to be confiscated by the State was proportionate (Joined Cases C-335/18 and