The case originated in an application (no. 79177/16) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ms Mary Marshall a Maltese national, Ms Marie Christiane Ramsay Pergola, a British national and the estate of the late Marquis John Scicluna (represented by its administrator Marcus John Scicluna Marshall as duly authorised by the Civil Court (First Hall) (Voluntary Jurisdiction) on 5 May 2016) (“the applicants”), lodged on 16 December 2016.
The applicants were represented by Dr I. Refalo, Dr M. Refalo and Dr S. Grech, lawyers practising in Valletta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicants complained, in particular, that the Constitutional Court judgment in their favour failed to give them appropriate redress for the violations suffered, they therefore remained victims of a violation of Article 6 and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 6 September 2018 notice of the complaints concerning Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention and Article 6 § 1 (length of proceedings), as well as Article 13 in connection with both just-mentioned articles was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The British Government did not make use of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
Details of the applicants are set out in the Annex.
The applicants are owners of commercial properties nos. 1 to 5 in St George’s Square, Valletta and nos. 132 to 135 Strait Street, Valletta (hereinafter jointly referred to as “the property”).
On 30 July 1958 the applicants’ ancestor (the late Marquis John Scicluna) leased the premises no. 1 to 5 in St George’s Square, Valletta, to Scicluna’s Bank for ten years starting on 1 January 1959 for the annual rent of 800 pounds sterling (GBP).
In March 1968, the premises no. 132 to 135 Strait Street, Valletta, adjacent to the other premises, were incorporated into the lease contract for use by Scicluna’s Bank. Thereinafter the lease was renewed every year.
On an unspecified date, Scicluna’s Bank was merged with the National Bank of Malta Ltd, and the contract of lease was renewed. The conditions imposed in the lease contracts of 1958 and 1968 et sequi stipulated that the property would be used as the seat of Scicluna’s Bank and that it could not be sublet or used for other purposes.
By means of Act XLV of 1973 as amended by Act IX of 1974 the Bank of Valletta (hereinafter “the Bank”) was established and the lease of the property was transferred in the name of the Bank by operation of law. The Bank was wholly owned by the Government.
The applicants objected to the transfer, considering it a breach of contract. Following numerous requests for the return of the property and futile attempts to agree over a new lease contract with appropriate conditions, in 1989 the applicants instituted ordinary proceedings (no. 926/1989) before the civil courts, in their ordinary jurisdiction, to regain possession of the property. In the applicants’ view, since it was a business lease and therefore a going concern which could be terminated at any time, the special rent laws under Chapter 69 of the Laws of Malta did not apply to it.
Twentyone years later, the case was determined by a final judgment of the Court of Appeal of 25 June 2010, whereby the court found that the lease in favour of the Bank was protected under Chapter 69 of the Laws of Malta (until 2028) and therefore that the ordinary courts were not the competent forum to address the applicants’ complaints.
Over time the Government reduced its stake in the Bank by selling shares to private third parties.
On 11 November 2010 the applicants instituted constitutional redress proceedings relying on, inter alia, Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention (fair trial within a reasonable time).
By a judgment of 9 February 2016 the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional competence upheld the applicants’ claims in part. It found a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention and a breach of the reasonable time requirement under Article 6 of the Convention in relation to proceedings no. 926/1989, and awarded the applicants 1,000,000 euros (EUR) in compensation. Costs were to be paid by the defendants.
In so far as relevant, the court rejected i) the defendant’s plea that the applicants had not presented proof of their title to the property ii) the defendant’s objection ratione temporis and iii) the defendant’s objection of non-exhaustion of ordinary remedies. The court noted that previous judicial action had recognised the applicants’ interest; that the situation complained of was a continuous one; and that the applicants had no ordinary remedies available to them given that the Rent Regulation Board (RRB) was not an effective remedy.
On the merits, the court found that the applicants had been deprived of their possessions, but the legislative intervention had been lawful (the lease at issue was valid at law and the Bank remained protected) and pursued the public interest in view of the economic climate at the time. Nevertheless, in the absence of adequate compensation there had been a breach of the applicants’ property rights. The court noted that, according to the courtappointed expert, the estimated rental value of the property in 2014 was EUR 159,350 [annually]. The rent received by the applicants was thus derisory and as a result they were suffering an excessive burden.
The court found a violation of the reasonable time requirement under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in the light of the twentyone year duration of the civil proceedings instituted by the applicants.
The Government and the applicants appealed.
By a judgment of 24 June 2016, the Constitutional Court upheld only in a limited part both appeals and confirmed the firstinstance judgment, with a varied reasoning in part, but reduced the compensation to EUR 25,000.
In particular, the Constitutional Court confirmed the firstinstance court’s rejection of the claim of nonexhaustion of ordinary remedies, noting that it had not been clear whether the competent forum to determine the matter was the civil courts or the RRB. The applicants pursued the remedy before the civil courts and it took the latter twentyone years to come to the conclusion that they were not the competent forum. The firstinstance court had thus been correct in looking into the merits of the case.
As to the merits, the Constitutional Court confirmed that the measure was disproportionate given the striking difference between the rent the applicants received, EUR 4,277.80 annually, and its rental value on the market, EUR 159,350 annually. The amendments as a result of Act X of 2009 [which amended the Civil Code and was aimed at ameliorating the position of land owners who were subject to controlled rents] were of little comfort given that the applicants had been suffering a breach for a long time and would continue to do so for another twelve years given that Article 1531I of the Civil Code resulting from the 2009 amendments  which provided for a possibility of owners regaining their property  could only come to play after twenty years from 2008. Furthermore, the fact that the applicants had not lodged proceedings before the RRB could not play in their disfavour given that the RRB was bound by law and therefore it could not award an amount of rent which would have fulfilled the proportionality requirement.
As to the violation of Article 6, the Constitutional Court noted, in brief, that the case had started in 1989 and the submission of evidence came to an end in 1994. It then took four years for the applicants to file their submissions. At that stage the court accepted the applicants’ request to nominate a court-appointed expert, but it then took six years, until 2006, for a courtappointed expert to submit a technical report, which was confirmed on oath in January 2007, and a firstinstance judgment was delivered on 28 March 2008. During that time, in 2003 the court had asked the parties for submissions and the applicants had presented their submissions only a year later in 2004. The proceedings before the appeal court had not been excessively long, while it was true that the appeal was lodged on 16 April 2008 and was appointed for hearing on 12 April 2010, the final judgment had been issued just two months later. It was thus clear that most of the delay was due to the applicants, namely, four years for their submissions, and then six years for the additional technical experts’ report  although the latter’s delay was justified given that two of the experts had to be replaced. However, given that the case was of average complexity the State could not be exonerated from its responsibility of an overall twentyoneyear delay. Nevertheless, given the responsibility of the applicants for part of the delay, in the Constitutional Court’s view a finding of a violation was sufficient just satisfaction in the present case.
As to redress, the Constitutional Court considered that it was not the adequate forum to decide on the eviction of a tenant, which was the competence of the ordinary courts or the RRB. However, given that the application of Chapter 69 of the Laws of Malta, in combination with Act XLV of 1973 as amended by Act IX of 1974 had breached the applicants’ human rights, the Constitutional Court ordered that such laws could no longer be relied on as a basis for the occupation of the premises in the present case. As to compensation, having considered that the applicants had waited twentythree years to lodge constitutional redress proceedings and the disproportion of the rent received by the applicants in the light of the market value, as well as the order invalidating the effects of the impugned laws between the parties at issue, the Constitutional Court awarded EUR 25,000. Costs were to be paid in the ratio of 3/5 by the applicants (amounting to EUR 4,620.43) and 2/5 by the Government.
The relevant provision of the Reletting of Urban Property (Regulation) Ordinance, Chapter 69 of the Laws of Malta, enacted in June 1931 and subsequently amended, and those of the Civil Code, Chapter 16 of the Laws of Malta, as amended in 2009, are set out in Zammit and Attard Cassar v. Malta (no. 1046/12, §§ 26-27, 30 July 2015).
Act XLV of 1973 and Act IX of 1974 vested the administration and full control of The National Bank of Malta and Tagliaferro Bank in the Council of Administration, which in turn passed the assets of The National Bank of Malta to the Bank of Valletta.