The case originated in an application (no. 18406/91) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Cypriot national, Mr Andreas Nicolaides (“the applicant”), on 31 May 1991.
The applicant was represented by Mr L. Clerides, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z.M. Necatigil.
The applicant alleged that the Turkish occupation of the northern part of  had deprived him of his home and properties.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
By a decision of 24 August 1999 the Court declared the application admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). In addition, third-party comments were received from the Government of Cyprus, which had exercised its right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b)).
The applicant was born in 1942 and lives in .
The applicant used to live with his family in Trypimeni, a village in the District of Famagusta. During the 1974 military intervention Turkish military troops evicted the applicant and his family from their home and forced them to leave  and flee to the south. Since 1974 both  and Trypimeni have been under Turkish military control.
The applicant claimed to be the owner of a garden with twenty fruitbearing apricot trees in Trypimeni village. The property, registered on 25 January 1967 in the name of the applicant under the number 472, had an area of 920 sq. m. According to the researches conducted by an expert appointed by the applicant in the  land register, the property at issue bore the plot number 185 on sheet/plan 13/32. In support of his claim of ownership, the applicant submitted a cadastral plan on which his property was marked in yellow.
On 9 December 1990 the applicant made an attempt to return to his home and property in  and Trypimeni by participating in a convoy of cars of fellow refugees wishing to return home during a peaceful march towards their villages.
The applicant and his fellow refugees, who had informed the Commander of the United Nations (UN) forces in Cyprus of their intention, stopped at the checkpoint in the "buffer zone" on the main road linking Nicosia and . There, they asked the UN officer on duty to be allowed to return to their homes, properties and villages. They requested him to transmit their demand to the Turkish military authorities. The officer announced that the Turkish military authorities had refused the refugees’ request to drive through the checkpoint and enter the Turkish-controlled part of .