The case originated in an application (no. 51599/11) against the Republic of North Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 8 August 2011, by Mr Savčo Jakimovski (“the first applicant”), a Macedonian/citizen of the Republic of North Macedonia, and Kari Prevoz D.O.O. Sveti Nikole (“the second applicant”), a company incorporated in the respondent State.
The applicants were represented by Mr T. Torov, a lawyer practising in Štip. The Government of North Macedonia (“the Government”) were initially represented by their former Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov, and then by Ms D. Djonova.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the confiscation of their lorry and commercial goods in the course of the customs misdemeanour proceedings had violated their rights under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 8 October 2014 these complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The first applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Sveti Nikole. Prior to the events described below, the first applicant purchased a lorry and registered a limited liability company (“the second applicant”). According to the first applicant he had taken a bank loan and put up his house as security to purchase the lorry in order to be able to provide for his family. From the available material, it can be seen that at the relevant time the second applicant was a limited liability company founded by a single person (ДООЕЛ). It appears that subsequently the second applicant was transformed into a limited liability company (ДОО), with the first applicant’s wife as its co-owner.
On 8 March 2008 (a Saturday) the first applicant entered the respondent State via the border crossing point at Novo Selo driving the lorry, which was loaded with 450 rolls of plastic foil. The first applicant was transporting goods from a Bulgarian company to their buyer – company B. The lorry was weighed by the customs authorities of the respondent State and the first applicant drove off from the customs terminal in the lorry.
On 10 March 2008 (a Monday) the first applicant submitted the lorry for inspection by the Bitola customs authorities (approximately 200 kilometres away from the point of entry at Novo Selo). The customs inspection seals that had been placed on the lorry by the Bulgarian authorities were undamaged. The customs officers found that the customs declaration had not been registered with the customs office at Novo Selo. On the same day the customs authorities seized the lorry and the transported goods.
On 11 March 2008 the Bitola customs office requested that the Commission for Customs-related Misdemeanours (Комисија за одлучување по царински прекршок – hereinafter “the Commission”) initiate misdemeanour proceedings against the first applicant in the light of the fact that the customs declaration had not been registered with the customs office at Novo Selo, which amounted to a misdemeanour punishable under sections 263 (1)(5) and 269 (1) of the Customs Act (hereinafter: “the Act” – see paragraphs 16, 17 and 19 below). The value of the transported goods was set at 30,890 euros (EUR). According to an expert report ordered by the Bitola customs office, the lorry had a value of 805,000 denars (MKD).
The first applicant argued that he had crossed the border at the official border crossing post at Novo Selo, where he had submitted the lorry to the customs authorities for them to undertake the appropriate procedures. After the weighing of the lorry and the completion of the customs formalities, the first applicant had been allowed to leave the customs terminal. Any mistake in the handling of the documents should not have been held against him. He had not been familiar with the relevant procedures and had had no intention of committing an offence. The goods had been submitted to the customs authorities in Bitola with the seals unbroken, so it followed that no damage had been caused. Lastly, the first applicant stated that he had only recently purchased the lorry and had taken out a loan, using his house as collateral, in order to be able to buy it.
On 11 July 2008 the Commission found that the first applicant had committed a misdemeanour under section 263 (1)(5) of the Act. It imposed a fine on him in an amount equivalent to EUR 1,500 and ordered the confiscation of the goods as a mandatory special measure (задолжително предвидена посебна прекршочна мерка) under section 267 (1) and (2) of the Act. It also imposed a protective measure (заштитна мерка)  confiscation of the lorry, pursuant to section 269 (1) of the Act, from the owner, who in the case in issue was also the offender.
On 8 May 2009 the Administrative Court granted administrative actions brought by the first applicant and company B., and quashed the Commission’s decision. It noted, inter alia, that the Commission had failed to establish whether the owner of the goods (company B.) and the owner of the lorry (the second applicant) had known or ought to have known that the goods were the subjects of an offence and that the lorry would be used as transport vehicle for that purpose.
In the resumed proceedings, on 22 June 2009 the Commission found that the first applicant had committed a misdemeanour under section 263 (1)(5) of the Act because the customs declaration had not been registered at the customs office Novo Selo (as the point of entry), which meant that the goods had not been duly submitted for inspection to the customs authorities, contrary to section 50 of the Act, and could therefore not be subject to further customs proceedings. It imposed a fine on the first applicant in the amount of EUR 1,500 (MKD 92,000) and ordered the confiscation of the goods as a mandatory special measure under section 267 (1) and (2) of the Act. Lastly, it imposed a protective measure  confiscation of the lorry, pursuant to section 269 (1) of the Act, since the relevant value criterion had been met (see paragraph 19 below). It repeated its earlier findings that the first applicant was the owner of the lorry. In determining the level of the fine, it took into consideration as mitigating circumstances the fact that the goods had been submitted to the customs authorities in Bitola with the seals unbroken.
The first applicant lodged a claim challenging that decision with the Administrative Court, reiterating his arguments (see paragraph 9 above). He maintained that he had no experience in the transport business and was not familiar with the customs procedures.
On 2 February 2010 the Administrative Court dismissed the first applicant’s claim. It upheld the Commission’s findings, holding that the relevant domestic law had been correctly applied. Under sections 4 (19) and 50 (1) of the Act and section 219 (1) of the Regulation on the Implementation of the Customs Act (“the Regulation” – see paragraphs 16 and 20 below), the failure to register a customs declaration with the customs office was considered to constitute a failure to submit the goods in question for inspection. As to the confiscation of the lorry, the court found that it had been lawful since the two relevant statutory conditions had been met (see paragraph 19 below). In respect of the second of those conditions, the court found that it had been satisfied since the second applicant, as the owner of the lorry, was liable for the actions of the first applicant, who had acted as its agent – as provided in Article 3 of the Convention on the Contract for the International Carriage of Goods by Road (hereinafter “the CMR Convention” – see paragraph 21 below). Lastly, it dismissed the first applicant’s arguments regarding his lack of intent to commit the offence, finding that they could not lead to a different ruling.
Following appeals by the first applicant, that decision was upheld by the Supreme Court’s judgment of 22 November 2010, which was served on the first applicant on 23 March 2011.
Section 4 (19) of the Act, as applicable at the time in question, stated that the due “submission of goods for inspection with the custom authority” would be deemed to have taken place upon the notification of the customs authority, in the prescribed manner, that the goods in question had reached it. Under section 50 (1) of the Act, goods that had reached the customs authority at a border crossing were to be submitted for inspection to the customs authorities by the person that had brought the goods into the customs area or, if necessary, by the carrier in question.
Section 263 (1)(5) of the Act, as applicable at the relevant time, provided that a monetary fine of between EUR 5,000 and EUR 100,000 would be imposed on a legal person that failed to submit the goods for inspection to the customs authority (section 50 of the Act). Section 263 (3) provided that a monetary fine of between EUR 500 and EUR 15,000 should be imposed on an individual who had committed such a misdemeanour.
Section 267 (1) and (2) of the Act provided that goods that were subjects of misdemeanours defined in section 263 should be confiscated. Such goods should be confiscated even in the event that they were not owned by the offender if the owner knew (or, given the circumstances of the case ought to have known) that the goods were subjects of misdemeanours.
Section 269 (1) and (3) of the Act provided that the vehicle used for transportation of goods that were subjects of misdemeanours defined in section 263 of the Act should be confiscated if the value of the goods was higher than 20% of the value of the vehicle and the owner knew or ought to have known that the vehicle would be used for such transportation. Third parties were entitled to claim compensation from the offender.
Section 219 (1) of the Regulation defined the initial customs authority as the authority to which declarations in respect of the transit transportation of goods were to be submitted.
The relevant provision of the Convention on the Contract for the International Carriage of Goods by Road, 399 UNTS 189 (“the CMR Convention”) reads as follows:
“For the purposes of this Convention the carrier shall be responsible for the acts of omissions of his agents and servants and of any other persons of whose services he makes use for the performance of the carriage, when such agents, servants or other persons are acting within the scope of their employment, as if such acts or omissions were his own.”