The case originated in an application (no. 43104/04) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Ukrainian nationals, Mr Mykola Vasylyovych Nedilenko, Mrs Oksana Vasylivna Zagarovska and Mrs Mariya Volodymyrivna Pylypchuk (“the applicants”), on 25 November 2004.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr M. Tarakhkalo and Ms O. Protsenko, lawyers practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, most recently, Mr I. Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants complained, in particular, about allegedly arbitrary and unreasonable searches of their flats and a lack of effective remedies in respect of their complaints. The first applicant also complained about the allegedly unlawful and unreasonable seizure and retention of his belongings, a lack of effective remedies in respect of that complaint and of the lengthy non-enforcement of a court judgment in his favour.
On 24 February 2016 the aforementioned complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicants were born in 1956, 1962 and 1974 respectively. They reside in Ivano-Frankivsk. The first and second applicants are spouses.
In March 2001 criminal proceedings were instituted on suspicion that the first applicant, at the material time chairman of a local branch of a private bank, had abused his authority, forged official documents and acted negligently in concluding loan agreements, resulting in damage to the bank.
On 20 March 2001 a police investigator ordered a search of the second applicant’s flat, where the first and second applicant resided at the time, and a search of the first applicant’s flat, where the third applicant was living temporarily with her daughter, a minor.
On the same date the search orders were approved by the IvanoFrankivsk regional prosecutor.
Between 6 p.m. and 9 p.m. on 21 March 2001 searches of the two flats were carried out. Twelve suits and twelve bottles of perfume belonging to the first applicant were seized from the second applicant’s flat. In addition, various personal and financial papers and bank deposit certificates belonging to the first applicant were seized from both flats.
In December 2001 several bottles of perfume were restored to the first applicant.
On an unspecified date several suits, some of which were damaged, were also restored to him.
The applicants unsuccessfully complained on numerous occasions to the prosecution authorities about the allegedly arbitrary searches of their flats and the seizure and continued retention of the first applicant’s property. They also lodged similar complaints with the court handling the first applicant’s criminal proceedings.
On 6 February 2004 the Ivano-Frankivsk Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) found the first applicant guilty of one count of forgery and acquitted him of all the other charges. By the same decision, the first applicant was sentenced to a fine of 600 Ukrainian hryvnias (UAH) and dispensed from paying it because the proceedings had become time-barred.
In a cassation appeal, the first applicant again complained, in particular, about the searches and the seizure and retention of his belongings, which, according to him, had been arbitrary.
On 8 June 2004 the Supreme Court of Ukraine upheld the judgment of 6 February 2004 and it became final. The first applicant’s complaints about the searches, seizure and retention of his belongings were not taken up in the ruling.
On 21 July 2004 the applicants instituted civil proceedings in the Ivano-Frankivsk Town Court (“Town Court”) against the State of Ukraine and its various agencies, claiming compensation for the damage allegedly inflicted to them in the course of the criminal proceedings against the first applicant. They referred to the Compensation Act of 1994 and the Civil Code provisions on tort law.
In 2006 the applicants’ cases were severed into three separate sets of proceedings.
The first applicant complained, in particular, that his personal belongings (perfume, suits and documents) had been seized unlawfully following arbitrary searches. He also complained that some items had been returned to him in a damaged state, while others had either been lost or had been retained by the police without any justification. Accordingly, the applicant demanded the restitution of his belongings retained by the police and compensation for the pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage resulting from the searches, seizures, lengthy retention and loss of property.
On 26 December 2008 the Town Court dismissed the first applicant’s claims. It noted, in particular, that as he had been lawfully convicted there was no legal basis for the State to pay him compensation in connection with the criminal proceedings against him.
On 20 May 2009 the Ivano-Frankivsk Regional Court of Appeal quashed that judgment to the extent that it related to the restitution of the belongings retained by the police and compensation for the loss and deterioration of some of the seized items. The court noted in that respect that while the first applicant’s conviction precluded it from considering the case under the 1994 Compensation Act, his claims for damage to the seized property had been substantiated in accordance with the Civil Code. The Court of Appeal found that the police’s arrangements for the storage of the seized items had been inadequate and that the continued storage of some of them had been devoid of a legal basis. The police were ordered to restore the retained items to the first applicant and to pay him UAH 3,750 (around 360 euros (EUR)) in pecuniary damage in connection with the loss, deterioration, and lengthy retention of some of them. In addition, the first applicant was awarded UAH 3,500 (around EUR 330) in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
The first applicant appealed in cassation, complaining, in particular, that the question of a justification for the initial searches, seizure and retention of his belongings by the police had been left out of the judicial review.
On 17 February 2010 the Supreme Court upheld the ruling by the Court of Appeal and it became final.
Subsequently, the first applicant attempted to institute further proceedings claiming a higher amount of compensation, however, they were of no avail.
The second applicant complained, in particular, that the police had unlawfully searched her flat.
On 12 March 2008 the Town Court dismissed her complaints. It found that the second applicant had no standing to lodge the above claims, either under the 1994 Compensation Act or the Civil Code, as she had had no procedural standing in the criminal proceedings within the framework of which the disputed searches and seizures had been carried out.
On 27 May 2008 the Ivano-Frankivsk Regional Court of Appeal upheld that judgment.
On 18 August 2008 the Supreme Court dismissed a cassation appeal by the second applicant.
The third applicant alleged, in particular, that the flat where she lived at the material time had been arbitrarily searched.
On 6 March 2008 the Town Court discontinued proceedings, finding that the complaints should be lodged before the administrative courts.
On 15 April 2008 the Court of Appeal upheld that decision.
On 23 February 2009 the Supreme Court of Ukraine dismissed a cassation appeal by the third applicant.
On 23 June 2005 the Town Court awarded the first applicant UAH 20,000 from the Ivano-Frankivsk State Auditing Department in connection with irregularities in their reports on the first applicant’s work.
On 16 December 2005 the Court of Appeal upheld that decision.
On 31 January 2006 the Supreme Court, following a cassation appeal by the Auditing Department, stayed enforcement proceedings.
On 7 November 2007 the Department’s cassation appeal was dismissed and the judgment of 23 June 2005 became final.
The judgment award was paid to the first applicant in full by 24 April 2008.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
“Everyone is guaranteed the inviolability of his or her home.
Entry into a home or other possessions of a person, and the examination or search thereof, shall not be permitted, other than pursuant to a reasoned court decision.
In urgent cases related to the preservation of human life and property or to the direct pursuit of persons suspected of committing a crime, another procedure established by law is possible for entry into a home or other possessions of a person, and for the examination and search thereof.”
“13.  The existing procedure for the arrest, custody and detention of persons suspected of committing an offence, and the procedure for carrying out an examination and search of a person’s home and other property, shall be retained for five years after the entry into force of the present Constitution.”
The relevant extracts of the Code provided as follows:
“A search shall be carried out by an investigator in the event of his having sufficient information indicating that instruments used for committing a crime, objects and valuables acquired as a result of criminal activity, as well as other objects and documents which are relevant to the establishment of the facts of a case, are hidden in a particular location or place or on some person. ...
A search may be carried out upon the order of the investigator and only after authorisation by the prosecutor or his deputy ...”
On 21 June 2001 the above provision was modified, in particular by including a requirement for prior judicial authorisation for a search and seizure operation in residential premises, in line with Article 30 of the 1996 Constitution.
Under section 1 of the Act as worded at the material time, a person was entitled to compensation for damage caused, in particular, by an unlawful search or seizure operation.
Section 2 listed the cases in which the right to compensation arose. They included the following: an acquittal; a judgment on the merits of a criminal case or another judicial decision acknowledging, in particular, that a search or seizure had been unlawful; or a discontinuation of criminal proceedings on the grounds of a lack of corpus delicti or of proof of guilt.