The case originated in an application (no. 36140/10) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by twenty Slovak nationals, whose particulars are set out in the appendix (“the applicants”), on 3 June 2010.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Polakovič, a lawyer practising in Bratislava. The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicants alleged that their rights under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 had been violated as a result of the compulsory letting of their land under the Use of Plots and Regularisation of their Ownership in Allotment Gardens Act (Law no. 64/1997 Coll. – “the Allotments Act”).
On 13 May 2013 the above complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants all live in Žilina, except for Mr Kyška, Mr P. Lalinský and Ms Vestfálová, who live in Turie, Bytča and Nemecká nad Hronom respectively.
The facts of the case are structurally similar to those obtaining in the cases against Slovakia of Urbárska Obec Trenčianske Biskupice (no. 74258/01, 27 November 2007 (merits) and 27 January 2009 (just satisfaction)), Jenisová (no. 58764/00, 3 November 2009), Šefčíková (no. 6284/02, 3 November 2009), and Salus (no. 28697/03, 3 November 2009).
The applicants are the owners of land situated in the cadastral area of Závodie on the territory of the municipality of Žilina. They acquired title to this land by way of inheritance from their predecessors.
In 1948 the State put the land in question at the disposal of an agricultural cooperative called Mier Žilina-Bánová. In 1987 the cooperative designated part of the land as an “allotment colony”, consisting of individual allotments which were put at the disposal of private third parties (“the gardeners”).
The applicants’ ‒ or, at the relevant time, their predecessors’ ‒ formal title to the land has remained unaffected but in practice, they have not been able to make use of it at all. The size of each of the applicants’ individual parcels of land thereby affected is listed in column C of the appendix.
In the context of the political changes in the former Czechoslovakia, the Land Ownership Act (Law 229/1991 Coll.) was enacted in 1991. Under section 22(2) thereof, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary with the applicants, the gardeners acquired a tenancy right in respect of the land in question with effect from the date of the Act’s entry into force.
The rent payable for such tenancy was regulated under section 22(3) of the Land Ownership Act until this provision was replaced by the Allotments Act, which entered into force on 26 March 1997.
The Allotments Act likewise imposed a compulsory tenancy arrangement in favour of the gardeners, the rent being regulated by its section 4, which applied by operation of law unless the parties had agreed otherwise. This provision, as applicable at that time, referred to other pieces of legislation which set the annual rent at ten per cent of the value of the property ‒ calculated on the basis of the then applicable price regulations ‒ the minimum being equivalent to 0.01 Euro (EUR) per square metre and per year.
In the applicants’ case, with the exception mentioned below, no such separate agreement had been reached between the parties, and the annual rent payable by the gardeners to the applicants was thus determined under the statutory rules at the lowest limit of the applicable scale, that is to say at a rate of EUR 0.01 per square metre. In the case of the applicant Ms L. Kothajová, an agreement was reached that, as from 2004, she would be paid rent equivalent to EUR 0.01168 per square metre and per year.
The applicable statutory regime was amended ‒ after the Court’s above-mentioned judgments had become final ‒ with effect from 1 April 2011 by Law no. 57/2011 Coll., which adjusted the rent payable to owners in a situation such as the applicants’ to a level commensurate with the market rent.
By virtue of the statutory amendment, the amount of the rent was to be determined under the Regulation of the Ministry of Justice on Determination of the General Value of Property (no. 492/2004 Coll.). This regulation uses the term “general value” ‒ which is understood to mean the expert assessment of the most likely price at a given place and time on the market in conditions of free competition and honest sale ‒ and lays down formulae for the determination thereof in relation to land and the rent payable for that land, the latter being linked to the former. These formulae take into account what is known as the “general situation index” (“the GSI”), ranging originally from 0.70 to 2.00, normally depending on the geographical location of the property.
However, prior to the entry into force of the amendments introduced by Law no. 57/2011, Regulation 492/2004 had been amended by Regulation no. 254/2010 Coll., which took effect from 1 July 2010. The latter Regulation introduced a special GSI ranging from 0.50 to 0.70 to be applied when determining the “general value” of land and the “general value” of the rent for the land in allotment colonies.
These amendments left the compulsory tenancy introduced by the Allotments Act unaffected. Such a tenancy arrangement remains in place until the completion of what are known as land consolidation proceedings in a given area. Such proceedings are also provided for under the Act, their aim being to have the ownership and use of the land in the allotment area consolidated, principally by transferring title to the land to the gardeners and having the former owners compensated by means regulated under the Act, the details of such consolidation being defined in what is known as a “land consolidation project”.
In the applicants’ case, the gardeners initiated the requisite land consolidation proceedings on 7 December 1998. Within the framework thereof, the order had been given for implementation of a “land consolidation project”, but the proceedings changed course on 7 August 2013 when the Constitutional Court held that the applicants’ inability to have that order reviewed by the courts violated their right of access to a court and their property rights.
The land consolidation proceedings are currently pending, at a stage where the general value of the applicants’ land remains to be determined.
The compulsory tenancy of the applicants’ land persists.
The parties disagreed as to the amount of rent payable for the applicants’ property. Their positions and the documents submitted in their support may be summarised as follows.
The applicants relied on report no. 05/2010 dated 29 March 2010, in which a sworn expert, A, estimated the general value of the rent in question by reference to the criteria laid down in Regulation no. 492/2004, and applied a GSI of 1.30. On that basis, the applicants considered that the market value of the annual rent amounted to EUR 2.66 per square metre.
Later, the applicants also submitted report no. 169/13 dated 5 November 2013 by another sworn expert, B, according to which the general value of monthly rent for a plot in the stated area belonging to the applicant Mr Leščinský was EUR 0.773 in 2013, EUR 0.782 in 2012, EUR 0.789 in 2011 and EUR 0.752 in 2010. These figures had been estimated on the basis of Regulation no. 492/2004, taking into account the GSI resulting from the amendments introduced by Regulation no. 254/2010.
The Government for their part submitted the following documents:
‒ A letter from the Forensic Engineering Institute in Žilina dated 17 December 2012, in which the Institute pointed out what they considered to be methodological flaws in the calculations of expert A. On the basis of their pro forma recalculation of the available data, the value of the annual general rent would be EUR 0.239 per square metre. However, the letter points out that this recalculation was done without a separate in situ investigation and without the examination of further documents that the Institute considered essential.
‒ A letter from the Slovak Real Estate Fund dated 24 April 2013 stating that, at that time, expert valuations of the general value of the land had been obtained for fourteen allotment colonies in the district of Žilina. On the basis of the general value of the land as established in these valuations, which took into account legislative amendment no. 57/2011, the Government contended that the average general value of the annual rent payable for land comparable to the applicants’ was EUR 0.38.
‒ A full expert report drawn up by the Institute in 2014, numbered 86/2014, which had been preceded by the Institute’s own investigations. In this report, drawn up on the basis of amended Regulation no. 492/2004, the Institute calculated the general value of the annual rent payable for the property in question as of 31 March 2014 as EUR 0.718 per square metre.
The method provided by Regulation no. 492/2004 could not be used in relation to the preceding periods. In these cases, the Institute assessed the general value of the annual rent for previous years ‒ on the basis of the results for the year 2014, but taking into account the general development of real estate prices in the given region and other economic criteria during those years ‒ as follows: in 2013 EUR 0.716, in 2012 EUR 0.746, in 2011 EUR 0.732, in 2010 EUR 0.745, in 2009 EUR 0.790, in 2008 EUR 1.084, and in 2007 EUR 0.804.
Lastly, the Institute reiterated the objections concerning the methodology used in the valuation produced by expert A and expressed the view that he had lacked the requisite qualifications for conducting the particular type of valuation obtaining in the present case, since his qualifications pertained only to agricultural land, and did not extend to include the type of land concerned in the present case.
The relevant constitutional rules and the Constitutional Court’s practice in the application thereof, as well as the relevant statutory rules, are set out in the Court’s judgment in Jenisová (cited above, §§ 33 et seq., with further references), amongst others.
In addition, section 3(5) of the the Allotments Act addresses the possibilities and consequences of terminating a compulsory tenancy under the Act by serving notice. Over and above other conditions and restrictions, it provides that such a tenancy may be terminated by notice only if the land consolidation proceedings have not yet commenced.
In a judgment of 26 October 2010 in (unrelated) case no. 6 Sžo 400/2009, the Supreme Court quashed the lower court’s judgment in which the latter had dismissed an administrative-law action challenging administrative decisions approving the implementation of a land consolidation project in an allotment colony.
In this judgment the Supreme Court referred to the Court’s judgments in the case of Urbárska Obec Trenčianske Biskupice (cited above) and, in particular, its findings as regards both the unacceptably low level of compensation for the owners whose land had been subject to land consolidation under the Allotments Act and the unacceptably low level of rent for the compulsory letting of their land under that Act.
The Supreme Court noted that, under Article 46 of the Convention, Slovakia had a duty to implement those judgments and that, under Article 7 § 5 of the Constitution, Protocol No. 1 had precedence over statute.
The Supreme Court further observed that the compensation payable under the Allotments Act to the owners in the case in question was symbolic and that, in the light of the Court’s case-law, it was necessary to examine whether, on the facts of that case, a fair balance had been struck between the various interests at stake. By failing to examine these aspects of the case, the lower court had assessed the case incorrectly.
The Supreme Court therefore quashed the contested judgment and remitted the case to the lower court for re-examination.
In the relevant part of its judgment on the merits of the above case, the Court found that:
“148.  [Its] conclusions as regards [...] [the] compulsory letting [of the applicant’s land] suggest that the violation of the applicant’s rights under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 originated in a problem arising out of the state of Slovakian legislation, which has affected a number of landowners whose land comes under the regime of [Allotments Act]. It appears that the hindrance in [...] letting out the land at a rent reasonably related to the value of the property, which the Court has found contrary to Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, arises from the application of a law to a specific category of citizens. Several other applications concerning the same issue are pending before the Court. Without prejudging the merits of those cases, the above facts indicate that the problem in issue is of a systemic nature.
...
Having regard to the systemic situation which it has identified, the Court is of the opinion that general measures at national level appear desirable in the execution of the present judgment in order to ensure the effective protection of the right to property in accordance with the guarantees set forth in Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. Firstly, the respondent State should remove all obstacles to the letting of land in allotment gardens on rental terms which take account of the actual value of the land and current market conditions in the area concerned. ...”
In its Resolution CM/ResDH(2013)87, adopted on 7 May 2013, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe declared that it had exercised its functions under Article 46 § 2 of the Convention in both the case in question and the other cases identified in paragraph 6 above, and decided to close the examination thereof.
It did so having examined Slovakia’s action report of 5 March 2012. The part of the report concerning the general measures taken in response to the Court’s pronouncements under Article 46 of the Convention in the judgment on the merits of Urbárska Obec Trenčianske Biskupice read as follows:
“Therefore two legislative amendments were adopted at national level. On 8 February 2011, the National Council of the Slovak Republic adopted the amendment of the [Allotments Act] and the Ministry of Justice of the Slovak Republic adopted the amendment of its [Regulation No. 492/2004]. As a result of these general measures, the rental terms for the letting of land in garden allotments are able to take into account the actual value of the land and the current market conditions and compensation for the transfer of ownership of land has a reasonable relation to the market value of the property at the time of the transfer (see Annex for more details).”