The case originated in two applications (nos. 10346/03 and 10893/04) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by nationals of Romania and Germany. Their names and other details, as well as the date on which the applications were lodged, are specified in the appendix to the judgment.
The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The German Government, having been informed of their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (a) of the Rules of Court), did not avail themselves of this possibility.
The applicants referred to in the appendix have lodged before the domestic courts various proceedings based on the restitution legislation enacted in Romania after the fall of the communist regime. Their complaints referring to the general inefficiency of the restitution mechanism were communicated to the Government under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, in 2008-09, as detailed in the appendix to the judgment.
As Iulia Motoc, the judge elected in respect of Romania, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28 § 3 of the Rules of the Court), the President decided to appoint Bianca Andrada Guţan to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 2 of the Rules of the Court).
Following the establishment of the communist regime in Romania in 1947, the State proceeded to nationalise buildings and agricultural land on a large scale. After the fall of the communist regime, the State enacted a series of laws aimed at affording redress for breaches of property rights by the former regime (see paragraphs 43-51 below).
Laws nos. 112/1995 and 10/2001 established the principle of restitution of nationalised residential property and compensation in cases where restitution was no longer possible. Law no. 112/1995 introduced a cap on compensation, but this was subsequently abolished by Law no. 10/2001.
Law no. 247/2005 attempted to harmonise the administrative procedures for restitution of properties covered by the above-mentioned laws and by the special legislation concerning restitution of agricultural land.
On 12 October 2010, the Court adopted a pilot judgment in the case of Maria Atanasiu and Others v. Romania (nos. 30767/05 and 33800/06, 12 October 2010), in which it singled out the deficiencies of the restitution mechanism, indicating to the respondent State under Article 46 of the Convention that new steps needed to be taken in order to process the restitution claims with more efficiency.
On 15 May 2013 Law no. 165/2013 came into force, setting out various procedures available to petitioners seeking settlement of their restitution claims.
Based on the parties’ observations and comments regarding the new remedies set out by Law no. 165/2013, on 29 April 2014 the Court found in its judgment in the case of Preda and Others v. Romania (nos. 9584/02 and 7 others, §§ 134-40, 29 April 2014), that the mechanism established by the new law offered a range of effective remedies that needed to be exhausted by those claimants whose complaints referred to one of the following situations: the existence of concurrent titles to property with respect to the same plot of agricultural land; the annulment of such title to property without any compensation; the delivery of a final judgment confirming the right to compensation in respect of the unlawful seizure by the State of any type of immovable property, without fixing the amount; the failure to pay such compensation awarded in a final judgment; and the prolonged failure to give a decision on a restitution claim.
However, the Court also held that Law no. 165/2013 did not contain any provisions of a procedural or substantive nature capable of affording redress on the matter of the existence of final judgments validating concurrent titles to property with respect to the same residential property. Furthermore, no procedure was available to former owners who, in the absence of restitution, would have been entitled to compensation but who did not to have access to it because the circumstances rendering restitution impossible had become known after the expiry of the time-limit for lodging compensation claims (ibid., § 124).
The complaints set out in the present applications reflect the circumstances described above (see paragraph 11). In particular, the applicants have alleged that their title to the property (building and appurtenant land) had been acknowledged by the domestic courts; however, owing to the sale of the property by the State, the applicants were prevented from enjoying their respective right. They claimed that this deprivation, together with the total lack of compensation for it, had imposed on them an excessive and disproportionate burden.
In 1950, under Decree no. 92, the State nationalised the building and its appurtenant land located at 22 Şoseaua Giurgiului in Bucharest, which belonged to the applicant’s predecessors.
In 1997 the applicant lodged a claim with the domestic courts for restitution of the above-mentioned property, alleging that its nationalisation had been unlawful and that therefore the property right had left her predecessors’ rightful ownership only when it had been transferred to her as heritage. The claim was formulated against Bucharest City Council and B., a State-owned company responsible for the management of property belonging to the State.
In its judgment of 6 June 1997 the Bucharest Fourth District Court allowed the claims and ordered that the property be returned to the applicant, in her capacity as sole heiress of its rightful owners. The court held that the immovable property had been nationalised unlawfully, since the applicant’s predecessors had not belonged to any of the social categories covered by the nationalisation decree and thus their right of property had been valid and continuous, being transferred as heritage to the applicant; the State could not therefore claim a valid title to the property.
The judgment was not appealed against and thus became final.
On 12 May 1998 the Mayor of Bucharest issued a restitution decision in respect of the immovable property located on Şoseaua Giurgiului, in compliance with the operative part of the judgment of 6 June 1997.
Under the terms of contracts entered into in accordance with Law no. 112/1995, company B., managing the building (see paragraph 14 above), had sold the flats located therein to the tenants.
The sale contract in respect of the first-floor flat was concluded on 5 November 1996 between B., representing the State, and the tenants, S.N. and S.P.
The sale contract in respect of the ground-floor flat was concluded on 23 June 1997 between B. on behalf of the State, and the tenant, S. A.-L.
On an unspecified date in 2000 the applicant lodged before the domestic courts two civil actions seeking the rescission of the sale contracts of 5 November 1996 and 23 June 1997 respectively, in so far as the State had sold property which it had not owned.
The final judgment of 7 February 2002 given by the Bucharest Court of Appeal dismissed the claim in respect of the first-floor flat, holding that the applicant did not have legal standing to ask for the rescission of the sale contract, in so far as she had not been a party thereto.
In its final judgment of 14 October 2003, the Bucharest Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s claim in respect of the ground-floor flat, holding that the buyer had acted in good faith and had thus acquired a valid title to the property, in accordance with the provisions of Law no. 10/2001, which had entered into force in the meantime. The court also held that the applicant was eligible for compensatory measures pursuant to the notice of claim (notificare) lodged with the administrative authorities under Law no. 10/2001 (see paragraph 25 below).
On 12 August 2002 the applicant lodged another action before the domestic courts, seeking again the rescission of the sale contract concerning the first-floor flat. This time, however, she based her claim on the provisions of Law no. 10/2001. In its final judgment of 1 February 2006 the Bucharest Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s claim, holding that in so far as the sale contract had been concluded by the buyers in good faith, it was in compliance with the law.
On 12 October 2001 the applicant lodged a notice of claim with the Bucharest City Hall under Law no. 10/2001, seeking reparatory measures in respect of the two flats. Several documents were appended to the application, including a copy of the judgment of 6 June 1997 and a copy of the inheritance certificate attesting to the fact that the applicant was the sole heiress of her predecessors.
On 23 and 24 April 2015 the Bucharest City Hall requested the applicant to complete her administrative file with documents related to her claim. However, the request did not reach the applicant, as the contact information mentioned in the 2001 application was no longer valid.
As far as the Court is aware, no decision has been taken in respect of this claim.
On 6 May 1977 flat no. 30, located in building A/4, Victoria Street, Piteşti – the applicants’ property – was seized by the State under Decree no. 223/1974, following the applicants’ decision to leave the country. They were not notified of the administrative decision to confiscate the property.
Between 1991 and 1995, the applicants wrote several letters to various domestic authorities, including the Piteşti City Council, the Piteşti Prefect’s Office and the director of company R., which managed the building on behalf of the State, seeking to obtain possession of the flat. The replies stated that the applicants’ claims could not be granted, as no relevant legislation had yet been enacted concerning reparatory measures in respect of previously nationalised property. In one of the replies sent by the Piteşti City Council on 1 May 1995, the applicants were informed that flats which had been nationalised under Decree 223/1974 could not be purchased by their current tenants from the local authorities.
On 9 July 1996 the applicants lodged a claim with the administrative authorities, seeking reparatory measures in respect of flat no. 30, in accordance with the provisions of Law no. 112/1995.
On 17 January 1997 company R. sold the flat to the tenants, S.C. and S.M.
On 16 May 1997 the administrative authorities dismissed the applicants’ claims lodged under Law no. 112/1995, in view of the fact that the flat had already been sold to its tenants.
On 30 August 1999 the applicants lodged before the Argeş County Court an action against Piteşti City Council, aiming to recover possession of flat no. 30. They claimed that the confiscation of the property had been unlawful, as on the one hand it had been in breach of the Constitution in force at the time, and on the other hand, they had not been notified of the administrative decision to confiscate it.
On 22 May 2000 the County Court allowed the applicants’ claims. The defendant appealed. On 23 March 2001 the Piteşti Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal because no statement of appeal had been submitted. The decision thus became final.
On 19 September 2002 the applicants, assisted by a bailiff, recovered possession of flat no. 30; the relevant minutes mentioned that the flat was empty and unfurnished.
On 1 October 2002 S.C. and S.M. challenged the enforcement of the judgment of 22 May 2000 (see paragraph 34 above). They claimed to be the rightful owners of flat no. 30, having bought it in good faith in 1997; furthermore, in so far as they had not been parties to the proceedings terminated by the outstanding judgment of 22 May 2000, they were not bound by it (inopozabilă).
By a final judgment of 25 June 2003, the Piteşti Court of Appeal allowed the claims of S.C. and S.M. In its reasoning, the court essentially held that the sale contract had been validly and lawfully concluded by the tenants, who had acted in good faith at the time of the sale. Moreover, the judgment of 22 May 2000 awarding the applicants title to the property was unenforceable (inopozabilă) against the buyers, because they had not been parties to the respective proceedings.
On 22 November 2006 the applicants lodged an action against S.C. and S.M. seeking to recover possession of flat no. 30 and urging the courts to find the sale contract unlawful. Their claims were allowed by the Piteşti District Court on 23 January 2008.
An appeal lodged by the defendants was allowed by the Argeş County Court on 16 June 2008. The court considered that the sale of the flat had been lawful. At the same time, it held that the applicants were entitled to compensation for the flat, equivalent to its market value at the date of payment.
The applicants have not lodged any claims under Law no. 10/2001.
The main legislative provisions relevant to the present case are described in Străin and Others v. Romania (no. 57001/00, §§ 19-23, ECHR 2005VII); Păduraru v. Romania, no. 63252/00, §§ 23-53, ECHR 2005XII (extracts); Maria Atanasiu and Others v. Romania (cited above, §§ 44-67); and Preda and Others v. Romania (cited above, §§ 7074). They can be summarised as follows.
In the absence of special legislation laying down rules governing nationalised immovable property, the courts initially considered that based on general principles of civil law, they had jurisdiction to examine the issue of the lawfulness of nationalisation decisions and to order that properties be returned to their owners if they were found to have been nationalised unlawfully.
The entry into force of Law no. 112 of 25 November 1995 on the legal status of certain residential property authorised the sale of such properties to the tenants. Properties could be returned to the former owners or their successors in title only if the persons concerned were living in the properties as tenants or the properties were unoccupied. If restitution was not possible, the former owners could claim compensation, the amount of which was capped.
Law no. 10 of 14 February 2001 on the rules governing immovable property wrongfully acquired by the State established the principle of restitution of the properties concerned. In cases where restitution was no longer possible, the former owners or their successors in title could claim compensation, the amount of which was not capped.
Article 2 § 2 of the law, in force until 6 February 2009, when it was repealed by Law no. 1/2009 (see paragraph 49 below), provided that people whose properties had been appropriated unlawfully were considered to have retained the ownership rights they had on the date of the appropriation; those rights were to be exercised upon receipt of the restoration decision or judgment, in accordance with the provisions of the law.
Paragraph 1 of Article 22 (former Article 21 § 1) initially set a timelimit of six months from the date of entry into force of the law for the lodging of a notice of claim seeking restitution or compensation (notificare) with the competent administrative authorities. The time-limit was subsequently extended by six months, namely until 14 February 2002. Paragraph 5 of the same Article provided that failure to comply with the above-mentioned time-limit would result in the loss of the right to claim restitution or compensation in court.
The relevant part of Article 45 (former Article 46) provided:
“(2)  The sale or donation of immovable property unlawfully seized by the State shall be declared null and void, save where the transaction was concluded in good faith. ...”
Article 45 § 5 provided that the deadline for lodging an action seeking the rescission of such a transaction was 14 August 2002.
The relevant parts of Article 46 (former Article 47) provided:
“(1)  The provisions of the present law shall also be applicable to proceedings which are pending before the courts [at the time of its entry into force], the entitled person having the possibility to choose the procedure set out by the present law, and to abandon the pending proceedings or to request the suspension of the pending case ...
(3)  In the event that the claim lodged by the entitled person to have the immovable property restored to him or her in kind was dismissed in a final judgment, the 
time-limit for the lodging of a restitution or compensation claim (notificare) as provided for in Article 22 § 1 shall start to run from the date of the final judgment.”
Law no. 1 of 30 January 2009 entered into force on 6 February 2009. It provided that immovable property sold under Law no. 112/1995 could no longer be returned to the former owners and that only alternative measures of redress were possible. The choice between an action for recovery of possession and the special restitution procedure under Law no. 10/2001 was abolished in favour of the latter.
Law no. 165 of 20 May 2013 did not repeal the previous legislation on the restitution of immovable property nationalised before 1989, but it reformed the reparation mechanism. It provided, as a general rule, for the restitution of property and for a system of compensation in situations in which restitution was not possible. However, the law did not set other timelimits for the lodging of new claims for restitution or compensation, as the reparation mechanism was meant exclusively for claimants who had already complied with the time-limits initially set out in the restitution laws (see paragraphs 46 and 48 above).
The law established a roadmap for the adoption of a number of measures to render the reparation mechanism functional, including the setting up of a national fund for agricultural land and other immovable property. Concomitantly, specific and binding time-limits were set for each administrative stage of the examination of the restitution claim. The law also provided for the possibility of a judicial review allowing the domestic courts to verify the legality of administrative decisions, but also to award, if necessary, the restitution or compensation claimed.
In the context of the review of the constitutionality of the relevant legislation mentioned above after its entry into force, the Constitutional Court was called upon to rule on the compatibility of some of the provisions with the Constitution. It dismissed most of the objections as to constitutionality raised in the domestic courts and reaffirmed that the laws in question were compatible with the Constitution.
In decision no. 830 of 8 July 2008 the Constitutional Court held that anyone who had lodged a notice of claim under Law no. 10/2001 within the statutory time-limit was eligible for reparatory measures and in particular for restitution of the property concerned if it had been nationalised unlawfully.
After the entry into force of Law no. 112/1995, the practice of the domestic courts was undermined by the absence of a stable legislative framework. The courts gave several different interpretations of concepts such as State “title”, the purchaser’s “good faith” and “appearances in law”, and also of the relationship between actions for recovery of possession and the restitution procedures provided for by the special legislation (see Păduraru, cited above, § 96).
The HCCJ ruled on the jurisdiction of the domestic courts to determine claims for restitution of nationalised properties in cases where the administrative authorities had failed to respond to the claims (notificări) issued under Law no. 10/2001. Following an appeal in the interests of the law, the full court held, in judgment no. 20 of 19 March 2007 published in the Official Gazette on 12 November 2007, that the domestic courts had jurisdiction to determine the merits of claims and, where appropriate, to order the restitution of the property in question or award statutory compensation.
On 4 June 2007 and 9 June 2008, the HCCJ, sitting as a full court and again ruling on two appeals in the interests of the law, delivered judgments nos. 52 and 33, which were published in the Official Gazette on 13 November 2007 and 23 February 2009. It held that following the entry into force of Law no. 10/2001, actions for recovery of possession of properties expropriated or nationalised before 1989, which had been lodged in parallel with the restitution procedure laid down by Law no. 10/2001, were inadmissible. However, as an exception to that rule the HCCJ held that persons who had a “possession” within the meaning of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention could bring an action for recovery of possession, provided that it did not infringe ownership rights acquired by third parties in good faith.
In judgment no. 27 of 14 November 2011, published in the Official Gazette on 17 February 2012, the HCCJ, ruled on another appeal in the interests of the law. It held that in accordance with the Court’s reasoning in the pilot case of Maria Atanasiu and Others, the concept of “existing possession” in the context of immovable property claimed under the restitution laws presupposed the existence of an administrative or judicial decision acknowledging, directly or indirectly, the applicant’s right to property, in particular that he or she had complied with all statutory conditions in order to qualify for the claimed right. The High Court also held that compensatory claims lodged before the courts outside the mechanism provided for by the special restitution legislation, such as claims based directly on Article 13 of the Convention or on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, as well as on civil law, were inadmissible.
Following a request for a preliminary ruling settling legal matters (hotărâre prealabilă pentru dezlegarea unor chestiuni de drept), the HCCJ delivered judgment no. 19 of 20 March 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 11 April 2017. It found that, with regard to immovable property in respect of which there were applications pending before the European Court of Human Rights when Law no. 165/2003 entered into force, its provisions were relevant only for those applications in which the applicants had lodged restitution or compensation claims at a domestic level pursuant to the relevant special legislation.
The judgment became binding on all the domestic courts from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.