The case originated in an application (no. 6111/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by
The second applicant, the wife of the first applicant, died on 13 February 2005. For practical reasons, Mrs Gabriela Smaranda Reichardt will also continue to be referred to as an “applicant” in this judgment, although 
Mr Johan Reichardt is now to be regarded as the applicant (see Dalban v. Romania [GC], no. 28114/95, § 1, ECHR 1999VI).
The applicants were represented by their only son, Mr Alexandre Reichardt. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Răzvan-Horaţiu Radu. The German Government did not make use of their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
On 27 February 2006 the President of the Third Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The first applicant was born in 1925 and lives in Aachen (). The second applicant was born in 1929 and died in 2005.
On 31 March 1976 the applicants’ property, comprising flat no. 1 and appurtenant land situated in Bucharest, Intrarea Traian Demetrescu no. 14, was seized by the State under Decree no. 223/1974, following their decision to leave the country. No compensation was paid. No copy of the decision to seize the property was sent to the applicants.
On 18 December 1996 company T., a State-owned company responsible for the management of property belonging to the State, sold the flat to the then tenant, T.T., under Law no. 112/1995.
On 3 May 2001 the applicants brought court proceedings for
On 24 August 2001 the applicants lodged an application with the administrative authorities for restitution in kind of the property under
On 11 October 2002 the Bucharest Court of First Instance allowed the applicants’ action in part. In the operative part of the judgment it held,
On 19 March 2003 the  allowed an appeal by T.T. and by company T. and, in the operative part of the judgment, varied the judgment of the first-instance court by dismissing the applicants’ action for recovery of the property. In its reasoning, the court considered that the first-instance court had been requested by the applicants to assess whether the seizure was null and void because they had not been sent a copy of the seizure decision, and that therefore the lower court should not have analysed the lawfulness of the seizure of its own motion. The  also considered that the failure to inform the applicants of the seizure did not affect its validity and that the applicants had no valid property title.
On 25 June 2003 the Bucharest Court of Appeal, in the operative part of a final decision, dismissed as groundless an appeal on points of law by the applicants. In the reasoning of the judgment the court considered that although some of the applicants’ criticisms were well-founded, in particular regarding the misinterpretation of the law by the Regional Court when it found that the Court of First Instance had exceeded the limits of the request made by the applicants, those criticisms did not constitute grounds for amending the previous judgment in accordance with Article 304 § 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure, but only for removing its reasoning. Therefore, in the reasoning part of its decision, the Court of Appeal considered, in line with the findings of the first-instance court, that the State had no valid title and that therefore the applicants had never lost their right of property. However, the court reasoned that as the applicants had not contested T.T.’s good faith in their appeal, the  had correctly dismissed their claim for recovery of the property.
The relevant legal provisions and jurisprudence are set forth in the judgments Brumărescu v. Romania ([GC], no. 28342/95, §§ 31-33,