The case originated in an application (no. 17978/05) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Lithuanian nationals, Mr Eduardas Albergas (“the first applicant”) and Mr Jurijus Arlauskas (“the second applicant”), on 4 May 2005.
The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicants alleged that they had been deprived of their property by a decision of a domestic court and had not received adequate compensation, in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 29 June 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The first applicant was born in 1949 and lives in Vilnius. The second applicant was born in 1955 and according to the most recently available data, also lives in Vilnius.
In 1994 the Vilnius City municipality assigned a plot of land measuring 0.08 hectares to the first applicant for the construction of an individual house. At the same time similar plots were assigned to other private persons. In accordance with the provisions of the domestic law in force and because of his status as a deportee’s family member, the first applicant was entitled to acquire the plot of land.
On 5 September 1995 the first applicant and the Vilnius Region Administration signed a contract by which he purchased the plot of land from the State. He paid 422 Lithuanian litai (LTL; approximately 122 euros (EUR)) and 423 “single-use investment vouchers” (investiciniai čekiai).
Subsequently, the first applicant registered the plot of land in his name in the land registry.
In 10 April 1997 the first applicant sold the plot for LTL 6,000 (about EUR 1,740) to the second applicant, who then registered the plot of land in his own name.
On an unspecified date the second applicant brought a claim before the courts against a private person, R.A., alleging that his right to peaceful enjoyment of his possession had been breached. The second applicant claimed that he had been unable to use his land because R.A., who lived next to the plot of land, had unlawfully put a fence around it.
R.A. lodged a counterclaim against both applicants, requesting the annulment of the land sale contracts of 1995 and 1997 (see paragraphs 7 and 9 above), together with the decisions of the authorities. R.A. claimed restoration in natura of her ownership rights to the disputed plot of land, as it was part of her father’s land which had been nationalised by the Soviet authorities. R.A. had requested the restoration of her property rights in 1991, and in 1999 her rights had been restored in natura, but only to a part of her father’s plot of land.
The courts at two instances granted the second applicant’s claim and dismissed R.A.’s counterclaim, noting that under the Law on the Procedure and Conditions of the Restoration of the Rights of Ownership to the Existing Real Property (įstatymas “Dėl piliečių nuosavybės teisių į išlikusį nekilnojamąjį turtą atstatymo tvarkos ir sąlygų”; hereinafter “Law on Restitution I”) in 1994, R.A. had been entitled to restitution in natura of not more than 0.2 hectares of land. The local authorities had taken this circumstance into consideration when assigning the plot of land to the first applicant. The fact that under the new Law on the Restoration of the Rights of Ownership of Citizens to the Existing Real Property (Piliečių nuosavybės teisių į išlikusį nekilnojamąjį turtą atkūrimo įstatymas; hereinafter “Law on Restitution II”) in force after 1 July 1997 R.A. was entitled to restoration in natura of up to 1 hectare of land was not considered as meaning that the decisions adopted by the local authorities in 1994-95 were automatically invalid.
R.A. appealed against those court decisions to the cassation court. By a final decision of 27 November 2002 the Supreme Court overturned the decisions of the lower courts. By applying the principle of priority for former owners’ rights that had been developed in the civil case P. Roževičienė v. Panevėžio miesto valdyba and others, no. 3K-3-384/1999, the Supreme Court concluded that the local authorities in 1994-95 had not been allowed to sell plots of land to third persons before ownership rights had been restored. The court also indicated that the applicants had acted in “bad faith” (nesąžiningai) when purchasing the disputed plot of land; however, the court decision did not substantiate the first applicant’s “bad faith”. As concerns the second applicant’s “bad faith”, the Supreme Court assumed that he had known about the third persons’ rights to the land.
By the above-mentioned decision of the Supreme Court the contracts of 1995 and 1997, together with the decision of 1994 to assign the disputed plot, were annulled and the plot was returned to the State. The first applicant had to return LTL 6,000 to the second applicant, the amount which he had received from the latter for the plot. The State had to return LTL 422 to the first applicant; none of the “single-use investment vouchers” were returned to him, as they no longer had any pecuniary value at the time of the Supreme Court’s decision.
Alleging that they had incurred a loss following the decision of the Supreme Court, the applicants applied to the National Land Service (Nacionalinė žemės tarnyba) in 2004 with requests to be assigned a new plot of land of the same size and value. Their requests were dismissed.
The applicants applied to the administrative courts. They argued that they had acquired the plot of land in good faith. The applicants had been deprived of the property by a decision of the Supreme Court, and the sums that had been awarded had not adequately compensated for the damage sustained. In particular, the first applicant alleged that the court had not awarded the full value of the property, given that part of the price had been paid in “single-use investment vouchers”. To compensate for their loss, the applicants asked to be assigned a new plot of land.
On 1 October 2004 the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court dismissed the claim. On 19 January 2005 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld that decision. The courts noted that the provisions of the domestic law under which the first applicant had been assigned the plot of land were no longer in force. As concerned the second applicant, he was not eligible under the domestic law to be assigned a plot of land either.
On 15 August 2005 the first applicant complied with the Supreme Court’s decision of 27 November 2002 and paid the second applicant LTL 6,000.
The applicants subsequently applied to the civil courts with a claim for damages against the Vilnius City municipality.
On 29 September 2005 the Vilnius City First District Court dismissed the applicants’ claim having reiterated that the applicants had purchased the plot of land in “bad faith”. It appears that the applicants did not appeal against that decision.
The Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania provides:
“Property shall be inviolable.
Rights of ownership shall be protected by law.
Property may be taken over only for the needs of society according to the procedure established by law and shall be justly compensated for.”
“The person whose constitutional rights or freedoms are violated shall have the right to apply to court.
Compensation for material and moral damage inflicted upon a person shall be established by law.”
The Law on Restitution I, enacted on 18 June 1991 and amended on numerous occasions, provided that, in restoring property rights, priority would be given to restitution in natura. The State retained the right to purchase a property from the previous owners if the current social conditions and relations so required. In particular, Article 12 § 1 (3) of the Law on Restitution I provided that the land is considered to be reserved by the State in the public interest (valstybės išperkama žemė) if it had been allocated, pursuant to the existing laws, to persons building individual houses.
On 9 July 1997, after the Law on Restitution I had been annulled, the Law on Restitution II entered into force. Provisions of the new law continued to ensure the principle of priority of restitution of property rights in natura. With regard to the land which had been allocated to persons for building of individual houses, Article 12 (2) of the new law provided that such land was still considered to be the land reserved by the State in the public interest, thus the provision of Article 12 § 1 (3) of the Law on Restitution I has been maintained in the new law.
It is established in the Preamble to the Law on Restitution II that “the rights of ownership acquired by the citizens of the Republic of Lithuania before the occupation are not revoked and have continuity”, that “the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania adopted by the will of the citizens of the Republic of Lithuania in 1992, guarantees and defends the rights and property of the State and its citizens”, that “the continuing restoration of the rights of ownership is based on the provisions of the 18 June 1991 Law of the Republic of Lithuania “On the Procedure and Conditions of Restoration of the Rights of Ownership to the Existing Real Property” – the existing real property shall be returned to citizens of the Republic of Lithuania, and in the event it is impossible to do so, they shall be compensated justly.”
Article 6.271 of the Civil Code, as in force from 1 July 2001, provides that damage caused by the unlawful acts of a public authority must be compensated for by the State, irrespective of any error by a particular public servant or other employee of the public authority.
In its ruling of 27 May 1994 the Constitutional Court held, inter alia, that possessions which had been nationalised by the Soviet authorities since 1940 should be considered as “property under the de facto control of the State”. The Constitutional Court also stated that, if possible, property rights should be restored in natura.
In rulings of 15 June and 19 October 1994, the Constitutional Court noted that the authorities of Lithuania, as a re-established State in 1990, were not responsible for the Soviet occupation half a century earlier, nor were they responsible for the consequences of that occupation. The Constitutional Court held that since the 1940s many private individuals had bought, in accordance with the legislation applicable at the material time, property which had previously been nationalised. It was impossible to ignore those factual and legal aspects, and the domestic legislation on restitution of property rights duly took into account the interests not only of the former owners, but also of the private persons who had occupied or purchased the property under lawful contracts.
In a ruling of 4 March 2003 the Constitutional Court reaffirmed that in the process of the restoration of the rights of ownership, one must coordinate the interests of both the former owners and society. It further reiterated the principle of a “restricted restitution”:
“The State of Lithuania, while striving to restore justice in part at least, i.e. to restore the violated rights of ownership, chose restricted restitution but not restitutio in integrum. The restoration of justice when the owners are compensated for the existing real property which has not been returned in natura has two sides: it is justice in respect of the owner as well as the entire society. The unlawful actions of the occupation government inflicted enormous damage not only on the owners whose rights of ownership were denied but also on the whole society and the entire State. While restoring justice in respect of the owners, one cannot ignore justice in respect of the entire society whose members are also the owners as well.
...
It has been mentioned that the State chose restricted restitution but not restitutio in integrum. The rights of ownership of citizens are restored not to the entire property which was unlawfully nationalised and expropriated by other unlawful ways, but to the existing real property.”
As concerns Article 30 of the Constitution and the right of persons to apply to court to defend their interests from interferences by the State, the Constitutional Court stated that the State authorities and their officials must act in conformity with the Constitution and law. They are obliged to protect human rights and freedoms and shall not themselves violate them. Public service should function so that not only is liability established for violations committed by the authorities but the persons who committed violations while in the public service would also be brought to justice. Otherwise, the confidence of people in the power of the State and the law would be ruined and “legal nihilism would flourish” (the rulings of 30 June 2000, 13 December 2004 and 19 August 2006).
Furthermore, the Constitutional Court has held that the laws must establish such legal regulation where a person who had incurred damage by unlawful actions would be able to claim just redress for that damage and to receive compensation which is in conformity with the principles of adequacy and proportionality (the ruling of 27 March 2009).
With regard to the status of an acquirer in good faith, the Constitutional Court held that, under the Constitution, the rights of a person who had sought to acquire property lawfully and in good faith, but who had acquired it without knowing that the owner had lost that property as a result of a crime committed by another person (or other persons), must be defended (ruling of 30 October 2008):
“While regulating the protection of the rights of ownership, the legislator must ensure the balance of values defended in and protected by the Constitution. The fact that the ownership rights of a person who has lost his property as a result of a crime committed by another person (other persons) must be defended does not mean that one does not also have to defend the rights of a person who sought to acquire property lawfully and in good faith but who acquired it without knowing that the owner had lost that property as a result of a crime committed by another person (other persons). The requirement to defend the rights of such a person stems from the Constitution, inter alia, the constitutional principle of a State under the rule of law and the constitutional principle of compensation for damage, which is enshrined in Article 30 of the Constitution. This constitutional principle is inseparable from the principle of justice inherent in the Constitution: all the necessary legal preconditions must be created by laws in order to justly compensate for the inflicted damage (Constitutional Court ruling of 19 August 2006).”
On numerous occasions in its jurisprudence the Constitutional Court emphasized the importance of protection of legitimate expectations which implied the duty of the State and its institutions to observe the obligations undertaken. In this connection it was concluded that “persons have the right to reasonably believe that their rights acquired under valid laws or other legal acts which are not in conflict with the Constitution will be retained for the established time and it will be possible to implement them in reality” and that a person could “reasonably expect that if he obeys law, and fulfils the requirements of the laws, his expectations will be held legitimate by the State and will be defended and protected”. The Constitutional Court also held that it is necessary to respect the norms and principles of the Constitution while changing the legal regulation, and inter alia the principle of lex retro non agit, and that the rights and legitimate expectations that had been acquired by a person may not be denied by changes in legal regulation (the rulings of 4 March 2003, 4 July 2003 and 13 December 2004).
On the issue of the lawfulness of the sale of previously nationalised property, in its decisions nos. 3K-3-384/1999 of 6 September 1999 and 3K3698/2003 of 16 June 2003, the Supreme Court held that as long as the question of the restoration of the former owner’s property rights was pending and had not been definitively resolved, that property had to be considered as disputed. Accordingly, such properties could not be transferred to third parties, because this could result in successive violations of the former owner’s ownership rights.