The case originated in an application (no. 37571/05) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by the applicants’ mother, a Montenegrin national, on 19 October 2005. In July 2006 she passed away and her two sons, Mr A and Mr B, elected to pursue the application before the Court. For reasons of convenience, the present judgment will refer to Mr A and Mr B as the applicants. The President of the Fourth Section, to which the case had been assigned at the time, acceded to the applicants’ request not to have their names disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr P. Radulović, a lawyer practising in . The Montenegrin Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Pažin.
The applicants complained, primarily, about the continued non-enforcement of the final civil judgments concerning the re-payment of the old foreign-currency savings deposited by their late mother and inherited by them. In the alternative, they complained about the failure of the Podgorička banka and/or the Central Bank of  to register the savings at issue and thus have them converted into the respondent State’s public debt, in accordance with the relevant domestic legislation.
On 6 July 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
Following the financial crisis in the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as well as the subsequent collapse of the banking system in the 1990s, in 1998, 2002, and 2003 the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as well as the respondent State itself adopted specific legislation accepting the conversion of foreign currency deposits in certain banks, including the Podgorička banka, into a public debt. The legislation set the time-frame (2017) and the amounts, including interest, to be paid back to the banks’ former clients (see paragraphs 27-41 below).
The applicants were born in 1949 and 1950, respectively, and both live in .
On 20 September 1993 the Court of First Instance (Osnovni sud) in Podgorica rendered the first judgment in favour of the applicants’ mother ordering the Podgorička banka to pay to her: (i) 179,650.84 US dollars (USD), 59,539.97 German marks (DEM), 254,906.52 Italian liras (LIT) and 4,364.70 Swiss francs (CHF) on account of her foreign-currency savings; (ii) the applicable domicile sight deposit interest for the period between 1 January 1993 and 3 July 1993, plus 6% annual interest as of 3 July 1993; and (iii) 193,768,312 Yugoslav dinars (YUD) for legal costs.
On 23 May 1994 the Court of First Instance in Podgorica rendered a second judgment in favour of the applicants’ mother ordering the Podgorička banka to pay to her: (i) USD 9,770 and DEM 25,700 on account of her foreign-currency savings; (ii) the accrued sight deposit interest, and (iii) YUD 1,584 for legal costs.
On 27 June 1996 the same court rendered a third judgment in favour of the applicants’ mother, ordering the Podgorička banka to pay to her: (i) USD 147,620.64, DEM 126,661.39 and LIT 1,602.16 on account of an erroneous calculation of the applicable interest; (ii) the stipulated interest of 12.5%; and (iii) YUD 900 for legal costs.
On various dates thereafter these judgments became final and enforceable.
By 5 November 1998 enforcement orders in respect of the first and third judgments were issued. By 19 November 1999 the Court of First Instance terminated the enforcement of these two judgments relying on the Act on the Settlement of Obligations Arising from the Citizens’ Foreign Currency Savings (see paragraph 29 below). The applicants’ mother did not seek an enforcement order in respect of the second judgment at the time.
Between December 2003 and February 2004 the applicants’ mother requested the enforcement of all three judgments against the Podgorička banka. On 30 March 2005 the Court of First Instance rejected these requests, on the basis that the Podgorička banka was no longer the debtor (nije pasivno legitimisana). The decision further explained that by virtue of the Act on the Citizens’ Foreign-Currency Savings 2003 the respondent State had taken over the debt from this bank, and that the Central Bank of Montenegro (Centralna banka Crne Gore) was responsible for the accuracy of the data taken from the records of the authorised banks (see paragraph 34 below).
On 18 April 2005 and 19 April 2005 the Court of First Instance upheld the impugned decisions, endorsing the reasons contained therein.
On 26 May 2004 the applicants requested the Real Estate Office (Direkcija za nekretnine) in Podgorica to register the enforcement orders against the Podgorička banka property (tražili zabilježbu u evidenciji rješenja o izvršenju na nepokretnostima). On 1 June 2004 the Real Estate Office rejected their request. On 23 November 2004 the Real Estate Administration (Uprava za nekretnine) upheld the previous decision and directed them to enforce their rights through the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance. On 3 April 2007 the applicants’ request was rejected by the  (Upravni sud).
On 21 December 2004 the applicants’ mother requested the Central Bank to ensure the payment of the outstanding debt. On 7 April 2005 the Central Bank informed her that it lacked competence to deal with her case (nema ingerencije u [ovom] slučaju). In particular, it could not be held responsible for the accuracy of the relevant data as that was the responsibility of the authorised banks. In this regard the Central Bank referred to Article 7 § 5 of the Act on the Citizens’ Foreign-Currency Savings 2003 (see paragraph 36 below). In February and March 2006 the applicants, on behalf of their mother, requested again that the Central Bank pay the savings in question. On an unspecified date thereafter the Central Bank replied by referring to its previous letter of 7 April 2005, notably that it could not comply with their request. On 18 December 2007, upon yet another request from the applicants, this bank confirmed that there were no foreign-currency savings registered in respect of their mother.
On 4 October 2005 the applicants’ mother was informed, upon her enquiry, by the Ministry of Finance that the authorised banks were responsible for the accuracy of the transferred data.
After the applicants’ mother passed away in July 2006, the Court of First Instance rendered a decision on 5 May 2007 declaring the applicants her sole legal heirs and specifying that the inheritance consisted of the deposits (novčana sredstva) as established by the final courts’ judgments referred to above (see paragraphs 7-9 above).
On 21 December 2007 the Podgorička banka informed the applicants that there was no evidence that the debt established by the domestic judgments had been paid. At the same time, they were informed that the Central Bank was responsible for the accuracy of the transferred data and that the applicants could obtain the official data concerning the transfer from the Central Bank.
On several occasions the applicants’ mother and/or the applicants contacted the Ombudsman (Zaštitnik ljudskih prava i sloboda), and the Ministry of Justice (Ministarstvo pravde), but to no avail.
It would appear that the debt established by the domestic courts’ judgments has never been registered by the Podgorička banka and transferred to the Central Bank.
The applicants’ mother had another foreign-currency account with EUR 17,697.79, which amount was registered as public debt with the Central Bank and later converted into bonds. On an unspecified date in 2006 the applicants would appear to have sold the bonds for half of their value.
Article 149 of the Constitution provides that the Constitutional Court shall rule on a constitutional appeal lodged in respect of an alleged violation of a human right or freedom guaranteed by the Constitution, after all other effective legal remedies have been exhausted.
The Constitution entered into force on 22 October 2007.
Section 48 provides that a constitutional appeal may be lodged against an individual decision of a state body, an administrative body, a local self-government body or a legal person exercising public authority, for violations of human rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, after all other effective domestic remedies have been exhausted.
Sections 49-59 provide additional details as regards the processing of constitutional appeals. In particular, section 56 provides that when the  finds a violation of a human right or freedom, it shall quash the impugned decision, entirely or partially, and order that the case be re-examined by the same body which rendered the quashed decision.
The Act entered into force in November 2008.
Sections 1, 2, 3 and 4 provided that all foreign currency savings deposited with the “authorised banks”, including the Podgorička banka, before 18 March 1995 were to become public debts.
Under section 10 the State’s responsibility in that respect was to be fully honoured by 2012 through the payment of specified amounts, plus interest, and according to a certain time-frame.
Section 22 provided that, as of the date of this Act’s entry into force (12 December 1998), “all pending lawsuits, including judicial enforcement proceedings, aimed at the collection of the foreign currency covered by this Act shall be discontinued”.
This Act repealed the Act described above. In doing so, however, it explicitly acknowledged as part of public debt all deposits previously recognised as such. It modified the time-frame for honouring the debt in question (from 2012 to 2016) and specified amended amounts, plus interest, to be paid annually.
Section 36 reaffirmed that “all lawsuits aimed at the collection of the foreign currency savings covered by this Act, including judicial enforcement proceedings, shall be discontinued”.
This Act entered into force on 4 July 2002. It was subsequently amended on two occasions, but these amendments concerned peripheral issues unrelated to the savers’ above-described status.
Section 3, inter alia, defines “foreign currency savings” as all foreign currency deposited by natural persons with one of the “authorised banks based in the territory of the Republic of Montenegro” as recognised as a public debt of the  (see paragraphs 27 and 30 above). The same section further provides that the foreign-currency savings shall be increased for an annual interest rate of 2% as of 1 January 2003. The same interest rate shall be applied on annual basis to all the remaining unpaid sums at the end of each payment period until the foreign-currency savings are entirely paid off.
Section 4 provides that the Central Bank of  shall provide all the records (evidenciju) and necessary documentation in respect of the foreign-currency savings, and that the same bank shall be responsible for the accuracy of the data taken from the records of the banks in question.
Pursuant to section 5 § 1 as of the date of this Act’s entry into force  shall assume the obligations of the authorised banks towards natural persons in respect of their foreign-currency savings.
Section 7 § 1 provides that after the transfer of debts to the Central Bank (nakon isknjižavanja potraživanja i obaveza), the authorised banks are obliged to provide the Central Bank with detailed analytical records of debts (detaljnu analitiku obaveza) on the basis of foreign currency savings. Article 7 § 5 provides that the authorised banks are responsible for the accuracy of these data.
Sections 14 and 15 provide that  shall honour this debt by 2017 and specify the amounts, and interest, to be paid annually in Euros.
Pursuant to section 18, the banks’ clients may, in advance of the said time-frame and under certain conditions, make use of their deposits converted into Government bonds in order to pay taxes, buy State property or take part in the privatisation of State-owned businesses.
Under sections 16 and 17 former clients of the banks in question can also sell the said bonds to other natural or legal persons. Such trading is exempt from taxation.
Sections 16 § 5 and 18 § 2 provide that the Government of Montenegro shall adopt additional technical regulations concerning the bonds in question.
This Act entered into force on 9 October 2003, and its amendments on 28 February 2004.
Section 172 paragraph 1 provides, inter alia, that a legal person is responsible for the damage caused by its body to another person in the course of performing its functions or related thereto.
Section 148 provides that one who causes damage to another person is obliged to compensate for it, unless he/she proves that the damage was not his/her fault.
Section 166 provides, inter alia, that a legal person is responsible for the damage caused by its body to another person in the course of performing its functions or related thereto.
Section 192 provides that the responsible person will provide restitutio in integrum as before the damage occurred. If the damage cannot be removed entirely in this way, the remainder of the damage will be compensated in money.
Section 188 provides that, by a civil claim, a plaintiff can seek the courts only to establish the existence or non-existence of a certain right or legal relation, or the accuracy of a document (neistinitost neke isprave).