The case concerns a complaint about the excessive length of restitution proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in Sofia.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Obretenov of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is one of the heirs of Mr M. She is entitled to a half of his inheritance.
Mr M. owned a part of an afforested island in the Danube. In 1948 the property was expropriated by the communist authorities.
In 1998, after the adoption of the Forests Restitution Act, Mr M.’s heirs initiated a restitution procedure. The course of these proceedings has been described in detail in the Court’s judgment in Popov and Chonin v. Bulgaria (no. 36094/08, §§ 921, 17 February 2015), a case brought by one of the other heirs of Mr M. and another applicant.
Notably, on 12 December 2000 the competent body – a local land commission – recognised the entitlement of Mr M.’s heirs, in principle, to restitution or compensation with regard to 542,500 square metres of land. Since restitution in kind was impossible, the island being situated in a border zone and therefore being public State property, the land commission held that the heirs were to receive compensation. Under the relevant domestic law, the only possible means of compensation was through the provision of other equivalent afforested land.
In the following years the authorities made attempts to identify forests of sufficient size and quality. Two decisions in that regard by the Montana agriculture department (former land commission), given in 2003 and 2009, were quashed by the Montana District Court in 2007 and 2012 respectively on grounds that, as regards the first decision, the administrative body had allotted Mr M.’s heirs forest land of low quality and, as regards the second, that contrary to the land commission’s findings appropriate land was available in the Montana region. As a result, the Montana District Court identified such land and ordered that it be transferred to the heirs.
In 2013-14 the agriculture departments in Montana and in neighbouring towns adopted several decisions transferring to the heirs of Mr. M. several plots of afforested land. The last of these decisions was dated 28 January 2014.
On numerous occasions throughout the years and until 2014 the applicant and other heirs of Mr M. wrote to the authorities, complaining about the delays in the procedure and the periods of inactivity.
The relevant domestic law on the restitution of forests has been summarised in Popov and Chonin (cited above, §§ 27-29).
The domestic law and practice concerning a compensatory scheme with regard to excessive length of judicial proceedings have been described in Balakchiev and Others v. Bulgaria (dec.) (no. 65187/10, §§ 20-34, 18 June 2013).