The case originated in an application (no. 12055/17) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Musa Tarhan (“the applicant”), on 26 January 2017.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Aktay and Mrs U Aktay, lawyers practising in Mersin. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged a violation of his right to the peaceful enjoyment of his property.
On 15 June 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Konya.
The facts of the case as set out by the parties may be summarised as follows.
The applicant owned real property covering an area of some 107 m² in Hadim, corresponding to plot no. 48, section 161.
On 19 December 2008 the Water Directorate General (Devlet Şu İşleri Genel Müdürlüğü) decided to expropriate that plot of land.
On 20 July 2008 the relevant authority, that is to say the Appraisal Commission (kıymet takdir komisyonu), estimated the value of the property at 843.58 Turkish liras (TRY).
On 12 August 2009, seeking to order emergency expropriation, the authorities applied to the Hadim Regional Court (“HRC”) for authorisation to take possession of the land before the deed transfer.
On 28 September 2009 the HRC authorised the takeover of the land and ordered the authorities to make a down-payment of TRY 866.09 to the applicant.
On 9 February 2012, in accordance with the then current regulations, the applicant was invited to negotiate with the authorities with a view to a friendly settlement on the amount of the award in compensation.
The applicant stated that he had rejected the authorities’ offer.
The Government submitted that the applicant had refused to take part in the negotiation.
Be that as it may, in the absence of agreement between the parties, on 24 December 2013 the authorities applied to the HRC to set the amount of the award and to transfer the deed.
The applicant, represented by counsel, alleged that the actual value of his property was much higher than the amount of TRY 843.58 fixed by the authorities.
Le 22 September 2014, at the end of the proceedings, the HRC ordered the transfer of the property deed in question to the authorities, and set the amount of the award in compensation at TRY 2,515.38.
As regards legal fees (avukatlık vekalet ücreti), the court ordered the parties to pay each other a lump sum of TRY 1,500.
On 7 June 2016 the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeals against that judgment.
On 25 July 2016 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Constitutional Court alleging that the judicial decision ordering him to pay the authorities TRY 1,500 in respect of legal fees had breached his rights, particularly that to peaceful enjoyment of his property.
He argued that he could not be held responsible for the commencement of the judicial proceedings. Indeed, he had been right to reject the sum offered by the authorities given that the HRC had ultimately set the award at almost three times that amount.
In support of his pleas he presented two judgments delivered by the 18th Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation on 20 November 2012 which had criticised judgments ordering expropriated persons to refund the expropriating authorities’ legal fees.
The applicant also submitted that pursuant to section 29 of the Law on expropriation, costs and expenses appertaining to expropriation should be borne by the expropriating authorities. He argued that legal fees fell within the concept of costs and expenses arising out of expropriation.
Moreover, referring to the judgment in the case of Perdigão v. Portugal [GC] (no. 24768/06, 16 November 2010), he emphasised that a considerable proportion of his expropriation compensation had been absorbed by the lump-sum refund of the authorities’ legal fees.
Finally, the applicant pointed out that the fact that the authorities had also been ordered to pay him the same sum was not such as to restore any kind of balance. In that connection, he stated that under the Attorneyship Law (section 164), sums which one party was ordered to pay in respect of legal fees for the other party were payable ipso jure not to the opposing party but to counsel for that party.
That appeal was dismissed by a two-judge committee on 29 November 2016.
The Constitutional Court, which decided to assess the complaint in the light of the right to a fair trial, and in particular from the angle of the right of access to a tribunal, observed that the fact of imposing the payment of legal fees on the party having lost the case pursued the legitimate aim of preventing unnecessary logjams in the courts and enabling the latter to hear and determine the cases before them within reasonable time-limits.
Where expropriation was concerned, the lawmaker had endeavoured to prioritise transferring property deeds on a friendly basis. Where no friendly agreement had been reached between the parties, the citizen risked being sued. That was why, at the end of this type of proceedings, each party was ordered to pay the other’s legal fees. The Court of Cassation had established case-law on that practice, as witness, for example, a judgment delivered by the 5th Civil Chamber on 4 May 2009 (E.2009/4315 K.2009/6884), and had therefore been foreseeable.
Although the lump-sum payable in respect of legal fees had been comparatively large as compared with the expropriation award, it should be borne in mind that the expropriating authority had also been order to pay the same sum. This had prevented any decrease in the expropriation award to the applicant.
Under those circumstances, the appeal had been manifestly ill-founded and had to be declared inadmissible.
Section 8 of Law no. 2942 on Expropriation provides that where an authority wishes to expropriate a property, it must prioritise the purchase procedure.
Under that procedure, which is described in section 8, a committee of experts appointed by the expropriating authority (known as the Appraisal Commission) estimates the value of the property. The owner is then invited to negotiate the amount of the award in compensation with the authority, failing which the total estimated amount is notified to him or her. In the event of an agreement between the parties, compensation is awarded to the owner only if he agrees to the transfer of the deed on to the land register.
The 5th paragraph of section 8 provides that the agreed amount must not exceed the sum estimated by the Appraisal Commission.
Section 10 of the Law provides:
“Where the property has not been expropriated under the purchase procedure, the administration ... shall apply to the regional court responsible for the area in which the property [to be expropriated] is located seeking a decision on the amount of compensation payable for the expropriation and the registration of the property [in the land register] in the name of the authority in return for the cash payment ... of that amount.”
Section 27 of the Law provides that the authorities may, in urgent situations, lawfully use a private property before having complied with all the requisite formalities for the standard expropriation procedure. In the framework of this so-called “urgent expropriation” procedure, the authorities must apply to a court for authorisation to take possession of the property. As such authorisation does not lead to the transfer of ownership of the land to the expropriating authority, the latter must negotiate the transfer with the owner, and where no agreement is reached, it must follow the procedure set out in section 10.
Section 29 of the Law states that judges’ daily travel allowances, experts’ fees, land registration fees “and other costs incurred under the present Law must be borne by the expropriating authority”.
Article 326 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that costs and expenses must be borne by the losing party. If none of the parties wins outright, the costs and expenses must be apportioned in accordance with the outcome of the case.
Article 330 of the same Code points out that in cases where recourse is had to the assistance of a lawyer, the judge will order the losing party to reimburse the legal fees payable to counsel for the opposing party. The amount of the reimbursement shall be determined on the basis of the applicable regulations.
Under section 164 in fine of Law no. 1136 (the Attorneyship Law), the sums which a party to proceedings has been ordered to pay in respect of legal fees are payable to counsel for the opposing party. Those sums payable to the lawyer cannot be reduced, compensated or distrained on account of the client’s debts.
By judgment of the General Assembly of Civil Chambers of 25 February 2004, the Court of Cassation ruled that both the expropriated party, having obtained compensation, and the authority, having obtained the transfer of ownership, should have their legal fees reimbursed. According to the Court of Cassation, the authority could be designated neither as the successful party nor as the losing party.