The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Ujar. He was represented by Mr R. Mustafazade, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 14 July 2007 several pieces of religious literature from the RisaleI Nur Collection were seized during a police raid on a religious meeting which was taking place in the applicant’s home in Ujar. Subsequently, on an unspecified date he was fined under Article 299.0.2 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) for the administrative offence of holding an unauthorised religious meeting.
In response to a letter from the applicant addressed to the Ujar Police Office on 13 November 2007, on 30 November 2007 the applicant was informed that the books had been seized so that they could be submitted for an expert examination by the State Committee for Work with Religious Associations (Dini Qurumlarla İş Üzrə Dövlət Komitəsi – hereinafter “the Committee”).
On 19 March 2010 the applicant complained to various authorities that the religious books that had been seized from his home had not been returned to him.
On 8 April 2010 the applicant received a letter from the Committee stating that, given their subject matter, it had been found that distribution of the books was undesirable.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a claim against the Committee with the Sabail District Court, asking the court to order the return of the unlawfully seized religious literature.
According to the transcript of the hearing, the applicant argued that the books seized at his premises were his property. He had bought the books in a bookshop in Baku and had used them for only his personal needs, and he had had no intention to distribute them. Moreover, on 3 August 2006 the Committee had conducted research into the Risale-I Nur Collection and had come to the conclusion that books from this collection did not have any negative impact on the existing state of affairs as regards religion, and could be freely distributed. Furthermore, back in 2007 he had been fined under Article 299.0.2 of the CAO for the administrative offence of holding an unauthorised religious meeting, but not for the illegal distribution of religious literature, therefore even those proceedings could not serve as a legal basis for seizing the books.
During the course of the proceedings the Committee’s representative submitted an expert opinion which concluded that distribution of the books in question had been found to be undesirable. The expert opinion further stated that the books contradicted the tradition of religious tolerance in the country, because they were written in such a way as to turn Said Nursi (a Turkish Muslim theologian) into a phenomenon, propagate ideas about his life and activities among the younger generation, and encourage sectarianism.
On 24 January 2011 the first-instance court rejected the claim. In finding no fault on the part of the Committee, the court relied on paragraph 9.2 of the Regulation on the State Committee for Work with Religious Communities (see paragraph 19 below) and referred to the commissioned expert opinion which stated that because the titles making up the Risale-I Nur Collection encouraged sectarianism and aimed to create religious groups, their distribution had been found to be undesirable.
When summarising the parties’ submissions, the conclusion of the expert opinion and the applicable legal provisions, the court held:
“... the defendant, being an authority in charge of the production, import and distribution of religious literature and other religious material, examined the content of the titles listed in the claim of Mammadov Shukran Hamid oglu [the applicant] and issued an expert opinion [in that regard] which found that their distribution was undesirable, as they purported to encourage sectarianism and the creation of religious groups. The claimant was informed accordingly by the letter dated 8 April 2010. Therefore, having considered that expert opinion, the court finds that the defendant correctly found that the distribution of the literature in question by the complainant was undesirable.”
It appears from the decision of the first-instance court that on 23 September 2003 and 27 September 2004 the Committee had authorised several private persons to import a number of titles from the Risale-I Nur Collection.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged an appeal against that decision. Relying on Article 9 of the Convention and Articles 29 and 48 of the Constitution, the applicant argued, inter alia, that the expert opinion which the first-instance court had relied upon heavily was too vague in its conclusion, in that it was not supported by any reference to particular parts of the books in question.
On 25 January 2012 the Baku Court of Appeal rejected the appeal, endorsing the reasoning of the firstinstance court in a summary fashion.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a cassation appeal against that decision, essentially reiterating the arguments which he had made before the Baku Court of Appeal.
On 24 August 2012 the Supreme Court dismissed the cassation appeal, having found – with reference to Article 9 § 2 of the Convention and the Court’s case-law – that the authorities had acted in the interests of public safety and the protection of public order in preventing the applicant from distributing the seized books at unauthorised religious meetings.
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Constitution provided as follows:
Article 29.  Right of property
“I.  Everyone has a right of property.
...
No one shall be deprived of his or her property in the absence of a court decision ...”
Article 47.  Freedom of thought and speech
“I.  Everyone enjoys freedom of thought and speech.
No one shall be forced to proclaim or repudiate his or her thoughts [or] beliefs.
Agitation and propaganda inciting racial, ethnic, religious [or] social discord and hostility are not allowed.”
Article 48.  Freedom of conscience
“I.  Everyone enjoys freedom of conscience.
Everyone has the right to freely determine his [or her] attitude towards religion, to profess, individually or together with others, any religion, or to profess no religion, [and] to express and disseminate his or her beliefs concerning his or her attitude to religion ...”
Article 22 (Religious literature and items of a religious nature) of the Law on Freedom of Religious Belief of the Republic of Azerbaijan, as in force at the material time, provided that individuals and religious communities might obtain and use religious literature and other items and material of a religious nature in any language. With the consent of the relevant executive authority [the Committee] for religious affairs, religious communities might import and freely distribute literature, items of a religious nature and other material containing religious content.
Paragraph 9.2 of the Regulation on the State Committee for Work with Religious Communities (“the Regulation”), as in force at the material time, provided that in the fulfilment of its duties, the Committee should have the right to control and authorise the production, import and distribution of literature and items of a religious nature and material containing religious and non-religious content, at the request of religious communities or relevant public authorities.
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Code of Administrative Offences provided as follows:
Article 23.  Types of administrative penalties
“23.1.  The following types of administrative penalties may be imposed for administrative offences:
...
1.4.  Seizure of the instrument or object of the administrative offence;
...”
Article 27.  Seizure of a particular item used as an instrument or
object in an administrative offence
"27.1.  The seizure of an item which constitutes the lawful property of a person who has committed an administrative offence, and which has been used as an instrument or object in the commission of an administrative offence under the circumstances defined in the Special Part of the present Code, shall be effected by the obligatory transfer of the item in question to the State, and the item shall not be returned.
2.  The seizure of a particular item which has been used as an instrument or object in the commission of an administrative offence shall be [ordered] by a judge.
...”
Article 299.  Violation of rules concerning the establishment and
activities of religious organisations
“299.0.  A violation of the rules concerning the establishment and activities of religious organisations, namely:
...
0.2.  a violation of the rules provided for by the legislation for the organisation and conduct of religious meetings, rallies and other religious ceremonies;
...
  shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of ten to fifteen conventional financial units for physical persons, and forty to seventy conventional financial units for officials.”