The case concerns the allegedly excessive length of restitution proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1927 and lives in Sofia. She was represented by Ms N. Sedefova, a lawyer practising in Sofia.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Obretenov, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant owned agricultural land, which was included in an agricultural cooperative in the 1950s.
In 2007 the applicant brought an action against the local body competent to take decisions concerning the restitution of agricultural land – the Samokov Agriculture Department (hereinafter “the Department”) – seeking a recognition that she was entitled to the restitution of land totalling 8,275 square metres. The action was allowed in a final judgment of the Sofia Regional Court on 3 February 2009. Following that, in a decision of 9 July 2009 the Department also acknowledged the applicant’s entitlement to restitution.
Seeing that the restitution of agricultural land in the region had started in the 1990s and most of the land had already been allocated to other persons, the Department appointed three of its members to study the available remaining plots of land – considered at that time to have become municipal property – and select appropriate ones. Such a procedure was provided for by law and three plots were selected for the applicant in February 2010.
However, it transpired subsequently that two of the plots were privately-owned. An attempt on the part of the Department to replace them with other plots was overturned in 2011 by the domestic courts, which found that the new plots had not been selected in accordance with the procedure provided for by law. In a final judgment of 10 May 2011 the Supreme Administrative Court ordered the Department to prepare a new proposal concerning the plots to be restituted to the applicants.
The Department selected three other plots and in August 2011 submitted a new proposal for approval to the Samokov municipal authorities. On 21 January 2012 the Samokov mayor informed the applicant that he had forwarded the proposal to the municipal council.
On 28 March 2013 the Samokov municipal council took a decision on the matter, accepting the Department’s proposal as concerns one of the three plots enlisted in it, measuring 3,791 square metres. As to the two other plots, the municipal council rejected the Department’s proposal, noting that one of them was privately-owned, and the other had not been registered as municipal property. The decision was published on the council’s website together with other decisions of that day, and the applicant was not individually notified of it.
At the date of the latest information available to the Court (March 2020), no further decision concerning the applicant’s entitlement to restitution had been taken.
The applicant submits that on numerous occasions throughout the years her son, acting as her representative, sought information from the Department on any new developments in the restitution procedure, but was informed that there were none.
The relevant domestic law on the restitution of agricultural land has been summarised in Zikatanova and Others v. Bulgaria (no. 45806/11, §§ 46-59, 12 March 2020).
The relevant domestic law and practice on the enforcement of final judgments of the administrative courts have been summarised in Bratanova v. Bulgaria (no. 44497/06, §§ 24-25, 9 June 2015) and Dimitar Yanakiev v. Bulgaria (no. 2) (no. 50346/07, §§ 30-35, 31 March 2016).