The case originated in an application (no. 29389/09) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Ivan Aleksandrovich Myakotin (“the applicant”), on 14 May 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr V.I. Dovzhenko, a lawyer practising in Mariupol, Ukraine. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged breaches of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention on account of the confiscation of his car for the alleged breach of customs regulations.
On 3 March 2014 this complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant is a citizen of Ukraine, he was born in 1987 and lives in Berdyansk.
On 22 June 2007 the applicant received a residence permit issued by the Spanish authorities valid until 18 June 2009. He states that he resided in Spain at the material time.
On 30 April 2008 the applicant crossed the Ukrainian border with Poland at the customs post “Krakovets”. He was driving a car, “Opel Vectra”, bought in Spain. During the customs check the applicant stated that he lived permanently in Spain and had come to Ukraine to continue his studies. In the customs declaration the applicant also indicated that he resided in Spain. In support of his statement the applicant submitted a Spanish residence permit. A customs officer, T., decided that the applicant, as a resident of Spain, was allowed to temporarily bring the car into the customs territory of Ukraine until 30 June 2008 without paying customs duties.
On 5 June 2008 the applicant was stopped by traffic police and on 27 June 2008 an administrative offence report was drawn up. It was concluded that the applicant had breached the customs rules since he should have been considered as a resident of Ukraine and thus should have paid 56,394.40 Ukrainian hryvnias (UAH) (at the material time, around 5,000 euros (EUR)) in customs fees for his car.
On 2 July 2008 the Lviv Customs Office ordered an internal investigation of the lawfulness of the actions of customs officer, T., whose duty it was to carry out the customs formalities in the applicant’s case.
On 4 July 2008 the Berdyansk Customs Office seized the applicant’s car. The administrative offence case against the applicant instituted for a breach of customs rules was transferred to a court. The applicant was accused of the movement of a vehicle through the customs border of Ukraine outside customs control and of evasion of customs duties.
On 7 July 2008, as requested by the Berdyansk Customs Office, the Berdyansk Branch of the Zaporizhzhzya Chamber of Commerce and Industry evaluated the applicant’s car and drew up a report stating that it was worth UAH 76,088 (at the material time EUR 9,881.56).
On 7 July and 21 August 2008 the Berdyansk Tax Police decided not to institute criminal proceedings against the applicant for tax evasion and trafficking as the amount of alleged damages was less than the minimum amount required for the acts in question to constitute an offence under the Criminal Code of Ukraine.
On 4 August 2008 the Berdyansk Customs Office drew up a report on the applicant’s administrative offence case. The Customs Office found that during the customs check on 30 April 2008 the applicant had declared that his permanent place of residence was Spain. However, the applicant’s passport did not contain a stamp certifying that fact. Moreover, the Customs Office found that the fact that the applicant’s permanent residence had been registered in Berdyansk also confirmed that when crossing the border he was a resident of Ukraine. Based on the above and referring to the provisions of, inter alia, the Law of Ukraine “On import (dispatch) into Ukraine, the customs clearance and taxation of personal belongings, goods and vehicles imported (dispatched) by individuals into the customs territory of Ukraine” (see paragraph 31 below) and the Resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine no. 231 of 31 March 1995 on the approval of the procedure for the issue of a passport of a citizen of Ukraine and travel documents of a child, their temporary suspension and seizure (see paragraph 33 below), the Customs Office concluded that when crossing the border the applicant was a resident of Ukraine. Finally, referring to the report on the market value of the car of 7 July 2008 (see paragraph 12 above) the Customs Office established that the customs duties evaded by the applicant amounted to UAH 70,922.90.
On 22 August 2008 the Lviv Customs Office drew up a report on the internal investigation. According to this report, T. could not recall all the details of the circumstances of the customs formalities carried out on 30 April 2008 due to the lapse of time. He nonetheless explained that when crossing the border the applicant had provided documents certifying ownership of the car and a customs declaration indicating that his permanent place of residence was Spain. It also follows from the report that during the inquiry on the border the applicant presented his residence permit issued by the Spanish authorities and explained that he permanently resided in Spain and that he had deposited his domestic identity document with the State authorities before he left Ukraine.
On 5 September 2008 customs officer, T., was disciplined for not correctly applying the customs regulations in the applicant’s case. It was noted in the relevant decision that since in the customs declaration it had been indicated that the applicant permanently resided in Spain, T. had decided that the applicant could temporarily bring his car onto Ukrainian territory. However, such a decision was unlawful since there was no indication that the applicant had been registered permanently or temporarily in a Ukrainian consulate abroad. It was also concluded that T. could have, and must have, understood the unlawfulness of his actions. Insufficient training and an inappropriate attitude towards the performance of his duties had been the reasons given for the incorrect application of the customs regulations.
On 20 October 2008 the Berdyansk Local Department of the Ministry of Interior of Ukraine issued a certificate stating that since 16 December 2003 the applicant’s place of residence had been registered in the city of Berdyansk.
On 10 November 2008 the Berdyanskyy Local Court, referring to Article 38 of the Code on Administrative Offences and Articles 322 and 328 of the Customs Code, terminated the proceedings in the applicant’s case as being time-barred; however, it ordered the confiscation of the applicant’s car. In a court hearing the applicant explained that he had been working in Spain and it had been the first time he had entered Ukraine using his car. When entering Ukraine he had presented all relevant documents to a customs officer and was not evading the customs control. The court, however, found that when crossing the border the applicant had declared in the customs declaration that he resided permanently in Spain. He also indicated that he had been temporarily bringing his car with him. On the same day he had taken an obligation to remove the car from the customs territory of Ukraine by 30 June 2008. The court held that according to the information received from a local department of the Ministry of Interior of Ukraine (see paragraph 17 above) at the time of the bordercrossing his place of residence had been registered in the city of Berdyansk. The court further cited the findings of the report on the internal investigation (see paragraph 15 above), according to which customs officer, T. had been disciplined for not correctly applying the customs regulations in the applicant’s case. Based on the above considerations the court concluded that the applicant, being a resident of Ukraine, had entered untrue information into the customs declaration and, as a result of abuse of office by the officers of the customs authorities, he had evaded payments of customs duties.
The applicant appealed stating that his guilt had not been proved. There was no evidence that he had an intention to breach customs rules. The applicant submitted all necessary documents to the customs officer. In particular, during the internal investigation, customs officer, T., admitted that he had taken the relevant decision on the basis of the documents submitted by the applicant. The applicant also noted that he had no permanent place of residence in Ukraine since his parents lived in Spain and he had been coming to Ukraine twice a year to pass exams at the university. Referring to the provisions of the law on “Natural Persons’ Income Tax” (see paragraphs 28 and 29 below) the applicant insisted that he had been a resident of Spain and the absence of the “permanent residence” stamp in his passport had not been a criterion for establishing his place of residence. While imposing the confiscation measure, the first-instance court had failed to take into account his character, the degree of his guilt, his financial situation, the nature of the offence, its mitigation and aggravating factors. The applicant finally noted that the court had failed to provide any reasoning in support of its decision not to fine him but to confiscate his car. According to the applicant, such a sanction was too severe in respect of his offence and questioned whether there should have been a sanction at all.
On 17 November 2008 the Azov Regional Management Institute confirmed that the applicant had been studying there since 2004.
On 22 December 2008 the Zaporizhzhya Regional Court of Appeal amended the decision of 10 November 2008 and found the applicant guilty of breaching the customs rules under Article 351 of the Customs Code. The court noted that since the sanction of confiscation could be applied at any time, the proceedings against the applicant for a breach of Article 351 of the Customs Code could not be terminated as time-barred. The court further established that the customs duties evaded by the applicant amounted to UAH 56,393.40 (at the material time around EUR 4,994). The applicant’s behaviour, according to the appeal court, attested that when declaring his place of residence during the border-crossing the applicant ought to have been aware of the unlawfulness of his actions. In particular, in the court hearing the applicant could not provide a persuasive answer as to why he had considered that Spain had been his permanent residence. Moreover, the applicant had refused to reply to the court’s questions concerning his place of residence registered in the city of Berdyansk. The court finally noted that the fact that customs officer, T., had incorrectly applied the customs regulations in the applicant’s case, did not disprove the applicant’s guilt.
Article 81 of the Code provided that the declaration of goods and vehicles shall be made by means of an application containing accurate information about goods and vehicles, the purpose of their movement through the customs border of Ukraine, as well as the information necessary for customs control and customs clearance.
Article 88 of the Code provided that during the customs formalities the declarant must:
(i)  declare goods and vehicles in accordance with the procedure established by this Code;
(ii)  show goods and vehicles for customs control and customs clearance at the request of the customs authority;
(iii)  provide the customs authority with the documents provided by the legislation and information required for the execution of customs procedures;
(iv)  pay taxes and fees.
Articles 322 and 328 of the Code provided for confiscation as one of the administrative penalties for a breach of customs regulations. There was no time-limit for imposition of a confiscation.
Other relevant provisions of the Code provided as following:
Article 351. Actions, Aimed at Movement of Goods and Vehicles through the Customs Border of Ukraine out of the Customs Control
“Actions, aimed at movement of goods and vehicles through the customs border of Ukraine out of the customs control, i.e. movement thereof through the customs border of Ukraine in places other than the location of a customs authorities or in the time other than the time for the customs clearance, or using unlawful exemption of goods from the customs clearance in the result of abuse of power by customs officials, -
shall be the reason for imposing penalty in the amount from 500 to 1,000 minimum tax-free personal incomes, or confiscation of such goods, as well as confiscation of vehicles used for transportation through the customs territory of Ukraine of goods – direct objects of violations of customs rules.”
Article 355. Activities, Aimed at Illegal Exemption from Taxes and Fees or at Reduction of their Amounts
“Declaring false data in customs declaration and submission of documents with such information to the customs authority as grounds for an exemption from taxes and fees or reduction of their amounts, or failure to pay taxes and fees within the time-periods, established by legislation, as well as other illegal actions, that resulted in taxes and fees arrears, where such actions do not constitute a criminal offence, -
shall be the reason for imposing a fine in the amount of one hundred up to five hundred minimum tax-free personal incomes on natural persons and from five hundred up to one thousand minimum tax-free personal incomes on enterprise officials.”
According to Article 38 of the Code, in force before 17 November 2008, the time-limit for the imposition of a penalty under administrative law is two months from the date of commitment of an administrative offence and two months from the date of detection of a continuous administrative offence. In case of refusal to institute criminal proceedings or of cessation of the criminal case, but in the presence of signs of an administrative offence in the offenders’ actions, an administrative penalty may be imposed no later than one month from the date of adoption of the decision to refuse the institution of a criminal case or to drop the case.
As of 17 November 2008 the two-month time-limits for the imposition of a penalty in the cases examined by the court were replaced by three-month time-limits.
The relevant provisions of Article 1.20.1 read as follows:
“Natural person - resident – individual who has a place of residence in Ukraine.
In case a natural person has also a place of residence in other country, he or she is considered to be a resident [of Ukraine] if that person has a place of permanent residence in Ukraine; if the person has a place of permanent residence also in a foreign state, he or she is considered a resident [of Ukraine] if he has more close personal or economic ties (centre of viral interest) in Ukraine.”
...
“Sufficient (but not exclusive condition for establishing a centre of viral interest of an individual is a place of residence of his or her family members ...”
Article 1.20.2 read as follows:
“Natural person – non-resident – individual who is not a resident of Ukraine.”
This Act regulates, inter alia, issues of registration of place of residence in Ukraine. According to Section 3 of this Act, registration of place of residence requires inserting such information (place of residence or place of stay) into the domestic identity document as well as inserting this information into the database of the State authorities.
The relevant provisions of Article 1 read as follows:
“Citizens-residents - Ukrainian citizens, foreigners, as well stateless persons who have a permanent residence in Ukraine, including those temporarily staying abroad;
Non-resident citizens - foreigners, citizens of Ukraine, individuals without citizenship, who have a permanent place of residence outside Ukraine, including those temporarily staying in the territory of Ukraine;
Permanent place of residence - place of residence in the territory of any state for the duration of at least one year by a citizen who does not have permanent residence in the territory of other states and intends to reside in the territory of this state during any duration regardless of the purpose of such residence, and provided that residence is not related to the performance by this person of an official duties under a contract.”
According to Section 11 of the Act, Ukrainian residents can temporarily import a car for up to one year upon payment of customs duties.
The procedure approved by this Resolution provided that in order to issue a passport when the citizen of Ukraine is abroad for permanent residence, a person must submit, inter alia, a domestic identity document with a stamp certifying that he or she has annulled his or her registration of permanent place of residence in Ukraine. Moreover, in the case of departure abroad for permanent residence the corresponding note is made [a stamp “permanent place of residence”] in the passport with an indication of departure state.
The procedure approved by this Resolution provided that a citizen of Ukraine who went abroad temporarily, but decided to remain abroad on a permanent basis, could receive a “permanent residence” stamp in his or her passport upon completion of certain formalities.
According to a letter of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine addressed to the Customs Service of Ukraine on 18 November 2005, proof of permanent residence outside Ukraine is a passport with a “permanent residence” stamp included therein.