The application concerns the applicant being deprived of property without any prior individual decision having been delivered to that effect and without his being awarded any compensation for that deprivation.
The applicant was born in 1931 and lives in Tivat. He was represented by Mr Z. Miljanić, a lawyer practising in Tivat.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms V. Pavličić.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 21 October 1980 the applicant bought two plots of land, registered as nos. 697/1 and 698/1, from a private person. On 22 October 1980, pursuant to the relevant decision to that effect, the applicant was registered as their owner in the Real Estate Register.
Over time the numbering and sizes of the plots of land changed. Thus plot no. 698/1 was divided into several plots of land, including plots nos. 955/3 and 955/4.
On 17 October 2006 the State instituted civil proceedings against the applicant seeking that it be recognised as the owner of plots nos. 955/3 and 955/4.
In the course of the proceedings, on 1 October 2014, the Court of First Instance (Osnovni sud) in Kotor went to the site (izlaskom na lice mjesta) and established that the plots of land at issue were on the seashore (na samoj obali mora).
On 19 December 2014 the court ruled in favour of the State. It found that it was not in dispute that the applicant had become the owner of the land at issue in a lawful manner (na zakonit način), under the sale contract concluded in 1980. It also found that the said land was in the coastal zone (u zoni morskog dobra) – specifically, on the seacoast (predstavlja samu morsku obalu), it comprised partly a concrete beach and partly a marina. Hence it was State property under sections 2 and 4 of the Coastal Zone Act and sections 11 and 13 of the State Property Act. Furthermore, under sections 10 and 11 of the State Property Act, the seacoast and the coastal zone constituted a common resource (javno dobro u opštoj upotrebi) that no one could possess (koje niko ne može imati u posjedu), as otherwise the coastal zone could not be used (ne bi služilo) for exploiting the sea, for maritime transport and for fishing, which was its basic purpose (osnovna svrha i namjena). The court specified that the applicant’s rights ceased with the establishment of the coastal zone (formiranjem granica morskog dobra) – that is to say the plots at issue had become State property by virtue of the said Acts entering into force.
Following an appeal by the applicant, on 25 September 2015 the High Court (Viši sud) in Podgorica upheld the first-instance judgment, in substance endorsing its reasoning. The High Court also specified that the applicant would retain the right to use the property at issue “until dispossession” (sve do njegovog izuzimanja).
Following a further appeal by the applicant, on 16 December 2015 the Supreme Court upheld the High Court’s judgment, endorsing its reasoning.
On 23 October 2017 the Constitutional Court dismissed a constitutional appeal lodged by the applicant. As regards his complaint in so far as it fell under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 the court held as follows:
“The Constitutional Court protects the right to property by prohibiting the State authorities from restricting or depriving [anyone] of that right, unless such restriction or the deprivation (oduzimanje) is based on law. ... Having regard to the contents (sadržaj) of the right to property ..., the findings expressed in the reasoning of this decision and the object of the dispute preceding the proceedings before the Constitutional Court, the [court] finds that there was no violation of ... Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.”
On 14 October 2016 the applicant instituted proceedings against the State seeking that he be registered as the user of the two plots of land (nosilac prava korišćenja) until dispossession.
On 13 April 2017 the Court of First Instance in Kotor ruled in favour of the applicant, finding that he had a pre-emptive right to use the land at issue (ima preče pravo korišćenja) until dispossession. The court repeated the wording of its findings in the judgment of 19 December 2014 (see paragraph 9 above) and, referring to section 30 of the Coastal Zone Act, noted that former lawful owners were entitled to compensation under the relevant provisions on expropriation.
That judgment was upheld on 12 January and 6 June 2018, respectively, by the High Court and the Supreme Court, which endorsed the reasoning of the Court of First Instance.
As can be seen from the relevant excerpt from the Real Estate Register (list nepokretnosti – prepis) dated 13 June 2019, the State was registered as the sole owner of the land at issue, and the applicant was registered as the user.
Article 45 of the 1992 Constitution guaranteed the right to property. In particular, it provided that no one could be deprived of the right to property and nor could this right be restricted except when the public interest – as defined by statute (utvrđen zakonom) – so required or on a statutory basis and in return for compensation at market value.
Article 58 of the 2007 Constitution guarantees the right to property. In particular, it provides that no one can be deprived of it or restricted in respect of it, except when the public interest so requires and in return for just compensation (uz pravičnu naknadu). It also provides that natural resources and resources in public use (prirodna bogatstva i dobra u opštoj upotrebi) are the property of the State.
This Act regulated property rights in detail. Section 3 provided, inter alia, that an owner had the right to use and dispose of his or her property within the statutory limits, and that everybody had a duty to refrain from violating other persons’ property rights. Section 8 provided that a person could be deprived of the right to property or that this right could be restricted, in accordance with the constitution or the law. Section 20 provided that property could be acquired ex lege, through a legal transaction, by means of inheritance, or on the basis of a decision issued by a State body in accordance with the law.
The 2009 Property Act replaced the 1980 Property Act. Section 6 thereof, however, essentially replicates section 3 of the 1980 Property Act. Section 10 provides, inter alia, that the right of property “can be restricted in accordance with law” (može ograničiti u skladu sa zakonom) and that no one can be deprived of his/her property, except in the public interest and in return for just compensation.
Section 20 provides that “common resources” (dobra od opšteg interesa) enjoy special protection under law; such resources include natural resources, resources in public use, and the coastal zone.
Section 2 provided that the coastal zone included the seacoast (morska obala). Section 3 defined the seacoast as a strip of coast up to the line reached by the biggest waves in the stormiest weather (do koje dopiru najveći talasi za vrijeme najjačeg nevremena) and at least six metres beyond that. Parliament could also declare land beyond that to constitute seacoast. Section 4 provided that the coastal zone was the property of the State, but that exceptionally, land beyond the six-metre strip declared seacoast by the Parliament could be privately owned.
Section 30 provided, inter alia, that owners of land within the coastal zone who had obtained such property lawfully before this Act entered into force and which was duly registered in the Real Estate Register as private property were entitled to compensation in the event of dispossession, pursuant to the provisions on expropriation. They also had a pre-emptive right to use the coastal zone (preče pravo korišćenja morskog dobra), under the same conditions, in accordance with the spatial (that is to say urban) plan.
This Act entered into force on 11 April 1992.
This Act entered into force on 28 March 2009 and thereby replaced section 4 of the 1992 Coastal Zone Act. However, sections 10, 11 and 13 of this Act, taken together, provide, inter alia, that the coastal zone, including the land, seacoast and beaches (kupališta) owned by the State therein, constitute common resources managed (kojima raspolaže) by Montenegro. Section 9 provides that natural resources and resources in public use cannot be private property (ne mogu biti objekti private svojine).
Section 1 defines expropriation as the deprivation or restriction of the right to property when this is required in the public interest, in return for just compensation. Public interest in the expropriation of a piece of real estate is “established by law, or on the basis of law”.
Section 7 provides that expropriation can be undertaken for the benefit (za potrebe) of the State, municipalities, State funds, and companies whose major owner is the State and which undertake activities in the public interest.
Section 14 sets out details as regards defining the public interest. In particular, if a public interest in the expropriation of certain real estate was not established by means of a statute, it can otherwise be established by the Government of Montenegro. A proposal for establishing the public interest in the expropriation of certain real estate is submitted by a person who, pursuant to this statute, would be the beneficiary (korisnik) of that expropriation. The proposal must contain, inter alia, the amount to be paid by way of just compensation. The Government must decide on that proposal within thirty days. In the wording of the same decision, where it defines the public interest in the expropriation in question, the Government must also determine the beneficiary of the expropriation.
Section 19 provides that an expropriation proposal may be submitted by the beneficiary of that expropriation only after the public interest in the expropriation of the real estate in question has been established.
Section 25 provides, inter alia, that any decision on expropriation must identify the beneficiary of the expropriation, the property in question and its owner.
Sections 35-60 provide details as regards the types and the amount of possible just compensation.