The case originated in an application (no. 45092/07) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Ms Kotrina Pyrantienė (“the applicant”), on 11 October 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Novikovas, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicant alleged that she did not receive adequate compensation after decisions of the domestic courts had deprived her of the property she had owned for nine years, in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 29 June 2012 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1942 and lives in Akademija, Kaunas Region.
In 1994 a local authority assigned a plot of land of 0.5 hectares to the applicant. On 6 August 1996 the Kaunas Region Administration confirmed the sale of the land to the applicant.
By an agreement of 24 September 1996 she acquired the plot of land from the State for 61 “single-use investment vouchers” (investiciniai čekiai) and registered it with the Land Registry in her name.
The applicant then grew vegetables on the plot and sold them at the market.
Following a civil claim brought in December 2001 by third parties seeking restoration of ownership rights to that plot, on 2 October 2003 the Kaunas Regional Court, acting as a court of appeal, quashed the authorities’ decision of 6 August 1996 as unlawful, and cancelled the sale of the disputed plot of land, which then had to be returned to the State. It was concluded that the authorities did not have the right to sell that plot of land as the former owners had already in 1991 lodged a request for restoration of their property rights to the nationalised property. It was also decided to remit the case to the first-instance court for the determination of questions of restitution and compensation, as the land-sale agreement had now been declared null and void. On 6 February 2004 the Supreme Court refused the applicant leave to appeal on points of law as out of time.
After the plot of land was taken from the applicant by the State, it was transferred to the former owners following a decision of 16 September 2005 by the Kaunas Region Administration to restore ownership rights to T.M.K. and J.R.
After the case had been remitted to the first-instance court an independent expert was appointed in the proceedings.
A valuation of the plot was carried out by an independent and certified valuer, which included a comprehensive assessment of the characteristics of that plot of land and estimated its value by comparing market prices.
It was established that the plot’s market value in September 2005 was 112,500 Lithuanian litai (LTL, approximately 32,580 euros (EUR)) while in August 1996 it had amounted to LTL 18,000. Nonetheless, the Kaunas Regional Court, acting as a court of first instance, on 5 October 2006 decided to award the applicant LTL 1,466 (approximately EUR 430), noting that that price corresponded to the sum the applicant had paid in single-use investment vouchers in 1996.
On 26 February 2007 the Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the lower court and rejected the applicant’s arguments that Article 6.147 § 2 of the Civil Code had to be applied by awarding the applicant the highest value of the property, as she had been deprived of it because of error by the State authorities.
On 8 May 2007 the Supreme Court refused to accept the applicant’s cassation appeal for examination, on the ground that her appeal raised no important legal issues.
The Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania provides:
“Property shall be inviolable. Rights of ownership shall be protected by law.
Property may be expropriated only for the needs of society and in accordance with the procedure established by law, and shall be justly compensated.”
The Law on the procedure and conditions for restoration of ownership rights to existing real property (Įstatymas dėl piliečių nuosavybės teisių į išlikusį nekilnojamąjį turtą atstatymo tvarkos ir sąlygų), enacted on 18 June 1991 and amended on numerous occasions (hereinafter “the Restitution Law”), provided that, in restoring property rights, priority was to be given to restitution in natura. The State retained the right to buy out a property from the previous owners if the current social conditions and relations so required. In particular, Article 12 paragraph 1 (3) of the Law provided that the State could buy out land in a rural area which had been allocated to a farmer and was occupied by a personal plot, house or other structures of which the farmer had the right of ownership.
The relevant part of the Civil Code, in force since 1 July 2001, provides as follows:
“1.  Any transaction that fails to comply with the mandatory statutory provisions shall be null and void.
When a transaction is declared null and void, each party shall be required to restore to the other party everything he or she has received by means of that transaction (restitution). Where it is impossible to restore in kind the items received, the parties shall be required to compensate each other in money, unless the law provides for other consequences as a result of the transaction’s being declared void ...”
“1.  Monetary equivalent shall be estimated according to prices that were valid at the time when the debtor received what he is liable to restore.
In the event of destruction or transfer of property subject to restitution, the person shall be bound to compensate for the value of the property as it was at the time when the property was received, destroyed or transferred, or at the time of its restitution, whichever value is the lowest. In the event of the person liable to make restitution being in bad faith, or where the restitution is due to his fault, he shall be bound to return the highest value of the property.”
Article 6.271 of the Civil Code provides that damage caused by unlawful acts by institutions of public authority must be compensated for by the State, irrespective of the fault of a particular public servant or other employee of the public authority institution.
The Government’s decree no. 816 on allocation of plots of land for personal and service use, in force since 4 November 1993, provided that new plots of land for individual farming must be measured only in areas which had previously been used as individual farm plots or had been allocated as individual farm plots in accordance with the plans established for that territory during the land reform.
In its ruling of 27 May 1994 the Constitutional Court held, inter alia, that possessions which had been nationalised by the Soviet authorities since 1940 should be considered as “property under the de facto control of the State”. The Constitutional Court also stated that, if possible, the property rights should be restored in natura. It further ruled that buying out land in rural areas for the purpose of building private housing served no public interest, since after such land had been bought out it could be privatised, thereby breaching the previous owners’ right to restitution.
On the issue of the lawfulness of the sale of previously nationalised property, in its decisions nos. 3K-3-384/1999 of 6 September 1999