The case originated in an application (no. 74054/11) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Sinan Yıldırım (“the applicant”), on 18 November 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr E. E. Şimşek, a lawyer practising in Tunceli. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 18 January 2017 the complaint concerning the alleged breach of the applicant’s right to freedom of expression was communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
On 9 February 2018 the Government were informed that the Court intended to assign the application to a Committee. In a letter dated 9 March 2018 the Government objected to the proposed examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in Tunceli.
On 5 April 2007 the applicant attended a concert performed by a band called “Grup Yorum” in the Hozat district of Tunceli.
On 17 October 2007 the Malatya public prosecutor filed an indictment with the Malatya Assize Court, charging the applicant with disseminating propaganda in favour of the DHKP/C (Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party/Front), an illegal armed organisation, under section 7 (2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713). The public prosecutor noted that the applicant had chanted the following slogans during the concert: “Mahir, Hüseyin, Ulaş; Fight until emancipation” (“Mahir, Hüseyin, Ulaş; Kurtuluşa kadar savaş”); “Martyrs of the revolution are immortal” (“Devrim şehitleri ölümsüzdür”); “Revolutionary prisoners are our honour” (“Devrimci tutsaklar onurumuzdur”); and “Victory on mountains, emancipation at the front; long live victory, long live resistance” (“Dağlarda zafer, cephede kurtuluş; yaşasın zafer, yaşasın direniş”).
During the investigation and the proceedings against him, the applicant stated that he had attended the concert in question and chanted the slogans “Music shall not stop, dance shall continue” (“Türküler susmaz , halaylar sürer”) and “We will not be defeated by oppression” (“Baskılar bizi yıldıramaz”). He also noted that he had been on the concert’s organising committee.
On 6 March 2008 the Malatya Assize Court convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to ten months’ imprisonment. In its judgment, on the basis of a police report on a police video recording of the concert of 5 April 2007, the indictment, the applicant’s defence submissions, and the public prosecutor’s observations on the merits of the case, the court considered it established that the applicant had chanted the slogans noted in the indictment. The court considered that the concert, for which legal and administrative authorisation had been obtained, had become a propaganda activity in favour of the DHKP/C, and that the applicant had chanted slogans used by that organisation. The Malatya Assize Court concluded that the applicant had committed the offence of disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation.
The applicant appealed.
On 4 July 2011 the Court of Cassation upheld the first-instance court’s judgment.
Between 6 October 2011 and 1 August 2012 the applicant duly served his prison sentence.
The relevant domestic law applicable at the material time can be found in Belge v. Turkey (no. 50171/09, § 19, 6 December 2016).
In particular, at the time of the events giving rise to the present application, section 7 (2) of Law no. 3713 read as follows:
“Any person who disseminates propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation shall be liable to [serve] a term of imprisonment of one to five years ...”