The case concerns the finding of a member of parliament liable in defamation in connection with a speech he made at a political rally.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Saratov. He was represented before the Court by Mr K. Serdyukov, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
The Government were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
At the material time the applicant was a member of parliament from the opposition Communist Party. On 7 November 2009, at a meeting in Saratov held to celebrate the 92nd anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, he accused the powers-that-be of “crimes against the Russian nation”:
“We can point to at least six crimes against the people, against the Russian nation, perpetrated by those authorities, starting from Yeltsin and his camarilla and ending with Putin and Medvedev ...
... All these crimes weigh heavily on the powers that were behind the 1991 coup, on the Yeltsins, Volodins, Sliskas, Medvedevs, and Putins. The crimes are on them and can only be washed away with blood. With blood should they wash away the disgrace they have brought upon us.”
Mr Volodin, a member of parliament from the ruling United Russia party elected in the Saratov Region, lodged a defamation claim against the applicant in connection with the second part of the above statement.
On 7 April 2010 the Leninskiy District Court of Saratov granted the claim, finding as follows:
“The court considers that in his speech Mr Rashkin made a factual statement that Mr Volodin had committed crimes against the people and the nation, and the speech reflected directly on the plaintiff. The court has arrived at this conclusion on the following grounds.
Mr Volodin is well-known in Saratov because he is an MP representing the Saratov Region... Despite the fact that the defendant used the last name of the plaintiff in the plural form, the court agrees ... that Mr Rashkin used the method of ‘incomplete naming of the person referred to’ ... The last name was used in the plural form, and the first name and patronymic were not mentioned. However, a considerable number of citizens and voters will realise that the statement refers to Mr Volodin who represents the Saratov Region in State bodies ...
The court considers that Mr Rashkin’s speech... contained factual statements suggesting that Mr Volodin had breached the criminal law and describing the plaintiff negatively ... Moreover, the factual statements are untrue, given that the plaintiff did not participate in the 1991 events as he was teaching at the university at the time and was a member of the local parliament ...
...
The plaintiff represents the voters of the Saratov Region in the State bodies and heads the United Russia party... and holds senior positions, including those of vice-speaker and deputy chairman of the State Duma, which makes the damage to his business reputation, honour and dignity substantial.”
The District Court ordered the applicant to pay Mr Volodin 1,000,000 Russian roubles (25,640 euros) in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
On 19 May 2010 the Saratov Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal.