The case concerns the finding of the applicants’ liability in defamation in connection with their reporting on a protest against the Moscow mayor’s decision to demolish the Artists House.
The first applicant, a joint-stock company incorporated under Russian law, is the publisher of the Kommersant newspaper. The second applicant is a journalist writing for the newspaper. He was born in 1976 and lives in Moscow. The applicants were represented by Mr D. Zharkov, a lawyer practising in the Moscow Region.
The Government were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 25 February 2009 the Kommersant newspaper published Mr Voronov’s news report carrying the headline “Artists held a display in support of the Central House of Artists. Snowmen and banners cropped up on Krymsky Val”. The report covered an artistic performance held in protest against the destruction of the Central House of Artists, an important exhibition facility on the Krymsky Val embankment in central Moscow housing the Tretyakov Gallery’s department of modern and contemporary art. The Moscow mayor Yuriy Luzhkov had announced the plan to demolish the Soviet-era building and to replace it with commercial development:
“Artists put up a dozen puny snowmen in front of the building and fitted them with posters calling for a halt to the demolition or lambasting the Moscow authorities. All the posters were signed by their authors: for example, artist [G.V.] signed the slogan ‘YURIY LUZHKOV UNCLUMSY THIEF’ ...
‘For Luzhkov, profit is all that matters. If promised good money, he would accept to tear down the town hall’ – such was the common thinking of protesters, expressed by [G.B.], a representative of the Council of Moscow Initiative Groups.”
The invented words “UNCLUMSY THIEF” («УКЛЮЖИЙ ВОР») were a rearrangement of letters in “YURIY LUZHKOV” («ЮРИЙ ЛУЖКОВ»). It was one of many lines in a satirical poem which Mr G.V. had created four years previously for the “ZHIVOY URLYUK” («ЖИВОЙ УРЛЮК») performance in which new words had been coined by rearranging letters in the Moscow mayor’s name. The applicants submitted photographs showing the banner ‘YURIY LUZHKOV UNCLUMSY THIEF’ attached to a snowman.
On 1 April 2009 Mr Luzhkov sued the applicants and Mr G.V. for defamation, claiming that the banner “Yuriy Luzhkov unclumsy thief” and the Mr G.B.’s statement had impaired his honour, dignity and the reputation of the Moscow mayor.
By a judgment of 8 June 2009, the Tverskoy District Court in Moscow granted the part of the claim concerning Mr G.B.’s statement. It held that, since Mr Voronov had not asked Mr G.B. to join the proceedings as a co-defendant, he should be presumed to have been the author of the statement. As he had not produced any evidence to show the truth of the statement, he was liable for defamation because, in the District Court’s view, he had damaged the mayor’s honour and reputation by implying that the mayor had not discharged his duties in good faith. As regards the statement “Yuriy Luzhkov unclumsy thief”, the District Court noted that Mr G.V. denied being its author. However, as the phrase did not contain any allegation of dishonesty, unethical behaviour or criminality, it was not actionable in defamation. The District Court awarded Mr Luzhkov 35,000 Russian roubles (RUB) against the Kommersant newspaper and RUB 15,000 against Mr Voronov.
Mr Voronov and Mr Luzhkov filed appeals against the judgment. The applicants did not receive information about the date or time of the appeal hearing. The Government produced a copy of a summons which had been sent to Mr Voronov’s work address but returned as unclaimed.
On 22 June 2010 the Moscow City Court proceeded to hear the appeals in the applicants’ absence. It upheld the part of the judgment concerning Mr G.B.’s statement and, in addition, found the applicants liable for reproducing the phrase “Yuriy Luzhkov unclumsy thief”. In the City Court’s assessment, it amounted to an allegation of illegal and unethical conduct on the part of Mayor Luzhkov. The City Court increased the awards in Mr Luzhkov’s favour to RUB 50,000 (1,315 euros (EUR) at the material time) against the newspaper and RUB 30,000 (EUR 790) against the journalist.