The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 24 April 1991, and on 3 July 1991 by the Government of Ireland ("the Government"), within the three-month period laid down in Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("the Convention"). It originated in two applications against  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) on 10 August and 15 September 1988. The first (no. 14234/88) was brought by Open Door Counselling Ltd, a company incorporated in Ireland; the second (no. 14235/88) by another Irish company, Dublin Well Woman Centre Ltd, and one citizen of the United States of America, Ms Bonnie Maher, and three Irish citizens, Ms Ann Downes, Mrs X and Ms Maeve Geraghty.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46) and the Government’s application referred to Article 48 (art. 48). The object of the request and the application was to obtain a decision as to whether or not the facts of the case disclosed a breach by Ireland of its obligations under Articles 8, 10 and 14 (art. 8, art. 10, art. 14) and also, in the case of the application, to examine these issues in the context of Articles 2, 17 and 60 (art. 2, art. 17, art. 60).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of the Rules of Court, the applicants stated that they wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyers who would represent them (Rule 30). On 23 January 1992 the President granted leave, pursuant to Rule 30 of the Rules of Court, to the first applicant company to be represented at the oral proceedings by a lawyer from the .
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr B. Walsh, the elected judge of Irish nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)). In a letter to the President of 8 May 1991, Mr Walsh stated that he wished to withdraw pursuant to Rule 24 para. 2, as the case arose out of a decision of the Irish Supreme Court in which he had participated. On 19 June the Agent of the Government informed the Registrar that the Hon. Mr Justice Blayney had been appointed as ad hoc judge (Article 43 of the Convention and Rule 23) (art. 43).
On 26 April the President of the Court had drawn by lot the names of the other seven members of the Chamber, namely Mr J. , Mr L.-E. Pettiti, Mr J. De Meyer, Mrs E. Palm, Mr R. Pekkanen, Mr A.N. Loizou and Mr J.M. Morenilla (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43).
Mr Ryssdal assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5) and, through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, the Delegate of the Commission and the representatives of the applicants on the organisation of the procedure (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38). In accordance with the President’s orders and directions, the Registrar received, on 31 October and 4 November 1991, the memorials of the applicants and the Government and, on 6 December 1991, the observations of the Delegate of the Commission.
On 28 August 1991, the President had granted, under Rule 37 para. 2, leave to "Article 19" (the International Centre against Censorship) to submit written comments on specific aspects of the case. Leave had been granted on the same date to the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children (S.P.U.C.). The respective comments were received on 28 November.
On 27 January 1992 the President consented to the filing of a document, pursuant to Rule 37 para. 1, second sub-paragraph, submitted by Dublin Well Woman Centre Ltd.
As directed by the President, the hearing took place in public in the , , on 24 March 1992. The Chamber had held a preparatory meeting beforehand during which it decided, pursuant to Rule 51, to relinquish jurisdiction forthwith in favour of the plenary Court. It also consented to the filing of various documents by the applicants and refused a request by lawyers acting on behalf of S.P.U.C. to address the Court.
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
- for the applicants
Open Door Counselling Ltd
Dublin Well Woman Centre Ltd and Others
The Court heard addresses by Mr Gleeson and Mr O’Reilly for the Government, by Mr Frowein for the Commission and by Mr Clarke, Mr Hardiman and Mr Cole for the applicants, as well as replies to questions put by the Court.
The Government made further submissions concerning the applicants’ claims under Article 50 (art. 50) on 10 April 1992. Comments by the applicants in reply were filed on 15 June 1992.
The applicants in this case are (a) Open Door Counselling Ltd (hereinafter referred to as Open Door), a company incorporated under Irish law, which was engaged, inter alia, in counselling pregnant women in Dublin and in other parts of Ireland; and (b) Dublin Well Woman Centre Ltd (hereinafter referred to as Dublin Well Woman), a company also incorporated under Irish law which provided similar services at two clinics in Dublin; (c) Bonnie Maher and Ann Downes, who worked as trained counsellors for Dublin Well Woman; (d) Mrs X, born in 1950 and Ms Maeve Geraghty, born in 1970, who join in the Dublin Well Woman application as women of child-bearing age. The applicants complained of an injunction imposed by the Irish courts on Open Door and Dublin Well Woman to restrain them from providing certain information to pregnant women concerning abortion facilities outside the jurisdiction of  by way of non-directive counselling (see paragraphs 13 and 20 below).
Open Door and Dublin Well Woman are both non-profit- making organisations. Open Door ceased to operate in 1988 (see paragraph 21 below). Dublin Well Woman was established in 1977 and provides a broad range of services relating to counselling and marriage, family planning, procreation and health matters. The services offered by Dublin Well Woman relate to every aspect of women’s health, ranging from smear tests to breast examinations, infertility, artificial insemination and the counselling of pregnant women.
In 1983, at the time of the referendum leading to the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution (see paragraph 28 below), Dublin Well Woman issued a pamphlet stating inter alia that legal advice on the implications of the wording of the provision had been obtained and that "with this wording anybody could seek a court injunction to prevent us offering" the non-directive counselling service. The pamphlet also warned that "it would also be possible for an individual to seek a court injunction to prevent a woman travelling abroad if they believe she intends to have an abortion".
The applicant companies were the defendants in proceedings before the High Court which were commenced on 28 June 1985 as a private action brought by the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children (Ireland) Ltd (hereinafter referred to as S.P.U.C.), which was converted into a relator action brought at the suit of the Attorney General by order of the High Court of 24 September 1986 (the Attorney General at the relation of the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children (Ireland) Ltd v. Open Door Counselling Ltd and Dublin Well Woman Centre Ltd [1988] Irish Reports, pp. 593-627).
S.P.U.C. sought a declaration that the activities of the applicant companies in counselling pregnant women within the jurisdiction of the court to travel abroad to obtain an abortion were unlawful having regard to Article 40.3.3o of the Constitution which protects the right to life of the unborn (see paragraph 28 below) and an order restraining the defendants from such counselling or assistance.
No evidence was adduced at the hearing of the action which proceeded on the basis of certain agreed facts. The facts as agreed at that time by Dublin Well Woman may be summarised as follows:
(a) It counsels in a non-directive manner pregnant women resident in ;
(b) Abortion or termination of pregnancy may be one of the options discussed within the said counselling;
(c) If a pregnant woman wants to consider the abortion option further, arrangements will be made by the applicant to refer her to a medical clinic in ;
(d) In certain circumstances, the applicant may arrange for the travel of such pregnant women;
(e) The applicant will inspect the medical clinic in  to ensure that it operates at the highest standards;
(f) At those medical clinics abortions have been performed on pregnant women who have been previously counselled by the applicant;
(g) Pregnant women resident in  have been referred to medical clinics in  where abortions have been performed for many years including 1984.
The facts agreed by Open Door were the same as above with the exception of point (d).
The meaning of the concept of non-directive counselling was described in the following terms by Mr Justice Finlay CJ in the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case (judgment of 16 March 1988, [1988] Irish Reports 618 at p. 621):
"It was submitted on behalf of each of the Defendants that the meaning of non-directive counselling in these agreed sets of facts was that it was counselling which neither included advice nor was judgmental but that it was a service essentially directed to eliciting from the client her own appreciation of her problem and her own considered choice for its solution. This interpretation of the phrase ‘non-directive counselling’ in the context of the activities of the Defendants was not disputed on behalf of the Respondent. It follows from this, of course, that non- directive counselling to pregnant women would never involve the actual advising of an abortion as the preferred option but neither, of course, could it permit the giving of advice for any reason to the pregnant women receiving such counselling against choosing to have an abortion."
On 19 December 1986 Mr Justice Hamilton, President of the High Court, found that the activities of Open Door and Dublin Well Woman in counselling pregnant women within the jurisdiction of the court to travel abroad to obtain an abortion or to obtain further advice on abortion within a foreign jurisdiction were unlawful having regard to the provisions of Article 40.3.3o of the Constitution of Ireland.
He confirmed that Irish criminal law made it an offence to procure or attempt to procure an abortion, to administer an abortion or to assist in an abortion by supplying any noxious thing or instrument (sections 58 and 59 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 - see paragraph 29 below). Furthermore, Irish constitutional law also protected the right to life of the unborn from the moment of conception onwards.
An injunction was accordingly granted "... that the Defendants [Open Door and Dublin Well Woman] and each of them, their servants or agents, be perpetually restrained from counselling or assisting pregnant women within the jurisdiction of this Court to obtain further advice on abortion or to obtain an abortion". The High Court made no order relating to the costs of the proceedings, leaving each side to bear its own legal costs.
Open Door and Dublin Well Woman appealed against this decision to the Supreme Court which in a unanimous judgment delivered on 16 March 1988 by Mr Justice Finlay CJ rejected the appeal.
The Supreme Court noted that the appellants did not consider it essential to the service which they provided for pregnant women in  that they should take any part in arranging the travel of women who wished to go abroad for the purpose of having an abortion or that they arranged bookings in clinics for such women. However, they did consider it essential to inform women who wished to have an abortion outside the jurisdiction of the court of the name, address, telephone number and method of communication with a specified clinic which they had examined and were satisfied was one which maintained a high standard.
On the question of whether the above activity should be restrained as being contrary to the Constitution, Mr Justice Finlay CJ stated:
"... the essential issues in this case do not in any way depend upon the Plaintiff establishing that the Defendants were advising or encouraging the procuring of abortions. The essential issue in this case, having regard to the nature of the guarantees contained in Article 40, s.3, sub-s.3 of the Constitution, is the issue as to whether the Defendants’ admitted activities were assisting pregnant women within the jurisdiction to travel outside that jurisdiction in order to have an abortion. To put the matter in another way, the issue and the question of fact to be determined is: were they thus assisting in the destruction of the life of the unborn?
I am satisfied beyond doubt that having regard to the admitted facts the Defendants were assisting in the ultimate destruction of the life of the unborn by abortion in that they were helping the pregnant woman who had decided upon that option to get in touch with a clinic in Great Britain which would provide the service of abortion. It seems to me an inescapable conclusion that if a woman was anxious to obtain an abortion and if she was able by availing of the counselling services of one or other of the Defendants to obtain the precise location, address and telephone number of, and method of communication with, a clinic in Great Britain which provided that service, put in plain language, that was knowingly helping her to attain her objective. I am, therefore, satisfied that the finding made by the learned trial Judge that the Defendants were assisting pregnant women to travel abroad to obtain further advice on abortion and to secure an abortion is well supported on the evidence ..."
The Court further noted that the phrase in Article 40.3.3o "with due regard to the equal right to life of the mother" did not arise for interpretation in the case since the applicants were not claiming that the service they were providing for pregnant women was "in any way confined to or especially directed towards the due regard to the equal right to life of the mother ...".
Open Door and Dublin Well Woman had submitted that if they did not provide this counselling service it was likely that pregnant women would succeed nevertheless in obtaining an abortion in circumstances less advantageous to their health. The Court rejected this argument in the following terms:
"Even if it could be established, however, it would not be a valid reason why the Court should not restrain the activities in which the defendants were engaged.
The function of the courts, which is not dependent on the existence of legislation, when their jurisdiction to defend and vindicate a constitutionally guaranteed right has been invoked, must be confined to the issues and to the parties before them.
If the Oireachtas enacts legislation to defend and vindicate a constitutionally guaranteed right it may well do so in wider terms than are necessary for the resolution of any individual case. The courts cannot take that wide approach. They are confined to dealing with the parties and issues before them. I am satisfied, therefore, that it is no answer to the making of an order restraining these defendants’ activities that there may be other persons or the activities of other groups or bodies which will provide the same result as that assisted by these defendants’ activities."
As to whether there was a constitutional right to information about the availability of abortion outside the State, the court stated as follows:
"The performing of an abortion on a pregnant woman terminates the unborn life which she is carrying. Within the terms of Article 40.3.3o it is a direct destruction of the constitutionally guaranteed right to life of that unborn child.
It must follow from this that there could not be an implied and unenumerated constitutional right to information about the availability of a service of abortion outside the State which, if availed of, would have the direct consequence of destroying the expressly guaranteed constitutional right to life of the unborn. As part of the submission on this issue it was further suggested that the right to receive and give information which, it was alleged, existed and was material to this case was, though not expressly granted, impliedly referred to or involved in the right of citizens to express freely their convictions and opinions provided by Article 40, s.6, sub-s.1 (i) of the Constitution, since, it was claimed, the right to express freely convictions and opinions may, under some circumstances, involve as an ancillary right the right to obtain information. I am satisfied that no right could constitutionally arise to obtain information the purpose of the obtaining of which was to defeat the constitutional right to life of the unborn child."
The court upheld the decision of the High Court to grant an injunction but varied the terms of the order as follows:
"... that the defendants and each of them, their servants or agents be perpetually restrained from assisting pregnant women within the jurisdiction to travel abroad to obtain abortions by referral to a clinic, by the making for them of travel arrangements, or by informing them of the identity and location of and the method of communication with a specified clinic or clinics or otherwise."
The costs of the Supreme Court appeal were awarded against the applicant companies on 3 May 1988.
Following the judgment of the Supreme Court, Open Door, having no assets, ceased its activities.
On 25 September 1989 S.P.U.C. applied to the High Court for a declaration that the dissemination in certain student publications of information concerning the identity and location of abortion clinics outside the jurisdiction was unlawful and for an injunction restraining its distribution. Their standing to apply to the courts for measures to protect the right to life of the unborn had previously been recognised by the Supreme Court following a similar action in the case of Society for the Protection of Unborn Children (Ireland) Ltd v. Coogan and Others ([1989] Irish Reports, pp. 734-751).
By a judgment of 11 October 1989 the High Court decided to refer certain questions to the European Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling under Article 177 of the EEC Treaty concerning, inter alia, the question whether the right to information concerning abortion services outside  was protected by Community law.
An appeal was brought against this decision and, on 19 December 1989, the Supreme Court granted an interlocutory injunction restraining the students from "publishing or distributing or assisting in the printing, publishing or distribution of any publication produced under their aegis providing information to persons (including pregnant women) of the identity and location of and the method of communication with a specified clinic or clinics where abortions are performed" (Society for the Protection of Unborn Children (Ireland) Ltd v. Stephen Grogan and Others, [1989] Irish Reports, pp. 753-771).
Mr Justice Finlay CJ (with whom Mr Justice Walsh, Mr Justice Griffin and Mr Justice Hederman concurred) considered that the reasoning of the court in the case brought against the applicant companies applied to the activities of the students:
"I reject as unsound the contention that the activity involved in this case of publishing in the students’ manuals the name, address and telephone number, when telephoned from this State, of abortion clinics in the United Kingdom, and distributing such manuals in Ireland, can be distinguished from the activity condemned by this Court in [the Open Door Counselling case] on the grounds that the facts of that case were that the information was conveyed during periods of one to one non-directive counselling. It is clearly the fact that such information is conveyed to pregnant women, and not the method of communication which creates the unconstitutional illegality, and the judgment of this Court in the Open Door Counselling case is not open to any other interpretation."
Mr Justice McCarthy also considered that an injunction should be issued and commented as follows:
"In the light of the availability of such information from a variety of sources, such as imported magazines, etc., I am far from satisfied that the granting of an injunction to restrain these defendants from publishing the material impugned would save the life of a single unborn child, but I am more than satisfied that if the courts fail to enforce, and enforce forthwith, that guarantee as construed in A.G. (S.P.U.C.) v. Open Door Counselling Ltd ([1988] Irish Reports 593), then the rule of law will be set at nought."
In a judgment of 4 October 1991 on the questions referred under Article 177 of the EEC Treaty, following the Supreme Court’s judgment, the Court of Justice of the European Communities ruled that the medical termination of pregnancy, performed in accordance with the law of the State in which it is carried out, constitutes a service within the meaning of Article 60 of the Treaty. However it found that the link between the activity of the student associations and medical terminations of pregnancy carried out in clinics in another member State was too tenuous for the prohibition on the distribution of information to be capable of being regarded as a restriction on the freedom to supply services within the meaning of Article 59 of the Treaty. The Court did not examine whether the prohibition was in breach of Article 10 (art. 10) of the Convention. In the light of its conclusions concerning the restriction on services it considered that it had no jurisdiction with regard to national legislation "lying outside the scope of Community law". Accordingly, the restrictions on the publication of information by student associations were not considered to be contrary to Community law (see paragraphs 22-23 above, the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children () Ltd v. Stephen Grogan and Others [1991] European Court Reports I, pp. 4733-4742).
The interpretation to be given to Article 40.3.3o of the Constitution also arose before the Supreme Court in the case of The Attorney General v. X and Others which concerned an application to the courts by the Attorney General for an injunction to prevent a 14-year-old girl who was pregnant from leaving the jurisdiction to have an abortion abroad. The girl alleged that she had been raped and had expressed the desire to commit suicide. The Supreme Court, in its judgment of 5 March 1992, found that termination of pregnancy was permissible under Article 40.3.3o where it was established as a matter of probability that there was a real and substantial risk to the life of the mother if such termination was not effected. Finding that this test was satisfied on the facts of the case the Supreme Court discharged the injunction which had been granted by the High Court at first instance.
A majority of three judges of the Supreme Court (Finlay CJ, Hederman and Egan JJ.) expressed the view that Article 40.3.3o empowered the courts in proper cases to restrain by injunction a pregnant woman from leaving the jurisdiction to have an abortion so that the right to life of the unborn might be defended and vindicated.
During the oral hearing before the European Court of Human Rights, the Government made the following statement in the light of the Supreme Court’s judgment in this case:
"... persons who are deemed to be entitled under Irish law to avail themselves of termination of pregnancy in these circumstances must be regarded as being entitled to have appropriate access to information in relation to the facilities for such operations, either in  or abroad."
The applicants presented evidence to the Court that there had been no significant drop in the number of Irish women having abortions in  since the granting of the injunction, that number being well over 3,500 women per year. They also submitted an opinion from an expert in public health (Dr J.R. Ashton) which concludes that there are five possible adverse implications for the health of Irish women arising from the injunction in the present case:
An increase in the birth of unwanted and rejected children;
An increase in illegal and unsafe abortions;
A lack of adequate preparation of Irish women obtaining abortions;
Increases in delay in obtaining abortions with ensuing increased complication rates;
Poor aftercare with a failure to deal adequately with medical complications and a failure to provide adequate contraceptive advice.
In their written comments to the Court, S.P.U.C. claimed that the number of abortions obtained by Irish women in , which had been rising rapidly prior to the enactment of Article 40.3.3o, had increased at a much reduced pace. They further submitted that the number of births to married women had increased at a "very substantial rate".
The applicants claimed that the impugned information was available in British newspapers and magazines which were imported into  as well as in the yellow pages of the  telephone directory which could be purchased from the Irish telephone service. It was also available in publications such as the British Medical Journal which was obtainable in .
While not challenging the accuracy of the above information the Government observed that no newspaper or magazine had been produced in evidence to the Court.
Article 40.3.3o of the Irish Constitution (the Eighth Amendment), which came into force in 1983 following a referendum, reads:
"The State acknowledges the right to life of the unborn and, with due regard to the equal right to life of the mother, guarantees in its laws to respect, and, as far as practicable, by its laws to defend and vindicate that right."
This provision has been interpreted by the Supreme Court in the present case, in the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children () Ltd v. Grogan and Others ([1989] Irish Reports, p. 753) and in The Attorney General v. X and Others (see paragraphs 22-25 above).
The statutory prohibition of abortion is contained in sections 58 and 59 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861. Section 58 provides that:
"Every woman, being with child, who, with intent to procure her own miscarriage, shall unlawfully administer to herself any poison or other noxious thing or shall unlawfully use any instrument or other means whatsoever with the like intent, and whosoever, with intent to procure the miscarriage of any woman, whether she be or not be with child, shall unlawfully administer to her or cause to betaken by her any poison or other noxious thing, or shall unlawfully use any instrument or other means whatsoever with the like intent, shall be guilty of a felony, and being convicted thereof shall be liable, [to imprisonment for life] ..."
Section 59 states that:
"Whoever shall unlawfully supply or procure any poison or other noxious thing, or any instrument or thing whatsoever, knowing that the same is intended to be unlawfully used or employed with intent to procure the miscarriage of any woman, whether she be or be not with child, shall be guilty of a misdemeanour, and being convicted thereof, ..."
Section 16 of the Censorship of Publications Act 1929 as amended by section 12 of the Health (Family Planning) Act 1979 provides that:
"It shall not be lawful for any person, otherwise than under and in accordance with a permit in writing granted to him under this section
any book or periodical publication (whether appearing on the register of prohibited publications or not) which advocates or which might reasonably be supposed to advocate the procurement of abortion or miscarriage or any method, treatment or appliance to be used for the purpose of such procurement."
Section 58 of the Civil Liability Act 1961 provides that "the law relating to wrongs shall apply to an unborn child for his protection in like manner as if the child were born, provided the child is subsequently born alive".
Section 10 of the Health (Family Planning) Act 1979 re-affirms the statutory prohibition of abortion and states as follows:
"Nothing in this Act shall be construed as authorising -
Apart from the present case and subsequent developments (see paragraphs 11-25 above), reference has been made to the right to life of the unborn in various decisions of the Supreme Court (see, for example, McGee v. Attorney General [1974] Irish Reports, p. 264, G. v. An Bord Uchtala [1980] Irish Reports, p. 32, Norris v. Attorney General [1984] Irish Reports, p. 36).
In the case of G. v. An Bord Uchtala (loc. cit.) Mr Justice Walsh stated as follows:
"[A child] has the right to life itself and the right to be guarded against all threats directed to its existence, whether before or after birth ... The right to life necessarily implies the right to be born, the right to preserve and defend and to have preserved and defended that life ..."
The Supreme Court has also stated that the courts are the custodians of the fundamental rights set out in the Constitution and that their powers in this regard are as ample as the defence of the Constitution requires (The State (Quinn) v. Ryan [1965] Irish Reports 70). Moreover, an infringement of a constitutional right by an individual may be actionable in damages as a constitutional tort (Meskell v. C.I.E. [1973] Irish Reports, p. 121).
In his judgment in The People v. Shaw ([1982] Irish Reports, p. 1), Mr Justice Kenny observed:
"When the People enacted the Constitution of 1937, they provided (Article 40,s.3) that the State guaranteed in its laws to respect, and, as far as practicable, by its laws to defend and vindicate the personal rights of the citizen and that the State should, in particular, by its laws protect as best it might from unjust attack and in the case of injustice done, vindicate the life, person, good name and property rights of every citizen. I draw attention to the use of the words ‘the State’. The obligation to implement this guarantee is imposed not on the Oireachtas only, but on each branch of the State which exercises the powers of legislating, executing and giving judgment on those laws: Article 6. The word ‘laws’ in Article 40,s.3 is not confined to laws which have been enacted by the Oireachtas, but comprehends the laws made by judges and by ministers of State when they make statutory instruments or regulations."
In their applications (nos. 14234 and 14235/88) lodged with the Commission on 19 August and 22 September 1988 the applicants complained that the injunction in question constituted an unjustified interference with their right to impart or receive information contrary to Article 10 (art. 10) of the Convention. Open Door, Mrs X and Ms Geraghty further claimed that the restrictions amounted to an interference with their right to respect for private life in breach of Article 8 (art. 8) and, in the case of Open Door, discrimination contrary to Article 14 in conjunction with Articles 8 and 10 (art. 14+8, art. 14+10).
The Commission joined the applications on 14 March 1989 and declared the case admissible on 15 May 1990. In its report of 7 March 1991 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the opinion:
(a) by eight votes to five, that there had been a violation of Article 10 (art. 10) in respect of the Supreme Court injunction as it affected the applicant companies and counsellors;
(b) by seven votes to six, that there had been a violation of Article 10 (art. 10) in respect of the Supreme Court injunction as it affected Mrs X and Ms Geraghty;
(c) by seven votes to two, with four abstentions, that it was not necessary to examine further the complaints of Mrs X and Ms Geraghty under Article 8 (art. 8);
(d) unanimously, that there had been no violation of Articles 8 and 14 (art. 8, art. 14) in respect of Open Door.
The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the seven separate opinions contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
At the public hearing on 24 March 1992 the Government maintained in substance the arguments and submissions set out in their memorial whereby they invited the Court to find that there had been no breach of the Convention.