The case originated in an application (no. 10090/16) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian NGO, the Centre for Democracy and the Rule of Law (Центр демократії та верховенства права – “the applicant organisation”), on 8 February 2016.
The applicant organisation was represented by Ms V. Volodovska, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant organisation alleged that the authorities had denied it access to the information it needed for its activities, in breach of Article 10 of the Convention.
On 11 September 2018 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant organisation in a Ukrainian NGO. It has been active since 2005 and, when the application was lodged, was called Media Law Institute. It has its offices in Kyiv.
On 26 October 2014 parliamentary elections were held in Ukraine. They followed presidential elections in May 2014.
By law, as part of the registration to stand in elections all candidates for Parliament had to file their curricula vitarum (“CVs”) with the Central Election Commission (“the CEC”). Brief information about all candidates, extracted from the CVs, was then published on the CEC’s website (see paragraph 38 below).
On 8 November 2014 the CEC finished counting the votes and announced that the electoral lists of six parties had crossed the electoral barrier and would be represented in Parliament.
Of the six individuals in the first positions of the lists five had previously held public office:
(i)  Mr Y. Boyko, an MP from 2007 to 2010, Energy Minister and Deputy Prime Minister from 2010 to early 2014. He was the first on the list of the Opposition Bloc;
(ii)  mayor of Kyiv Mr V. Klitschko, who, prior to his election as mayor in June 2014, had been an MP and a leader of a parliamentary group since 2012 – the Petro Poroshenko Bloc’s list;
(iii)  Mr O. Lyashko, an MP since 2006 and a presidential candidate in 2014 – the Radical Party’s list;
(iv)  Ms Y. Tymoshenko, a former Prime Minister and candidate in the 2010 and 2014 presidential elections – the Batkivshchyna (“Fatherland”) Party’s list;
(v)  the then Prime Minister of Ukraine Mr A. Yatsenyuk, who, prior to his taking the office of Prime Minister in February 2014, had been an MP and who had been a presidential candidate in 2010 and, before that, the speaker of Parliament and Foreign Minister – the Narodny Front’s (“People’s Front”) list;
The sixth was Ms G. Hopko, who was the first on the list of the Samopomich (“Self-reliance”) Party and who had never before occupied any public office.
On 10 November 2014 the applicant organisation asked the Central Election Commission to provide it, by email, with copies of the CVs of the above six individuals. It relied on the Access to Public Information Act and the Parliamentary Elections Act, arguing that the CVs constituted public information. It provided no indication as to how the documents would be used.
On 17 November 2014 the CEC refused to provide copies. Instead it provided only the information which had already been published on the CEC’s website. In a four-page decision the CEC cited the following grounds for the refusal:
(i)  the CEC referred to the broad definition of confidential information concerning private life contained in the Constitutional Court’s 2012 decision concerning respect for private life (see paragraphs 46 to 48 below);
(ii)  the Parliamentary Elections Act specified, in listing the information about candidates to be published on the CEC’s website (see paragraph 38 below), which information about candidates was public;
(iii)  under the Access to Public Information Act (see paragraphs 32 and 33 below) the CEC could only use the personal data provided to it for the purpose for which it had been provided and could only disclose confidential information with the consent of the persons whom it concerned;
(iv)  the CEC lacked the candidates’ consent for disclosure of any other information about them contained in their CVs, specifically: (a) work history, (b) history of any work for the public, including elected positions, (c) family, (d) address and (e) telephone number (see paragraph 37 below);
(v)  the applicant organisation’s information request did not identify any need to disclose that information without the candidates’ consent for reasons of national security, economic welfare and human rights.
The applicant organisation appealed against that decision to the Kyiv Circuit Administrative Court. Its arguments are set out in paragraphs 14 to 19 below.
The applicant organisation argued that the CVs constituted public information subject to disclosure under the Access to Public Information Act. It relied in particular on section 63 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, which defined all information submitted to the CEC by candidates as “open” (see paragraph 38 below). It also argued that just because not all information submitted by the candidates to the CEC had to be published on its website did not mean that, as public information, it did not have to be disclosed on request.
The Access to Public Information Act and the Data Protection Act specified that information regarding performance of functions by public officials could not be designated as confidential (see paragraphs 31 and 40 below). The requested information concerning education, work history, history of work for the public and the families of the individuals concerned was crucial for assessing the level of their competence and potential conflicts of interest as MPs and so fell within the definition of information which the Data Protection Act exempted from being designated confidential (see paragraph 40 below).
That information was also of public interest as it concerned the leaders of the most popular political parties. The applicant organisation, as the founder of the civic movement Chesno focused on transparency and integrity in the electoral process, and was interested in that data as it was engaged in constant supervision of the electoral process, and collection and dissemination of information about the candidates for elected office.
The applicant organisation pointed out that, in any case, before the elections Mr Klitschko and Ms Hopko had themselves published their full CVs on the websites of their parties showing that they had not objected to their being disclosed.
The applicant organisation also stated that it had tried to obtain this information about the candidates even prior to the elections but its email enquiries had been ignored so it had had to renew its request after the elections.
The CEC had failed to engage in the three-step balancing exercise the Access to Public Information Act required in order to justify refusal of an information request (see paragraph 30 below).
The CEC responded that the legislation it had applied had been the result of the implementation in domestic law of Articles 8 and 10 of the Convention. In examining the information request, the CEC had come to the conclusion that the applicant organisation had been interested in the entirety of the information contained in the CVs, including the confidential elements, namely addresses, telephone numbers, family, date and place of birth and work history.
On 8 June 2015 the Circuit Court dismissed the applicant organisation’s claim for the reasons set out in paragraphs 22 to 24 below.
Referring to section 11 of the Information Act (see paragraph 41 below) the court held that the information contained in the CVs was, as a general rule, confidential and could only be disclosed where the law specifically provided for this. The Information Act allowed disclosure of information which was in the public interest, notably where it was necessary for citizens to exercise their rights (see paragraph 42 below).
On the facts, the applicant organisation had failed to prove that the information it had been seeking had been necessary for voters to exercise their right to vote effectively. Notably, information about candidates had been published on the CEC’s website as required by the Parliamentary Elections Act. Reading that Act in context (see paragraphs 37 and 38 below) it was evident that the candidates had provided consent only to the disclosure of the information the Act required to be published on the CEC website. This implied that there had been no consent to the disclosure of the other information or that it could not be disclosed without consent.
The court added that Article 10 of the Convention, as explained by the Court in Von Hannover (no. 2) v. Germany (no. 59320/00, §§ 63-64, 24 June 2004), allowed the limitation of the freedom of speech in the interest of ensuring respect for Article 8 rights. To be sure, there was greater scope for limitation of politicians’ right to private life in order to ensure that the press could perform its role of public “watchdog”, but this was not unlimited and therefore the CEC, as the holder of information, had had to take into account the limits on disclosure of private information imposed by law. The fact that two of the individuals concerned had disclosed their CVs in a different context had not changed the court’s findings because there had been no proof that those individuals had consented to the disclosure of their CVs submitted to the CEC.
The applicant organisation appealed, maintaining essentially the same arguments. It also argued that, while the Information Act (see paragraph 41 below) indeed classified information on education as confidential, no law declared work history, including history of work in the public interest as confidential. As regards family, that information had to be disclosed already anyway as part of the declaration of income and assets envisaged by the anti-corruption legislation (see paragraph 44 below). Disagreeing with the first-instance court’s assessment that the information in question was not necessary for the exercise of the constitutional rights of citizens, the applicant organisation pointed out that the individuals concerned were leaders of major parties who, by putting themselves forward as candidates, opened themselves up to heightened scrutiny.
In the latter connection the applicant organisation relied on the resolution of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe of 25 December 2008 no. 1165 on the right to privacy (see paragraph 53 below). The court’s reliance on the Von Hannover judgment had been erroneous since the information the applicant organisation was asking for did not concern the private and family life of the concerned individuals but their education, job and public history and families, information which was necessary to assess their competence in office and possible conflicts of interest.
On 17 August 2015 the Kyiv Administrative Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s judgment. Invoking the Constitutional Court’s decision of 2012 (see paragraphs 46 to 48 below) it held that the information found in the CVs was confidential. There was no consent for its disclosure. Pursuant to the Access to Public Information Act (see paragraph 32 below) such information could only be disclosed in the interests of national security, economic welfare or human rights. The applicant organisation had failed to prove that the disclosure of the information was needed for the exercise of its own or of voters’ constitutional rights.
The applicant organisation appealed on points of law, raising essentially the same arguments.
On 8 September 2015 the High Administrative Court refused to institute proceedings for review of the lower courts’ decisions on points of law, holding, without detailed reasoning, that there was no indication of error of law in them.
Section 6(2) provides that access to information can be restricted provided three circumstances are combined:
(i)  the restriction would be in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary;
2)  disclosure of the information can harm such interest to a significant extent (розголошення інформації може завдати істотної шкоди цим інтересам);
3)  the harm from disclosure outweighs the public interest in receiving the information.
Section 6(7) provides that restrictions are imposed on information and not on documents. If a document contains information the access to which is restricted, then that information which is not restricted must be disclosed.
Sections 7(1) and 13(2) provide that information presenting public interest cannot be designated as confidential.
Section 7(2) provides that confidential information can only be disclosed with the consent of the person concerned or, in the absence of consent, only in the interests of national security, economic welfare and human rights.
Section 10 provides that holders of information about individuals have to use it only for the purposes and in a manner provided by law.
Section 19 sets forth a procedure for requesting information. Pursuant to section 19(5) an information request has to contain the following information:
(i)  a general description of the information or the name, identifying details of the document (number and/or date) or the content of the document requested, if they are known to the requesting party;
(ii)  name of the requesting party, his or her contact details and signature.
Section 9 states that any citizen of Ukraine who has reached 21 years of age and has lived in Ukraine for the last five years and who has no unexpunged criminal record for intentional crime can stand as a candidate.
Section 13 guarantees the accessibility of the information concerning elections, including the right for voters to examine information about candidates.
Section 54 provides that the CEC must register candidates provided that they have submitted certain documents, including:
(i)  a CV in hard and electronic copy;
(ii)  сonsent for publication of “biographical information” (згоду на оприлюднення біографічних відомостей у зв’язку з участю у виборах);
(iii)  a declaration of income, assets and obligations as required by the Prevention of Corruption Act (see paragraph 44 below).
The CV has to contain the information which is then published on the CEC website (see paragraph 38 below). In addition, it has to contain the information concerning the applicant’s:
(i)  education;
(ii)  work history (трудову діяльність);
(iii)  history of any work for the public, including in elected positions (громадську роботу (у тому числі на виборних посадах))
(iv)  family (склад сім’ї);
(v)  address (адресу місця проживання);
(vi)  telephone number.
Section 63(2) provides that the information contained in the documents filed with the CEC in the course of candidate’s registration should be “open” (accessible) (інформація, що міститься у документах, поданих до Центральної виборчої комісії для реєстрації кандидатів, є відкритою) and that the following “biographical information” should be published on the CEC’s website:
(i)  name,
(ii)  date of birth,
(iii)  citizenship and period of residence in Ukraine,
(iv)  (current) occupation and employer (відомості про посаду (заняття), місце роботи),
(v)  party membership,
(vi)  place of residence (місце проживання),
(vii)  information on whether the candidate has a criminal record,
(viii)  who nominated the candidate (self-nomination or the nominating party).
At the material time section 50 of the Act required presidential candidates to submit declarations disclosing their income and assets and those of their family members (see paragraph 44 below), which the CEC was required to publish in national newspapers and on its website.
Section 5 provides that personal data can be designated as confidential by law or by the person concerned. However, data concerning performance of the functions by public officials cannot be designated as confidential.
Section 11 of the Act, as worded at the relevant time, designated the following non-exhaustive list of categories of information about individuals as confidential: ethnic origin, education, civil status, religious convictions, state of health, address, date and place of birth. It also provided that confidential information could not be disclosed without the consent of the person concerned, except were provided by law in the interests of national security, economic welfare and protection of human rights.
Section 29 provided that information the access to which is restricted could, nevertheless, be disclosed if the disclosure was in the public interest and the right of the public to know outweighed the potential harm from disclosure.
Section 38 of the Act provided that information could be fully owned or used by individuals, legal entities and the State. The owner of the information can dispose of it as he or she sees fit within the limits of the law. One of the grounds on which ownership rights in information vests is creation of the information by the owner.
Sections 4 and 12 of the Act required a wide range of public officials, including MPs, civil servants and municipal officials to annually, up to 1 April, declare their income, assets and obligations on the form approved by the Act. Information contained in the declarations of a range of high-ranking officials, including members of the Government and Parliament, was to be published online.
An Annex to the Act contained a form of the declaration of income, assets and obligations. Other than fields for financial information (income from various sources, real and movable property, and so forth) the form contained fields for:
(i)  name;
(ii)  address;
(iii)  current position;
(iv)  information on family members: full name, tax number and the number of the internal identification documents (серія та номер паспорта громадянина України) for each family member.
In its decision of 20 January 2012 the Constitutional Court provided an official interpretation of Articles 32 and 34 of the Constitution, which guaranteed respectively the right to respect for private life and freedom of speech.
The court held that all information about private and family life was confidential. Information about private and family life covered all information about relations of a monetary and non-monetary nature, events, relations associated with a person and his or her family except for information about performance by public officials of their functions. In particular, it covered information about ethnicity, education, civil status, religious convictions, health, property, address, date and place of birth, information about events in day-to-day, intimate, professional, business and other aspects of life.
The court went on to note that public authorities could only use and disclose such information in cases provided by laws enacted by Parliament in the interests of national security, economic welfare and human rights.
Resolution of the Plenary of the HAC of 29 September 2016 no. 10 contains the guidelines to be followed by administrative courts in resolving disputes related to access to public information. The relevant parts of the guidelines are summarised in paragraphs 50 to 52 below.
Point 5.8 of the resolution stated that, if the law imposed certain minimum requirements on individuals seeking to occupy certain public positions, such as education, work experience, mastery of foreign languages or absence of a criminal record, then such information could not be designated as confidential (it cited the Data Protection Act, see paragraph 40 above).
In point 9.3 the HAC illustrated the meaning of section 6(7) of the Access to Public Information Act (see paragraph 30 above) with the following example. Because declarations under the Prevention of Corruption Act (see paragraph 45 above) contained confidential information, in the event of a request for disclosure of such a declaration, a copy of the declaration must be given to the requesting party with the parts containing the confidential information redacted.
In point 9.4 the HAC explained that, in requesting a copy of a document, the person was not required to identify the specific information which the person was seeking to obtain from that document. A document or its part containing unrestricted information could be an object of an information request in its own right. Under the Access to Public Information Act (see paragraph 34 above), it was sufficient for the requesting party to identify the document he or she was requesting.
Resolution of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe of 25 December 2008 no. 1165 on the right to privacy reads, in the relevant part:
“6. The Assembly is aware that personal privacy is often invaded, even in countries with specific legislation to protect it, as people’s private lives have become a highly lucrative commodity for certain sectors of the media. The victims are essentially public figures, since details of their private lives serve as a stimulus to sales. At the same time, public figures must recognise that the position they occupy in society – in many cases by choice – automatically entails increased pressure on their privacy.
Public figures are persons holding public office and/or using public resources and, more broadly speaking, all those who play a role in public life, whether in politics, the economy, the arts, the social sphere, sport or in any other domain.
It is often in the name of a one-sided interpretation of the right to freedom of expression, which is guaranteed in Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, that the media invade people’s privacy, claiming that their readers are entitled to know everything about public figures.
Certain facts relating to the private lives of public figures, particularly politicians, may indeed be of interest to citizens, and it may therefore be legitimate for readers, who are also voters, to be informed of those facts.
It is therefore necessary to find a way of balancing the exercise of two fundamental rights, both of which are guaranteed in the European Convention on Human Rights: the right to respect for one’s private life and the right to freedom of expression.”