The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Ardahan. The applicant was represented by Ms C. Vine and Ms S. Karakaş, lawyers practising in London.
The Government were represented by their Agent.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2003 criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant for having referred to Abdullah Öcalan as “Sayın”, meaning esteemed, in a speech.
On 30 November 2007 the Erzurum Assize Court convicted the applicant as charged under Article 215 of the Criminal Code and sentenced him to one month imprisonment. In accordance with Article 50 of the Criminal Code, the applicant’s prison sentence was commuted to a fine.
Subsequently, following the entry into force of a new Law in February 2008, which enlarged the scope of Article 231 of the Criminal Procedure Code, the public prosecutor asked the trial court to re-examine the case.
On 27 February 2008 the Erzurum Assize Court held that Article 231 was not applicable to the applicant’s case as he had a criminal record, and therefore decided not to suspend the pronouncement of the judgment that had been delivered on 30 November 2007.
A full description of the relevant domestic law may be found in Yalçınkaya and Others v. Turkey (nos. 25764/09 and 18 others, §§ 1213, 1 October 2013).
Furthermore, the suspension of the pronouncement of a judgment is governed by Article 231 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the relevant paragraphs of which read as follows at the material time:
“...
(5) If the accused has been convicted of the charges against him and ordered to pay a fine or sentenced to imprisonment for a period of less than two years, the court may decide to suspend the pronouncement of the judgment ... The suspension of the pronouncement of the judgment means that the judgment shall not bear any legal consequences for the offender.
(6) A decision to suspend the pronouncement of a judgment may be issued provided that:
(a) the offender has never been found guilty of an intentional offence;
(b) the court is convinced, taking into account the offender’s personal traits and his behaviour during the proceedings, that there is little risk of any further offence being committed; [and]
(c) the damage caused to the victim or to society is redressed by way of restitution or compensation.
...
(12) An objection to the decision to suspend the pronouncement of the judgment may be filed.”