The case originated in an application (no. 56827/00) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Koray Düzgören (“the applicant”), on 15 October 1999.
The applicant was represented by Ms A. J. Stock, Mr M. Muller, Mr T. Otty and Ms J. Gordon of the Kurdish Human Rights Project in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
On 28 September 2004 the Court (Second Section) declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaint concerning the alleged lack of independence and impartiality of the military court, the alleged interference with the applicant's right to freedom of expression and the alleged lack of an effective remedy to the Government. Under Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1947 and lives in .
On 1 April 1998 the applicant, who is a journalist, distributed a leaflet concerning the conscientious objector Mr O.M.U, outside the . He also handed the leaflet to the public prosecutor at the  together with a petition stating that he should be prosecuted for having committed a crime.
The leaflet, entitled “Freedom to think - an initiative against the crime of thought” contained the press release issued by O. M. U on 1 September 1995. The latter had been previously convicted and sentenced on account of this press release. The relevant parts of the leaflet are as follows:
Preface and Epilogue:
“... For the purpose of defending the free expression of every kind of thought, we who have signed as publishers, convey this 'convicted' text to the people, regardless of its contents and the question whether or not we share its contents, even though some of us do not agree with some lines in it...'
The press release of O. M. U:
“Good morning, Today's press conference is not organised by the Izmir Association of the Opponents of War. The responsibility for this conference rests exclusively with me. As you know, the case, which was brought before the Ankara Military Court of the Office of the Chief of Staff where I was allegedly accused of committing the crime of 'inciting others to evade military service', was concluded on 29 August.
...
The army, unable to deal with us through judicial methods, think that they can draw the opponents of war away from the public view. First of all, I am not a deserter; I am a 'conscientious objector'. I neither intend to do military service nor desert. There is no reason to desert, because I defend the principle that people should exercise their right not to do military service without having to go into hiding.
As to the papers given by the Recruitment Office...I am going to burn them right now before your eyes...
I am not a soldier and I never will be. Of course, I am aware that I will be summoned for military service, but until I am summoned, whenever that may be there will be no changes to my lifestyle. They can find me here and take me by force. But I will resist to the end in the barracks, and I am underlining that I will refuse to do military service in any shape or fashion.”
On 1 April 1998 the public prosecutor at the  took the applicant's statement in which the applicant reiterated the content of his petition. He maintained that, by publishing and distributing the above-mentioned leaflet, he had committed the same offence for which O. M. U. had been convicted. He contended that he agreed with the contents of the leaflet. He further pointed out that there were judgments of the European Court of Human Rights which referred to conscientious objectors. He claimed that the leaflet was not intended to dissuade people from doing military service or to incite them to desert. He further stated that in the  conscientious objectors did not do their military service, but were given other jobs. He commented that maybe in the future the same would also be true for . He concluded that his aim was to obtain the abolition of compulsory military service in .
On 4 June 1998 the military public prosecutor at the  in  filed a bill of indictment, accusing the applicant of inciting others to evade military service. He requested that the applicant be convicted and sentenced under Article 155 of the Criminal Code and Article 58 of the Military Penal Code.
On an unspecified date, the criminal proceedings against the applicant commenced before the General Staff Court in . During the proceedings the applicant reiterated his previous submissions. In particular, he claimed that he was a defender of freedom of expression and challenged the independence and impartiality of the court.
On 9 March 1999 the court convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to two months' imprisonment and to a fine of
On 19 April 1999 the applicant appealed to the Military Court of Cassation. In his appeal, the applicant, relying on Articles 6 and 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, contended that he should not have been tried by a military court and that the act which he had committed could not be considered to be an offence.
On 25 May 1999 the Military Court of Cassation upheld the decision of the . In its decision the court, referring to domestic law and the jurisprudence of the Court, held that the military courts had jurisdiction and competence to try the applicant and, after having assessed the contents of the leaflet, concluded that the judgment given by the  was in accordance with the law.
On 17 July 1999 the applicant left  in order to avoid imprisonment.
The relevant domestic law and practice in force at the material time are outlined in the following judgment: Ergin v.  (no. 6), no. 47533/99, §§ 15-18, 4 May 2006.
Following the amendment introduced on 30 July 2003 by section 6 of Law no. 4963, section 11 of the Constitution of Military Courts Act now reads:
“...Military courts shall not try civilians charged with committing the crimes and lesser offences referred to in Article 58 of the Military Penal Code in time of peace.”