The case originated in two applications (nos. 48226/10 and 14027/11) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Turkish nationals, Mr Serkan Cengiz, Mr Yaman Akdeniz and Mr Kerem Altıparmak (respectively “the first applicant”, “the second applicant” and “the third applicant”), on 20 July 2010 (the first applicant) and 27 December 2010 (the other two applicants).
The second and third applicants were represented before the Court by Ms A. Altıparmak, a lawyer practising in Ankara. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
Relying on Article 10 of the Convention, the applicants complained in particular of a measure that had deprived them of all access to YouTube. In addition, relying on Article 6 of the Convention, the first applicant submitted that he had not had an effective judicial remedy enabling him to have the measure in question reviewed by a court.
On 16 April 2014 notice of the applications was given to the Government.
Mr Cengiz was born in 1974 and lives in İzmir. He is a lecturer at the Law Faculty of İzmir University and is an expert and legal practitioner in the field of freedom of expression.
Mr Akdeniz and Mr Altıparmak were born in 1968 and 1973 respectively. Mr Akdeniz is a professor of law at the Law Faculty of Istanbul Bilgi University. Mr Altıparmak is an assistant professor of law at the Political Science Faculty of Ankara University and director of the university’s Human Rights Centre. 
YouTube (www.youtube.com) is the leading video-hosting website on which users can upload, view and share videos. Most videos on the site or on YouTube channels can be viewed by any Internet users, but only users with a YouTube account may upload video files. The platform is available in more than seventy-six countries. Over one billion users visit the site each month, viewing more than six billion hours of videos.
On 5 May 2008, under section 8(1)(b), (2), (3) and (9) of Law no. 5651 of 4 May 2007 on regulating Internet publications and combating Internet offences (“Law no. 5651”), the Ankara Criminal Court of First Instance made an order for the blocking of access to www.youtube.com and IP addresses 208.65.153.238 to 208.65.153.251 providing access to the website. The court held, among other things, that the content of ten pages on the website (ten video files) infringed Law no. 5816 of 25 July 1951 prohibiting insults to the memory of Atatürk.
On 21 May 2010 the first applicant lodged an objection against the blocking order of 5 May 2008. Relying on his right to freedom to receive and impart information and ideas, he sought to have the order set aside.
On 31 May 2010 the second and third applicants, as YouTube users, also lodged an objection against the blocking order of 5 May 2008. They sought to have the order set aside, arguing that there was a public interest in having access to YouTube and that the blocking of such access seriously impaired the very essence of their right to freedom to receive information and ideas. They also submitted that six of the ten pages to which the order of 5 May 2008 related had already been deleted and that the other four were no longer accessible from inside Turkey. This meant, in their submission, that the blocking order had become devoid of all purpose and constituted a disproportionate restriction on the rights of Internet users to receive and impart information and ideas.
On 9 June 2010 the Ankara Criminal Court of First Instance dismissed the applicants’ objection, holding in particular that the blocking order complied with the requirements of the legislation. Addressing the inaccessibility of the video files from inside Turkey, it stated that, while access to the files had indeed been blocked by YouTube within Turkey, the videos in question had nevertheless not been removed from the website’s database and thus remained accessible to Internet users worldwide. It also held that, as they had not been parties to the investigation procedure, the applicants did not have locus standi to challenge such orders. Lastly, the court noted that an objection against the same blocking order had already been dismissed on 4 June 2008.
On 2 July 2010 the Ankara Criminal Court upheld the decision of 9 June 2010 of the Ankara Criminal Court of First Instance, holding that it had complied with the procedural rules and fell within the court’s discretion.
On 17 June 2010 the Ankara Criminal Court of First Instance adopted a further decision concerning YouTube, ordering the blocking of access to the website www.youtube.com and forty-four other IP addresses belonging to the site.
On 23 June 2010 the second and third applicants lodged an objection against the additional blocking order of 17 June 2010.
On 1 July 2010 the Ankara Criminal Court of First Instance dismissed the objection lodged by those two applicants and by YouTube representatives and the Internet Technology Association. Addressing the inaccessibility of the video files from inside Turkey, it reiterated that, while access to the files had indeed been blocked by YouTube within Turkey, the videos in question had nevertheless not been removed from the website’s database and thus remained accessible to Internet users worldwide. It also held that, as they had not been parties to the case, the applicants did not have locus standi to challenge such orders. It added that, given that the website in question had continued to infringe the law by remaining active, the blocking order was compatible with the requirements of the legislation. Lastly, it rejected the argument that the provision applied in the present case was unconstitutional.
In the judgment of 2 July 2010 referred to above (see paragraph 11), the Ankara Criminal Court also upheld the decision of 1 July 2010 of the Ankara Criminal Court of First Instance.
The Government indicated that in the period before and after the order blocking access to YouTube, between 23 November 2007 and 1 July 2009, 1,785 complaints had been made to the Telecommunications and Information Technology Directorate (“the TİB”) to the effect that YouTube was hosting content that was illegal under Law no. 5651, in particular concerning sexual abuse of minors and insults to the memory of Atatürk.
The Government also stated that, prior to the order of 5 May 2008, the domestic courts had already made thirty-four orders blocking access to YouTube on account of illegal content hosted by the site. Following the orders, the TİB had contacted YouTube’s legal representative in Turkey under the “notice-and-take-down” procedure. The order of 5 May 2008, according to the Government, indicated that there were ten web addresses (URLs) hosting defamatory content about Atatürk. Access to six of the pages had been blocked, but the other four had remained accessible both from within Turkey and abroad. Accordingly, the TİB had notified YouTube of its decision to remove the content in question. However, YouTube had not stopped hosting the offending pages and the TİB had had no other solution than to block access to the entire YouTube website as Turkey had not set up a URL filtering system.
The applicants stated that, following the order of 5 May 2008, access to YouTube had been blocked in Turkey by the TİB until 30 October 2010. On that date, the blocking order in respect of YouTube had been lifted by the competent public prosecutor’s office following a request from a company claiming to own the copyright to the videos. However, from 1 November 2010 YouTube had decided to restore the videos, finding that they did not infringe copyright. The second and third applicants also pointed out that they had discovered that, in January 2015, four video files (nos. 1, 2, 7 and 8) out of the ten concerned by the order of 5 May 2008 were still accessible on YouTube. They noted that, among those files, videos nos. 2 and 7 did not include any content that could be construed as insulting the memory of Atatürk and thus fell outside the scope of section 8 of Law no. 5651. In particular, video no. 2 was fourteen seconds long and showed a burning Turkish flag. Video no. 7 was forty-nine seconds long and showed a former chief of staff of the Turkish armed forces. Only videos nos. 1 and 8 might have been regarded as insulting, but there had been no proceedings to establish that their content was illegal.
For a summary of the relevant domestic and international law and practice at the material time, the Court would refer to Ahmet Yıldırım v. Turkey (no. 3111/10, §§ 15-37, ECHR 2012).
Law no. 5651 provided as follows, in so far as relevant, at the material time.
“(1)  A blocking order [erişimin engellenmesi] shall be issued in respect of Internet publications where there are sufficient grounds to suspect that their content is such as to amount to one of the following offences:
(a)  Offences under the Criminal Code ...
(b)  offences against the memory of Atatürk under Law no. 5816 of 25 July 1951. 
...
(2)  The blocking order shall be issued by a judge if the case is at the investigation stage or by the court if a prosecution has been brought. During the investigation, the blocking of access may be ordered by the public prosecutor in cases where a delay in acting could have harmful effects. The order must then be submitted to the judge for approval within twenty-four hours. The judge must give a decision within a further twenty-four hours. If he or she does not approve the blocking of access, the measure shall be lifted by the prosecutor forthwith. Blocking orders issued as a preventive measure may be appealed against in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271).
(3)  A copy of the blocking order issued by the judge, court or public prosecutor shall be sent to the [TİB] for execution.
(4)  Where the content provider or the hosting service provider is abroad ... the blocking order shall be issued by the Directorate of its own motion. It shall then be notified to the access provider with a request for execution.
(5)  Blocking orders shall be implemented immediately or at the latest twenty-four hours after notification.
...
(7)  If the criminal investigation ends in a decision to discontinue the proceedings, the blocking order shall automatically cease to apply ...
(8)  Where the trial ends in an acquittal, the blocking order shall automatically cease to apply ...
(9)  If the illegal content is removed, the blocking order shall be lifted ...”
The Government stated that two significant amendments had recently been made to Law no. 5651. The prison sentences provided for by the Law had been replaced by fines and the effective protection of personal rights had been increased; also, blocking orders were now limited in time.
In addition, the Court observes that through the adoption of Law no. 6639, on 27 March 2015, a new section 8A was inserted into Law no. 5651. The new provision authorises the TİB, further to a request to that effect from the Prime Minister or a ministry, to order the deletion of the content of a web page and/or the blocking of access to such content. It also explicitly states for the first time that the blocking of access to an entire website is permitted. Subsection (3) of section 8A reads as follows.
“Blocking orders issued in accordance with this provision shall be aimed at blocking access to the content of the chapter or part of the publication (URL or other) constituting the offence. Where it is not technically possible to block access to the offending content or where the blocking of access to the offending content does not prevent the offence, access to the entire website may be blocked.”
The Government pointed out that URL filtering technology for foreign-based websites was not available in Turkey and that the relevant legislation in this area was based on the “notice-and-take-down” procedure, which tended to avoid the inconvenience of blocking access to the entire website. The implementation of this procedure had already resulted in the removal of harmful content. Thus, 60,000 examples of illegal content on foreign-based websites had been removed to date. To that end, an information-reporting centre had been set up; its duties included receiving complaints from individuals regarding Internet content. Many individual complaints had been made to the centre by this means about videos shared on YouTube.
The relevant provisions of Law no. 5816 of 25 July 1951 prohibiting insults against the memory of Atatürk read as follows.
“Anyone who specifically insults or curses the memory of Atatürk shall be liable to imprisonment for a term of between one and three years.
Anyone who breaks, destroys, damages or dirties a statue or image of Atatürk or his tomb shall be liable to imprisonment for a term of between one and five years.
Anyone who incites another to commit any of the above-mentioned offences shall be punished in the same way as the principal offender.”
“The punishment shall be increased by half where the offence provided for in section [1] above has been committed by a group of two or more persons, or overtly or via the media or in a public place. Where violence is used in the commission or attempted commission of the offences provided for in the second subsection of section 1 above, the punishment shall be doubled.”
In March 2014, following several decisions in which the Turkish courts had found that the website https://twitter.com (a microblogging site where users can post short messages online free of charge via instant messaging or SMS) was hosting content that was damaging to the claimants’ private life and reputation, the TİB ordered the blocking of access to the site. In a judgment of 25 March 2014, the Ankara Administrative Court stayed the implementation of the TİB’s order.
In the meantime, on 24 and 25 March 2014, three individuals, including the second and third applicants, had applied to the Constitutional Court to challenge the blocking order.
In a judgment of 2 April 2014 (no. 2014/3986), the Constitutional Court held that the TİB’s decision to block access to https://twitter.com interfered with the right to freedom to receive and impart information and ideas. It noted, in particular, that delaying the posting of information or opinions shared via this medium, even for a short time, risked making the site devoid of all topical value and interest and that as a result the applicants, who were active users of the site, had an interest in having the blocking order lifted promptly. Referring to the Court’s judgment in Ahmet Yıldırım (cited above), it also held that the measure in issue had had no legal basis.
On 27 March 2014 the TİB issued an order blocking access to YouTube, particularly in the light of a judgment of the Gölbaşı Criminal Court of First Instance. In a judgment of 2 May 2014, the Ankara Administrative Court stayed the implementation of the TİB’s order. Following the non-enforcement of that judgment, the YouTube company, the second and third applicants and six other individuals applied to the Constitutional Court. In a judgment of 29 May 2014, the court set aside the blocking order. Before addressing the merits of the case, it determined whether the applicants had the status of victims and held as follows.
“27.  ... It appears from the file that ... Yaman Akdeniz, Kerem Altıparmak and M.F. taught at different universities. These applicants explained that they carried out research in the field of human rights and shared the research via their YouTube accounts. They also stated that through the website they were able to access written and visual material from the United Nations and the Council of Europe ... The applicant, E.E., for his part, explained that he had a [YouTube] account, that he regularly followed users who shared files, as well as the activities of non-governmental organisations and professional bodies, and that he also wrote critical comments about the shared content ...
In the light of those explanations, it can be concluded that the applicants were direct victims of the administrative decision ordering the blocking of all access to www.youtube.com ...”
As to the merits of the case, with reference to Ahmet Yıldırım (cited above), the Constitutional Court found that the measure in issue had had no legal basis, particularly in the light of Law no. 5651, which did not authorise the wholesale blocking of an Internet site. It held as follows.
“52.  In modern democracies, the Internet has acquired significant importance in terms of the exercise of fundamental rights and freedoms, especially the freedom of expression. Social media constitute a transparent platform ... affording individuals the opportunity to participate in creating, publishing and interpreting media content. Social-media platforms are thus indispensable tools for the exercise of the right to freedom to express, share and impart information and ideas. Accordingly, the State and its administrative authorities must display considerable sensitivity not only when regulating this area but also in their practice, since these platforms have become one of the most effective and widespread means of both imparting ideas and receiving information.”
In its General Comment No. 34 on Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, adopted at its 102nd session (1129 July 2011), the United Nations Human Rights Committee stated as follows.
“43.  Any restrictions on the operation of websites, blogs or any other internet-based, electronic or other such information dissemination system, including systems to support such communication, such as internet service providers or search engines, are only permissible to the extent that they are compatible with paragraph 3 [of Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, governing the restrictions that may be imposed on the exercise of the right to freedom of expression]. Permissible restrictions generally should be content-specific; generic bans on the operation of certain sites and systems are not compatible with paragraph 3. It is also inconsistent with paragraph 3 to prohibit a site or an information dissemination system from publishing material solely on the basis that it may be critical of the government or the political social system espoused by the government.”