The case originated in an application (no. 39748/05) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by OOO Izdatelskiy Tsentr Kvartirnyy Ryad, a publishing company incorporated under Russian law with its registered office in Moscow (“the applicant company”), on 11 October 2005.
The applicant company was represented by Mr A. Molokhov, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant company alleged a violation of its right to freedom of expression.
On 30 August 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
At the material time the applicant company was the publisher of Kvartirnyy Ryad, a newspaper specialising in coverage of the housing market in the Moscow area (“the newspaper”).
On 20 May 2004 the newspaper published an article by G. entitled “So sorry for the bird. The blue one” («А птичку жалко. Синюю» – “the article”). The article described a conflict situation concerning a large commonhold association, Bluebird (Синяя птица), which included eight blocks of flats in the south-west of Moscow. G. suggested in the article that a number of residents of the Bluebird flats had been affected by the alleged misuse of common areas, in particular attics in the blocks of flats and that T., the head of the commonhold association, had been behind the misuse. G. emphasised that T. was also the deputy head of a district council in Moscow and that he had declined to comment on the article’s contents prior to publication. The article asked T. and the local government questions pertaining to the misuse of the common areas.
The relevant parts of the article read as follows:
“Residents of eight blocks of flats in Severnoe Butovo keep sending letters to the courts, the prosecutor’s office, the city administration and even President Putin to complain about the head of the “Bluebird” commonhold association, T., [w]ho has developed an indecently hasty business activity spitting in the face of the association’s Charter and a number of regional and federal laws. ...
... But T. has expressed his distrust in the commission elected by the general meeting and has appointed his own commission...as a result T. has managed to retain his position ...
... the commission was not elected, but appointed, which guaranteed the appointment of T. for a third term ...
... In sum, even though T. did not have the majority of the votes, he nonetheless managed to conclude the contract ...
... let’s ask one final question, which again pertains to T.: does a State official have the right to combine his official functions with a commercial business activity?”
On 28 May 2004 T. lodged a defamation claim against the applicant company and G. with the Presnenskiy District Court of Moscow (“the District Court”). The plaintiff alleged that the statements contained in the article damaged his honour, dignity and business reputation. The court received the statement of claim on 15 June 2004.
On 8 December 2004 the District Court examined and partially allowed the claim, referring to Article 152 of the Civil Code and Resolution no. 11 of the Plenary Supreme Court. It reasoned:
“... the impugned statement: “... who [has] developed an indecently hasty business activity spitting in the face of the commonhold association’s Charter and a number of regional and federal laws” should be retracted [by the defendants] ... as during the judicial examination of the case the defendants failed to prove that T.’s actions were unlawful.
The defendants, a third party and witnesses explained that an attic ... had been unlawfully rented out. The lease agreement had been unlawfully concluded by T. ...
However, no evidence has been provided [by the defendants] to the court to prove that the plaintiff’s actions were unlawful or illegal or in violation of federal and regional law or the commonhold association’s Charter.
Moreover, the issue of the lease of the attic ... was examined by the Zyuzinskiy District Court of Moscow. By the decision of the Zyuzinskiy District Court of Moscow of 19 May 2004 actions of the Bluebird commonhold association headed by T. were found to be in compliance with the law in force.
As to the statements: “... the commission was not elected, but appointed, which guaranteed the appointment of T. for a third term ... In sum, even though T. did not have the majority of the votes, he nonetheless managed to conclude the contract ...” ... They are not to be retracted as they are not damaging to the honour and dignity of the plaintiff.
... as to the statement: “let’s ask one final question, which again pertains to T.: does a State official have the right to combine his official functions with a commercial business activity?” It should not be retracted either as ... the author of the article [G.] is asking a rhetorical question ...”
The District Court ordered the applicant company “to refute the statement [published] in the newspaper Kvartirnyy Ryad on 20 May 2004 ... that T. developed activities as the head of the “Bluebird” commonhold association, violating the association’s Charter as well as a whole range of laws of the capital area and federal law”. It also awarded T. non-pecuniary damages: 10,000 Russian roubles (RUB – approximately 270 euros) to be paid by the applicant company and RUB 8,000 to be paid by G.
The applicant company and G. appealed against the judgment to the Moscow City Court (“the City Court”).
On 4 May 2005 it upheld the judgment of 8 December 2004 in full, referring to Article 152 of the Civil Code and to Resolution no. 11 of the Plenary Supreme Court. It provided the following succinct reasoning:
“The plaintiff has proven the fact that the contested statements were disseminated: he provided the court with an original issue of the newspaper of 20 May 2004 ...
... the court [of first instance] rightly held that the defendants had failed to prove the veracity of the disseminated statement ... that [the plaintiff] had developed an indecently hasty business activity spitting in the face of the association’s Charter and the law.
At the same time, the court [justifiably] referred to the judgment of the Zyuzinskiy District Court of Moscow ... which found the actions of the commonhold association ... headed by T. to be in compliance with the law in force.”
On 25 July 2005 the City Court rejected a request by the applicant company for supervisory review.
On 13 October 2005 the enforcement proceedings were terminated by a bailiff as the judgment of 8 December 2004 had been enforced in full.
Article 29 of the Constitution guarantees freedom of thought and expression, together with freedom of the mass media.
Article 152 of the Civil Code provides that an individual may apply to court with a request for the rectification of statements (сведения) that are damaging to his or her honour, dignity or professional reputation unless the person who has disseminated the statements proves them to be true. The aggrieved person may also claim compensation for losses and nonpecuniary damage sustained as a result of the dissemination of the statements.
Resolution no. 11 of the Plenary Supreme Court of 18 August 1992 (amended on 25 April 1995) provided that, in order to be considered damaging, statements had to be untrue and contain allegations of a breach of the law or moral principles (for example dishonest acts or improper behaviour at work or in everyday life). Dissemination of statements was understood to mean the publication of statements or their broadcasting (section 2). The burden of proof was on the defendant to show that the disseminated statements were true and accurate (section 7).
Resolution no. 3 of the Plenary Supreme Court of 24 February 2005 repealed Resolution no. 11. It defines “untruthful statements” as allegations of facts or events which have not taken place in reality by the time of the statements’ dissemination. Statements contained in court decisions, decisions by investigative bodies and other official documents amenable to appeal cannot be considered untruthful. Statements alleging that a person has breached the law, committed a dishonest act, behaved unethically or broken rules of business etiquette tarnish that person’s honour, dignity and business reputation (section 7). Resolution no. 3 requires courts hearing defamation claims to distinguish between statements of fact, which can be checked for veracity, and value judgments, opinions and convictions, which are not actionable under Article 152 of the Civil Code since they are an expression of the defendant’s subjective opinion and views and cannot be checked for veracity (section 9).
On 12 February 2004 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted, at the 872nd meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies, the Declaration on freedom of political debate in the media, which read in particular as follows:
“The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe,
...
Reaffirming the pre-eminent importance of freedom of expression and information, in particular through free and independent media, for guaranteeing the right of the public to be informed on matters of public concern and to exercise public scrutiny over public and political affairs, as well as for ensuring accountability and transparency of political bodies and public authorities, which are necessary in a democratic society, without prejudice to the domestic rules of member states concerning the status and liability of public officials ...
Conscious that natural persons who are candidates for, or have been elected to, or have retired from political bodies, hold a political function at local, regional, national or international level or exercise political influence, hereinafter referred to as “political figures”, as well as natural persons who hold a public office or exercise public authority at those levels, hereinafter referred to as “public officials”, enjoy fundamental rights which might be infringed by the dissemination of information and opinions about them in the media;
Conscious that some domestic legal systems still grant legal privileges to political figures or public officials against the dissemination of information and opinions about them in the media, which is not compatible with the right to freedom of expression and information as guaranteed by Article 10 of the Convention;
Draws particular attention to the following principles concerning the dissemination of information and opinions in the media about political figures and public officials:
...
Public debate and scrutiny over political figures
Political figures have decided to appeal to the confidence of the public and accepted to subject themselves to public political debate and are therefore subject to close public scrutiny and potentially robust and strong public criticism through the media over the way in which they have carried out or carry out their functions.
Public scrutiny over public officials
Public officials must accept that they will be subject to public scrutiny and criticism, particularly through the media, over the way in which they have carried out or carry out their functions, insofar as this is necessary for ensuring transparency and the responsible exercise of their functions.”