The case originated in three applications (nos. 8306/08, 8340/08 and 8366/08) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by twelve Turkish nationals (“the applicants”), whose names appear in the appendix.
The applicants were represented by Mr Ö. Kılıç, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 8 February 2008 the applicants' representative requested that the respondent Government be notified of the introduction of the applications in accordance with Rule 40 of the Rules of Court and that the cases be given priority under Rule 41. On 3 March 2008 the President of the Second Section granted that priority to the cases.
On 10 April 2008 the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the applications to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the applications at the same time as their admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
At the material time the applicants were the owners, executive directors, editors-in-chief, news directors and journalists of two weekly newspapers published in Turkey: Yedinci Gün and Toplumsal Demokrasi. The publication of these newspapers was suspended pursuant to section 6(5) of Law no. 3713 (the Prevention of Terrorism Act) by the Istanbul Assize Court on 12 and 5 January 2008, respectively, for a period of one month, on account of various news reports and articles. The impugned publications were mainly deemed to be propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, the PKK/KONGRA-GEL, and constituted an approval of crimes committed by that organisation and its members.
Neither the applicants nor their representative participated in these ex parte procedures, and their written objections to the suspension orders were dismissed. Consequently, the orders were executed.
The applicants, Ali Turgay and Hüseyin Aykol, the owner and the editor-in-chief, respectively, of Yedinci Gün, were prosecuted under sections 6(2) and 7(2) of Law no. 3713, as well as Articles 215 and 218 of the Criminal Code, for disseminating propaganda in favour of and praising crimes committed by the aforementioned organisation and its members, on account of various articles published in the said newspaper (case no. 2008/30).
The applicant, Hüseyin Bektaş, the owner of Toplumsal Demokrasi, was similarly prosecuted under sections 6(2) and 7(2) of Law no. 3713 and Article 215 of the Criminal Code (case no. 2008/14).
According to the information in the case file, these criminal proceedings are still pending at first instance.
Article 28 of the Constitution of Turkey reads as follows:
“The press is free and shall not be censored. The establishment of a publishing company shall not be subject to prior permission or the deposit of a financial guarantee.
The State shall take the necessary measures to ensure freedom of the press and freedom of information.
As regards restrictions on freedom of the press, Articles 26 and 27 of the Constitution are applicable.
Anyone who writes or prints any news or articles which threaten the internal or external security of the State or the indivisible integrity of the State with its territory and nation, which are aimed at inciting offences, riot or insurrection, or which refer to classified State secrets, and anyone who prints or transmits such news or articles to others for the above purposes, shall be held responsible under the law governing these offences. Distribution may be suspended as a preventive measure by the decision of a judge or, in the event that delay is deemed prejudicial, by the competent authority designated by law. The authority suspending distribution shall notify a competent judge of its decision within twenty-four hours. The order suspending distribution shall become null and void unless upheld by a competent judge within forty-eight hours.
No ban shall be placed on the reporting of events except by a judge's decision designed to ensure the proper functioning of the judiciary, within the limits specified by law.
Periodical and non-periodical publications may be seized by the decision of a judge in the event of an ongoing investigation into or prosecution of offences prescribed by law and, in situations where a delay could endanger the indivisible integrity of the State with its territory and nation, national security, public order or public morals, and for the prevention of an offence, by order of the competent authority designated by law. The authority issuing the order to confiscate shall notify a competent judge of its decision within twenty-four hours. The order to confiscate shall become null and void unless upheld by the competent court within forty-eight hours.
The general common provisions shall apply to the seizure and confiscation of periodicals and non-periodicals for the purposes of criminal investigation and prosecution.
Publication of periodicals published in Turkey may be temporarily suspended by order of the courts in the event of a criminal conviction on account of their containing material which undermines the indivisible integrity of the State with its territory and nation, the fundamental principles of the Republic, national security and public morals. Any publication which is clearly a continuation of a suspended periodical shall be prohibited and shall be seized following a decision by a competent judge.”
The relevant provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713), amended by Law no. 5532, which entered into force on 18 July 2006, read as follows:
Section 6
“1.  It shall be an offence, punishable by a term of imprisonment of one to three years, to announce, orally or in the form of a publication, that terrorist organisations will commit an offence against a specific person, whether or not that person's ... identity is divulged, provided that it is done in such a manner that he or she may be identified, or to reveal the identity of civil servants who have participated in anti-terrorist operations or to designate any person as a target.
It shall be an offence, punishable by a term of imprisonment of one to three years, to print or publish declarations or leaflets emanating from terrorist organisations.
...
If any of the offences defined in the paragraphs above are committed through the press or the media, the owners and editors-in-chief of the press and media organs concerned who did not participate in the commission of the offence shall also be liable to a judicial fine equivalent to between a thousand and ten thousand days' imprisonment. However, the maximum limit of this punishment shall be the equivalent of five thousand days for editors-in-chief.
Periodicals whose content openly encourages the commission of offences within the framework of the activities of a terrorist organisation, approves of the offences committed by a terrorist organisation or its members or constitutes propaganda in favour of the terrorist organisation may be suspended for a period of fifteen days to one month as a preventive measure by a decision of a judge or, if a delay is detrimental, on an instruction from a public prosecutor. The public prosecutor shall notify the judge of such instruction within twenty-four hours. If the judge does not approve the decision within forty-eight hours, the instruction to suspend publication shall become null and void.”
Section 7(2)
“Any person who disseminates propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of one to five years. Where this offence is committed through the press or the media, the sentence shall be increased by half. Moreover, the owners and editors-in-chief of the press and media organs concerned who did not participate in the commission of the offence shall also be liable to a judicial fine equivalent to between one thousand and ten thousand days' imprisonment. However, the maximum limit of this punishment shall be the equivalent of five thousand days for editors-in-chief.”
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code (Law no. 5237) read as follows:
Article 39
“(1)  A person who abets commission of an offence shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of fifteen to twenty years if the offence is punishable by an aggravated life sentence, and ten to fifteen years where the offence is punishable by a life sentence. Punishment is reduced by half in all other circumstances. However, in the latter case the punishment cannot exceed eight years.
(2)  A person is deemed to have abetted commission of an offence in the following circumstances:
(a)  Encouragement to commit an offence...”
Article 215
“Any person who approves of an offence committed, or praises a person on account of an offence he or she has committed, shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of up to two years.”
Article 218
“Where one of the offences proscribed by Articles 213-217 is committed through the press or the media, the sentence shall be increased by half.”
On 3 March 2006 the former President of Turkey lodged a case with the Constitutional Court (case no. 2006/121), challenging the validity of section 6(5) of Law no. 3713. It had been argued, inter alia, that suspension of the future publication and distribution of a periodical pursuant to section 6(5) was a restriction on the freedom of the press which was not permissible under Article 28 of the Constitution and that, therefore, this section had created an unconstitutional penalty.
In its judgment dated 18 June 2009, published in the Official Gazette of 26 November 2009, the Constitutional Court decided that section 6(5) of Law no. 3713 was compatible with the Constitution (decision no. 2009/90). As regards the suspension of the publication of periodicals as a preventive measure pursuant to section 6(5), the Constitutional Court held as follows:
“In the petition (of the former President of Turkey), it has been maintained that the first paragraph of Article 28 of the Constitution provides that the press is free and shall not be censured. It has also been maintained that the fourth, fifth, sixth and eight paragraphs mention the measures targeting press and media organs. In the fourth paragraph, “prevention of distribution”, in the fifth paragraph “ban on reporting” with a view to the proper functioning of the judiciary, in the sixth paragraph “seizure” of periodical and non-periodical publications and in the eighth paragraph, “temporary suspension” of periodicals are regulated. It has also been noted that the restrictions on the press and media are provided in the Constitution and cannot be extended by sanctions provided by legislation. It has therefore been argued that section 6(5) of Law no. 3713 is not in conformity with Article 28 of the Constitution.
...
The acts set out in the paragraph in question are acts that are defined as offences in other laws. In order for the preventive measure in question to be applied, it is not sufficient to commit these offences through the press or the media: the acts must be committed within the context of the activities of a terrorist organisation. Therefore, the measure foreseen should be considered as having the aim of preventing the deliberate use of the press and the media in terrorist activities and ensuring that the press and media organs act with responsibility. The legislature, which has the duty to protect the indivisible unity of the State with its territory and nation, is obliged to take all necessary measures against such situations. The paragraph in question has its roots in such a necessity.
The measure of “prevention of distribution” set out in the fourth paragraph of Article 28 of the Constitution and the measure foreseen by section 6(5) of Law no. 3713 have similarities in terms of their nature and consequences. From this point of view, it can be concluded that the legislature has not enacted a law which provides for a different measure from the measure set out in the fourth paragraph of Article 28.
Moreover, taking into consideration the nature of acts that result in the suspension of the publication of periodicals, the magnitude of damage caused by the commission of those offences through the press and the media, as well as the aim, extent and methods of terror in our country and the facility of the press and media organs to communicate with the masses and the former's influence on society, it has been concluded that the provision in question aims at the continuity of democratic society.
For the aforementioned reasons, the provision in question is not incompatible with Article 28 of the Constitution. Therefore, the request for its annulment should be rejected...”