The case originated in five applications (nos. 49197/06, 23196/07, 50242/08, 60912/08 and 14871/09) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Turkish nationals, Ms Şükran Aydın, Ms Ayşe Gökkan, Mr Ayhan Erkmen, Mr Orhan Miroğlu and Mr Mesut Beştaş (“the applicants”), on 28 November 2006, 28 May 2007, 6 October 2008, 5 November 2008 and 10 February 2009 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr M.A. Altunkalem, a lawyer practising in Diyarbakır (the first applicant), Ms R. Doğan Yıldız and Mr Y. Aydın, lawyers practising in Istanbul (the second applicant), Mr O. Gündoğdu, a lawyer practising in Kars (the third applicant), Mr C. Kayhan, a lawyer practising in Ankara (the fourth applicant) and Ms M.D. Beştaş and Mr E. Ürküt, lawyers practising in Diyarbakır (the fifth applicant). The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 4 March 2010 the applications were communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicants were born in 1957, 1965, 1973, 1952 and 1966 and live in Diyarbakır, Şanlıurfa, Kars, Ankara and  respectively.
At the time of the events the applicant, Ms Şükran Aydın, was the mayor of Bismil and was standing for election in the parliamentary elections of 3 November 2002 as a candidate for the People’s Democratic Party (DEHAP) in the province of Diyarbakır.
On 2 January 2003 criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant before the Lice Criminal Court of First Instance for conduct contrary to Law no. 298 on the fundamental provisions governing elections and voter registration (Seçimlerin Temel Hükümleri ve Seçmen Kütükleri Hakkında Kanun), on the ground that on 26 October 2002 she had campaigned for election in Kurdish.
In the course of the trial the applicant submitted that she had addressed the crowd partly in Kurdish because the population was Kurdish and she had taken into consideration the fact that there were many elderly people and women in the crowd who would not understand Turkish.
On 26 January 2005 the Lice Criminal Court of First Instance, having examined the evidence in the case file including the verbatim transcript of a video recording, found that the applicant had campaigned for election in Kurdish on 26 October 2002, in breach of section 58 of Law no. 298. In accordance with section 151(2) of Law no. 298, the court sentenced the applicant to six months’ imprisonment and to a heavy fine. Taking into account the applicant’s good behaviour during the trial, the circumstances of the case and her personality, the court first reduced the sentence, then commuted the prison sentence to a fine and finally ordered that payment of the fine be suspended as the applicant had no criminal record and the judge was satisfied that she would not reoffend.
On 11 May 2006 the Court of Cassation altered the amount of the fine and upheld the judgment of the first-instance court. The decision was returned to the registry of the first-instance court on 13 June 2006.
At the time of the events the applicant, Ms Ayşe Gökkan, was standing for election in the parliamentary elections of 3 November 2002 as a candidate for the People’s Democratic Party (DEHAP) in the province of Şanlıurfa.
On 6 November 2002 criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant before the Viranşehir Criminal Court of First Instance for conduct contrary to Law no. 298 on the fundamental provisions governing elections and voter registration, on the ground that on 27 October 2002 she had campaigned for election in Kurdish.
In the course of the trial the applicant maintained that she had spoken in Kurdish because she was addressing a crowd of Kurdish women who did not understand Turkish.
On 15 December 2005 the Viranşehir Criminal Court of First Instance, having examined the evidence in the case file including the verbatim transcript of a video recording, found that the applicant had campaigned for election in Kurdish on 27 October 2002, in breach of section 58 of Law no. 298. In accordance with section 151 of Law no. 298, the court sentenced the applicant to six months’ imprisonment and to a heavy fine. Taking into account the circumstances of the case and the applicant’s personality, the court commuted the prison sentence to a fine and subsequently ordered that payment of the fine be suspended as the applicant had no criminal record and the judge was satisfied that she would not reoffend.
On 29 November 2006 the Court of Cassation declined to examine the applicant’s appeal on the ground that it was not written in Turkish. The court altered the amount of the fine and upheld the judgment of the firstinstance court.
On 1 November 2007 criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant, Mr Ayhan Erkmen, who was mayor of Dağpınar, before the Digor Criminal Court of First Instance for conduct contrary to Law no. 298 on the fundamental provisions governing elections and voter registration, on the ground that on 18 July 2007 he had given a speech in Kurdish during a rally organised by Mr Alınak, who was standing for election in the parliamentary elections as an independent candidate in the province of Kars.
In the course of the trial the applicant maintained that he had spoken in Kurdish so that the crowd, many of whom did not understand Turkish, could understand him better. On 24 March 2008 the Digor Magistrates’ Court, having examined the evidence in the case file including the verbatim transcript of a video recording, found that the applicant had spoken in Kurdish during an election rally on 18 July 2007, in breach of section 58 of Law no. 298. In accordance with section 151 of Law no. 298, the court sentenced the applicant to six months’ imprisonment. Taking into account the applicant’s good behaviour during the trial, the circumstances of the case and his personality, the court first reduced the sentence to five months and finally decided to suspend pronouncement of the judgment (hükmün açıklanmasının geriye bırakılması) for five years under Article 231 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 20 May 2008 the Digor Criminal Court of First Instance dismissed an objection lodged by the applicant against the above-mentioned decision.
Criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant, Mr Orhan Miroğlu, who had stood for election in the parliamentary elections as an independent candidate in the , for conduct contrary to Law no. 298 on the fundamental provisions governing elections and voter registration, on the ground that on 27 June 2007 he had campaigned for election in Kurdish.
In the course of the trial the applicant maintained that he had spoken in Turkish but that, since there were people in  who spoke Kurdish, he might have greeted them in Kurdish.
On 3 April 2008 the Mersin Magistrates’ Court, having examined the evidence in the case file including the verbatim transcript of a video recording, found that the applicant had spoken partly in Kurdish during an election rally on 27 June 2007, in breach of section 58 of Law no. 298. In accordance with section 151 of Law no. 298 the court sentenced the applicant to six months’ imprisonment. Taking into account the applicant’s good behaviour during the trial, the circumstances of the case and his personality, the court decided to suspend pronouncement of the judgment for five years under Article 231 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 7 July 2008 the Mersin Criminal Court of First Instance dismissed an objection lodged by the applicant against the above-mentioned decision.
On 16 June 2004 criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant, Mr Mesut Beştaş, who had stood for election in the municipal elections of 28 March 2004 as a candidate for the Social Democratic People’s Party (SHP) in the province of Siirt, for conduct contrary to Law no. 298 laying down the fundamental provisions governing elections and voter registration, on the ground that on 20 March 2004 he had campaigned for election in Kurdish.
In the course of the trial the applicant maintained that nothing in the speeches he had given could be construed as constituting an offence and that it was not illegal to speak in Kurdish.
On 10 May 2005 the Siirt Criminal Court of First Instance, having examined the evidence in the case file including the verbatim transcript of a video recording, found that the applicant had spoken in Kurdish during an election rally on 20 March 2004, in breach of section 58 of Law no. 298. In accordance with section 151 of Law no. 298 the court sentenced the applicant to six months’ imprisonment and to a heavy fine. Taking into account the applicant’s good behaviour during the trial, the circumstances of the case and his personality, the court first reduced the sentence and then commuted the prison sentence to a fine. At the request of the principal public prosecutor’s office, the Siirt Criminal Court of First Instance reexamined the applicant’s conviction and sentence on 18 October 2005 and sentenced him to an administrative fine. This decision was quashed by the Court of Cassation on 11 October 2006.
On 6 April 2007 the Siirt Criminal Court of First Instance found the applicant guilty as charged. In accordance with section 151 of Law no. 298 the court sentenced the applicant to six months’ imprisonment and to a heavy fine. It later commuted the applicant’s prison sentence to a fine. This decision was quashed by the Court of Cassation on 8 April 2008.
On 27 October 2008 the Siirt Criminal Court of First Instance decided to suspend pronouncement of the judgment against the applicant for five years under Article 231 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. On 18 December 2008 the Siirt Assize Court dismissed an objection lodged by the applicant against the above-mentioned decision.
At the time of the events the relevant parts of Law no. 298 read as follows:
Section 58
“... it shall be forbidden to use any language or script other than Turkish in campaigning for election on radio or television or by other means.”
Section 151(2)
“... persons acting in breach of the prohibitions specified in sections 58 ... shall be liable to a prison term ranging from six months to one year and to payment of a fine of between one million and five million liras.”
By Law no. 5980 of 8 April 2010 the relevant part of section 58 was amended to read as follows:
“... During election campaigns political parties and candidates shall primarily use Turkish.”
Article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“In those States in which ethnic ... or linguistic minorities exist, persons belonging to such minorities shall not be denied the right, in community with the other members of their group ... to use their own language.”
Article 2 of the United Nations Declaration of 12 December 1992 on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities stipulates, inter alia, as follows:
“1.  Persons belonging to national or ethnic ... and linguistic minorities ... have the right to ... use their own language, in private and in public, freely and without interference or any form of discrimination.
Persons belonging to minorities have the right to participate effectively in ... public life.”
Article 5 of the UNESCO Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity of 2 November 2001 reads:
“All persons have ... the right to express themselves and to create and disseminate their work in the language of their choice, and particularly in their mother tongue...”
The principle that no prohibition should be imposed on the use of minority languages during election campaigns is set forth in the Recommendations of the second session of the Forum on Minority Issues, entitled “Minorities and Effective Political Participation”, held in November 2009 within the United Nations. Point 19 of the Recommendations reads as follows
“19.  There should be no prohibition or unreasonable restriction placed on the use of any minority language during election campaigns, although language use should naturally be determined by assessing how the broadest constituencies possible may be reached. As far as possible, electoral authorities should provide voting information in both the official language and those minority languages used by voters in the areas where they are concentrated.”
The Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities contains several provisions of relevance:
Article 9
“1. The Parties undertake to recognise that the right to freedom of expression of every person belonging to a national minority includes freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas in the minority language, without interference by public authorities and regardless of frontiers. ...
...”
Article 10
“1. The Parties undertake to recognise that every person belonging to a national minority has the right to use freely and without interference his or her minority language, in private and in public, orally and in writing.
...”
Article 15
“The Parties shall create the conditions necessary for the effective participation of persons belonging to national minorities in cultural, social and economic life and in public affairs, in particular those affecting them.”
On 27 February 2008 the Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, in its commentary on the effective participation of persons belonging to national minorities in cultural, social and economic life and in public affairs, expressed the following opinion regarding the use of minority languages in election campaigns:
“77.  State Parties should ensure that parties representing or including persons belonging to national minorities have adequate opportunities in election campaigning. This may imply the display of electoral advertising in minority languages. The authorities should also consider providing opportunities for the use of minority languages in public service television and radio programmes devoted to election campaigns and on ballot slips and other electoral material in areas inhabited by persons belonging to national minorities traditionally or in substantive numbers.”
Point 5.d of Recommendation 273 (2009) of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe, entitled “Equal access to local and regional elections”, reads as follows:
“[Recommends that the Committee of Ministers urge the governments of member states:] to invite local and regional authorities to ensure the availability of electoral material in a regional or minority language and to give the right to candidates from minority groups to use their mother tongue in the pre-electoral campaign in order to guarantee equal access to local and regional elections to members of a minority group;”
On the basis of the material available to the Court in 2010 in respect of twenty-two Contracting States (Albania, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, “the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia”, Ukraine and the United Kingdom), it appears that the use of minority languages by candidates speaking during public election meetings is not subject to criminal sanctions in any of the countries concerned.