The applicant complained that the sentence imposed on her by a final judgment of the High Court of Cassation and Justice on 7 November 2013 had breached her right to freedom of expression. She relied on Article 10 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Bucharest. She was represented by Mr D.C. Mihai, a lawyer practising in Bucharest.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar of the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
At the time of the events the applicant was a former minister of justice of Romania, an active politician and a member of the European Parliament.
On 7 September 2009 two national newspapers published two press articles reporting comments the applicant had made the previous day at a summer school organised by the Democratic Liberal Party (Partidul Democrat Liberal – PDL).
Under the headline “Monica Macovei stated that the [Social Democrat Party’s (Partidul Social Democrat – PSD)] members of parliament [V.]P. and [D.]Ş. are corrupt”, the newspaper Ziarul Financiar published the following article:
“The PDL European Parliament member Monica Macovei ... stated yesterday ... that two young PSD members of parliament had [signed] contracts worth millions of euros with State companies from the constituencies they represented [in Parliament], arguing that this was a clear case of corruption.
The former minister of justice stated ‘Take a look at the lawyers in Parliament, there are two youngsters from the PSD for example, who have [signed] contracts worth millions of euros with State companies from the constituencies they represent [in Parliament], money that they get for legal advice. This is a typical act of corruption by political influence. It is not at all different from other acts of corruption.’
Afterwards, she named the two PSD members of parliament, stating that she was referring to [the Chamber of Deputies member] V.P., who was also the minister for relations with Parliament, and to Senator D.Ş., and added that this information had appeared in the press. Macovei argued that the first step was to make the two functions of lawyer and of member of parliament incompatible. ‘For as long as one is [working as] a member of parliament, one cannot exercise this profession (of lawyer).’”
Under the headline “Monica Macovei lunges at [V.]P.”, the newspaper Ziua published the following article:
“The PDL European Parliament member Monica Macovei accused yesterday the Social Democrats V.P. and D.Ş. of corruption by implementing contracts [concluded] with State companies. [V.]P. argued that [her] accusations sounded like the ones of the ‘friend’ I.M. who had helped her during the electoral campaign.
Naming [V.]P. and [D.]Ş., the former minister of justice stated ‘Take a look at the lawyers in Parliament, there are two youngsters from the PSD for example, who have [signed] contracts worth millions of euros with State companies from the constituencies they represent [in Parliament], money that they get for legal advice. This is a typical act of corruption by political influence.’
Contacted by Ziua, [V.]P. stated that there was no difference between the accusation made by Macovei and the one made some time ago by the controversial [I.]M.
The PSD member stated that ‘she is a first-class liar. Her words are the words of I.M. Birds of a feather flock together. When [I.]M. accused me of something similar, I presented documents [which proved] that I did not have any form of contract and [I.]M. went silent. Now the idea has been taken over by [I.]M.’s friend, Macovei’.
P. further stated that he was not considering taking legal action because he did not want to ‘waste the time of [the] justice [system] with Macovei’”.
On 16 October 2009 D.Ş. brought general tort law proceedings against the applicant, seeking 500,000 Romanian lei (RON) (approximately 117,100 euros (EUR)) in respect of non-pecuniary damage and the publication of the court’s judgment at the applicant’s expense in three national newspapers, as well as in the newspapers Ziarul Financiar and Ziua. He argued that the applicant’s statement that “the PSD members of parliament [V.]P. and [D.]Ş were corrupt” and the fact that she had named an act that in her opinion represented “a clear case of corruption” in the press articles of 7 September 2009 had discredited him in the eyes of the public and of his professional and political partners and had affected his professional and moral reputation, including his teaching career at the Bucharest Law School, as well as his dignity and honour. He relied on Articles 998-999 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 46 below), Articles 10 and 30 §§ 1 and 6 of the Constitution (see paragraph 44 below), Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights (“the Convention”) and Article 19 § 3 of the International Pact concerning civil and political rights.
On 18 October 2010 the Bucharest County Court (“the County Court”) dismissed D.Ş.’s action. It noted that on 6 September 2009 at a summer school organised by the PDL, the applicant had described an act which in her opinion had represented “a clear case of corruption” and that her opinion had been published in the newspaper Ziarul Financiar. It also noted that the applicant had expressed her opinion in a context in which an analysis had been made as to whether the function of lawyer and that of member of parliament were incompatible. The plaintiff’s name, together with the name of the member of parliament V.P., had been mentioned in this context.
The court held that, examined in a context in which the applicant had supported the existence of an incompatibility between the functions of lawyer and member of parliament, her statements had not been defamatory. The words “a clear case of corruption” had not had an exclusive pejorative connotation as long as the person together with whom the plaintiff had been named had not been the object of a criminal investigation or of any other form of investigation which could have raised doubts about his moral integrity. The simple adjacent mentioning of the plaintiff’s name could not have led to a deterioration of his image as a politician and lawyer, and could not have affected his dignity and honour.
The court further held that in the above-mentioned context, the applicant’s statements could be regarded as insinuations. An insinuation was a form of implied sub-textual suggestion which could not carry blame. In her speech the applicant had publicly suggested a certain fact. A suggestion did not have a material support. It was used to speculate about certain meaning of words and especially the way in which the public perceived them, this perception being also directly influenced by the public’s level of education. Albeit suggestive, the applicant’s statements had not been vehement. Ironic speech and especially the suggestion of a certain circumstance were means of expressing an opinion. A person who had made a suggestion but not an offensive statement had neither accused nor exonerated.
The court also held that all of the above formed the content of the right to freely express an opinion. The plaintiff had undoubtedly felt affected by the fact that his name had been used in a context casting blame on politicians and especially on those in power.
The court considered that in those circumstances the plaintiff could not ask it to punish the applicant for her attitude, given that she had remained prudent in her suggestions. Such an approach had been endorsed also by the European Court of Human Rights (“the Court”), which had reiterated repeatedly that criticism directed at politicians, as in the plaintiff’s case, was a matter of public interest.
D.Ş. appealed against the first-instance judgment.
In her submissions before the second-instance court the applicant argued, amongst other things, that in several public speeches she had made in September 2009 as a Member of the European Parliament, including one she had made at the summer school organised by the PDL, she had reiterated her opinions concerning the incompatibility of the functions of lawyer and member of parliament. In support of that idea, without initially giving any names, she had provided as an example the situation in which State companies from the constituency had increased the income of two lawyers and members of parliament – members of the PSD – as a result of legal-assistance contracts. When asked by journalists, she had acknowledged that she had been referring to V.P. and D.Ş and had expressly mentioned that information about the system the two had been using to obtain income had already been reported in the press. During her public speeches on that topic she had explained that it had been a system by which the law practice “[D.]Ş and Associates” had earned substantial amounts of money from energy companies in a certain constituency at a time when V.P. had been both a senior partner of the law firm and a member of parliament representing the said constituency. The system which had led to obtaining substantial incomes by merging parliamentary influence with the position of lawyer had also been reported in press articles of 8 September 2009 (see paragraph 44 below).
On 3 October 2011 the Bucharest Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) allowed D.Ş.’s appeal and ordered the applicant to pay him damages of RON 10,000 (approximately EUR 2,300) and to publish the court’s judgment at her own expense in three national newspapers with the widest circulation, as well as in the newspapers Ziarul Financiar and Ziua.
The Court of Appeal held that the conditions for civil liability had been met in the applicant’s case. In particular, the applicant’s unlawful act had consisted in the statement she had made on 7 September 2009 about an untruthful fact, namely that the plaintiff had committed an act of corruption in his joint functions of lawyer and member of parliament. Her statement had gone beyond a simple value judgment and had amounted to a defamatory statement of fact concerning the plaintiff’s activity. The domestic courts and the Court had acknowledged that freedom of expression was limited by the fundamental rights and freedoms of others. In other words, freedom of expression stopped where the constitutional rights concerning the dignity of others began, and the national authorities had to make sure that a proportional balance was struck between those rights.
The court considered that even though the person targeted in the statements was a public figure involved in politics, and it could therefore be argued that he had implicitly accepted exposure to criticism concerning the exercise of his public mandate, which was of public interest, the ease with which the impugned statements had been made, by a person fully aware of the legal consequences of taking a public stance without actual proof, overstepped the limits of freedom of expression.
Human dignity was a characteristic of human personality and therefore its protection had to be effective, given the fundamental nature of that right. Otherwise it would become a mere illusory right which could not be relied on by persons with an intense social activity, and exercising it would be blocked by freedom of expression. As a result, the court considered that the applicant’s allegations concerning the existence of a bill on the incompatibility of lawyers who were also members of parliament had to be discarded because, on the one hand, any statement had to have a foundation or a factual support well known by the person in question – even more so if the statement had been made by someone known by the public to be a trained professional belonging to the legal field – and, on the other hand, because the legislative process in that regard could have been conducted transparently and lawfully.
The court acknowledged that the bill to which the applicant had referred in her defence had been of public interest and had concerned democratic values. However, it considered that the applicant’s statements concerning the plaintiff had overstepped the acceptable limits of exaggeration and had represented a direct affirmation of an act of corruption concerning him, even though everyone had the right to be presumed innocent.
The court reiterated the scope and limits of the rights to freedom of expression, honour, dignity, reputation and public image as prescribed by domestic, European and international provisions; the Court’s conclusions concerning the distinction between statements of fact and value judgments, and the required proof in support of such statements; the heightened level of protection enjoyed by political speech; and the higher level of acceptable criticisms to which public persons in general, and politicians in particular, may be exposed. On this basis it held that the intentional statement of the applicant, known to the public as a former minister of justice, that by exercising jointly the functions of lawyer and member of parliament during the relevant period of time, the plaintiff had used political influence in connection with the legal services provided by the law practice he had founded, had been of a nature that had affected the plaintiff’s political, professional and teaching career. None of the available evidence had proved that the plaintiff had signed any legal-assistance or other contracts with a State-owned company located in the constituency he was representing in Parliament. As a result, the plaintiff had suffered non-pecuniary damage and was entitled both to non-pecuniary damages and to the publishing of the court’s judgment in the press.
Lastly, the court held that the amount of compensation granted to the plaintiff in respect of non-pecuniary damage had been assessed symbolically because human dignity was not a value which could be quantified.
The applicant and D.Ş. appealed on points of law against the second-instance judgment.
The applicant argued that the second-instance court had failed to examine the arguments raised by her in her defence and had assessed the facts wrongly. As regards her statements, the second-instance court had considered 7 September 2009 as the date when she had committed the unlawful act. However, two press articles of 8 September 2009 attached to the case file had noted that she had stated that the function of member of parliament should have been incompatible with the function of lawyer because politicians could use their status to obtain various benefits. She had provided as an example the law practice of “[D.]Ş. and Associates”, which had earned millions of euros from State-owned companies – located in a certain constituency – precisely at a time when V.P. had been both a senior partner at the law practice in question and a member of parliament. It had been clear, therefore that her statements had concerned mainly V.P., because he had been both a lawyer and a member of parliament. The law practice of “[D.]Ş. and Associates” had been the weak link in the D.Ş. and V.P. chain because D.Ş. had not been a member of parliament at the time when the contracts had been concluded.
The applicant further argued that she had made similar statements since 2006 when she had been a minister of justice and had initiated a bill prohibiting the exercise of lawyer and member of parliament functions at the same time. Moreover, her statements had not been a gratuitous attack against the two individuals in question as she had never referred only to D.Ş. She had referred to the mutually beneficial relationship between the two men, who had been friends, which she had used as an example to justify the need for her proposed bill to be adopted. She had never stated that D.Ş. had exercised jointly the functions of lawyer and member of parliament.
The applicant claimed that she had also argued before the secondinstance court that D.Ş. had never proved the exact content of the alleged defamatory statements that were the object of the dispute. He had relied on a press report concerning the content of her statements, which had been contradicted by other press reports. As she had already proved before the lower courts, her statements had been reported differently by the press, and D.Ş., who had been aware of those differences, had not taken any steps to clarify them. Even so, the second-instance court had accepted D.Ş.’s version of the events without providing any reasons, holding that the applicant’s unlawful act had consisted in making an untruthful public statement on 7 September 2009. She argued that it had been clear, however, that the phrase “a typical act of corruption” was missing from the press reports of 8 September 2009. Nor did it appear from those press reports that she had stated that D.Ş. had signed contracts and had earned large amounts of money from companies in his constituency, or that he had exercised jointly the function of lawyer and member of parliament. The second-instance court had avoided examining those inconsistencies in the press reports and had therefore failed to establish the facts correctly.
Furthermore, the applicant argued that her statements had been made on a clearly reasonable factual basis, namely: (i) at least four press articles concerning the mutually beneficial relationship between D.Ş. and V.P. published before her statements of September 2009; (ii) two investigations – into the contractual relationship between the “[D.]Ş. and Associates” law practice and two State-owned companies located in the constituency represented in Parliament by V.P. – which had been finalised more than a month before her statements and which had been brought to the attention of the criminal authorities; and (iii) V.P.’s public income declaration. V.P. had become a senior partner at “[D.]Ş. and Associates” in September 2007 and the above-mentioned investigations had disclosed that since then, the number of new contracts signed by the law practice had increased exponentially and that the existing ones had increased in value significantly. In addition, V.P.’s income had increased considerably.
The applicant submitted that her statements had been made in good faith and had not been a gratuitous attack. Nor had they sought to discredit the plaintiff. She had sought to provide an example and an argument in support of an idea, namely the incompatibility between the functions of lawyer and member of parliament, which she had been promoting for a long time even before she had referred to the plaintiff.
Lastly, the applicant argued that the second-instance court had applied wrongly the domestic general tort law provisions and Article 10 of the Convention. The protection granted to D.Ş.’s political image had been disproportionate and detrimental to a free debate on a matter of public interest. Moreover, the second-instance court had failed to examine whether in the circumstances of the case the curtailment of her right to freedom of expression had been necessary in a democratic society. According to the Court’s case-law, the level of acceptable criticism was higher in the case of politicians, regardless of whether the statements in issue had been made by journalists or other persons.
By a final judgment of 7 November 2013 (available to the parties on 3 March 2014) the High Court of Cassation and Justice (“the Court of Cassation”) dismissed both appeals on points of law.
The Court of Cassation held that the conditions for civil liability had been met in the applicant’s case. In particular, her unlawful act had consisted in the public statement she had made on 7 September 2009 containing an untruthful fact, namely that the plaintiff had committed an act of corruption in his joint functions of lawyer and member of parliament. Damage had been caused to the plaintiff as a result of the negative effect that her statements had had on his political and professional reputation and on his public image. The link between the unlawful act and the damage caused had consisted in the fact that the applicant’s statements had raised doubts about the plaintiff’s integrity in carrying out his political duties and about his reputation in the field of higher education.
The applicant’s liability flowed from her attitude. Her direct statements concerning the plaintiff had overstepped the level of acceptable criticism and had amounted to a direct statement about an act of corruption committed by him in circumstances where he had enjoyed a right to be presumed innocent.
It was true that the acceptable level of criticism was higher in respect of politicians. However, they also had the right to have their reputation and dignity protected. Not every statement concerning a politician had to be tolerated by default.
The court referred to the Court’s conclusions concerning the distinction between statements of fact and value judgments, and the required proof in support of such statements. On that basis it held that an accusation of acts of corruption formulated by a former minister of justice and prosecutor could have damaged the plaintiff’s political, professional and teaching career. The problem of corruption was of major interest for Romanian society.
The court could not accept the applicant’s argument that her statements concerning the incompatibility between the functions of lawyer and member of parliament had not sought to gratuitously attack the applicant or to discredit him, but had amounted to mere arguments in support of a bill. It held that the applicant was a former minister of justice, publicly perceived as a legal professional given her career as a prosecutor, and her public statement about an untrue fact, in particular an act of corruption committed by the plaintiff, had been bound to cause him non-pecuniary damage.
The court held further that neither the domestic nor the international norms provided for a precise way of repairing in full the non-pecuniary damage suffered by a person. Making an assessment on an equitable basis, the court concluded that the second-instance court had correctly calculated the amount of compensation granted to the plaintiff in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
Lastly, the court held that a large amount granted in respect of nonpecuniary damages would not deter the applicant from committing similar acts in the future. However, an order to publish the judgments which had held that the acts in question had been unlawful would do so.
D.Ş. was a senator and a member of parliament from December 2008 to 2015.
The applicant submitted to the Court three articles published on 7 March 2006, 24 February 2008 and 9 May 2009, respectively, in an unidentified newspaper, on the Internet page of the newspaper Ziua and on the Internet news portal HotNews. They stated that the applicant had initiated a bill proposing, amongst other things, that the function of lawyer be declared incompatible with the function of member of parliament and that the incompatibility in question remain in force for at least twenty years. They also stated that Parliament had not adopted the aforementioned proposal.
The applicant also submitted to the Court five articles published in the media between 28 September 2007 and 6 March 2009. Two of the articles stated, amongst other things, that V.P. had become a senior partner of the law practice “[D.]Ş. and Associates” in September 2007. The remaining three articles described the relationship and connections between V.P., D.Ş., the law practice “[D.]Ş. and Associates” and various major State-owned energy companies located in the constituency represented in Parliament by V.P., including the legal-assistance contracts signed by the law practice and the energy companies in question between April 2007 and December 2008 for large legal fees.
On 4 August 2009 the internal audit department of one of the abovementioned State-owned companies produced an inquiry report concerning two legal-assistance contracts signed by the company with “[D.]Ş. and Associates”. The report identified several problems with regard to the way in which the contracts had been signed and implemented, and stated that the State company had suffered important financial losses. It recommended that the report be notified to the relevant authorities for further investigation.
The applicant submitted to the Court V.P.’s public income declarations from May 2007 to October 2009, indicating that from 2005 to 2008 V.P.’s income for his work as a lawyer had increased significantly. They also indicated that from September 2007 to 2008 he had been a senior partner of the law firm “[D.]Ş. and Associates”.
The applicant submitted to the Court two press articles of 8 September 2009 published by the newspaper Pandurul and the Internet news portal Presaonline. The two articles first stated that the previous day a new episode had begun in the conflict between the applicant and V.P. They then reported that the applicant had stated that the function of member of parliament should be made incompatible with the function of lawyer because politicians could use their status to obtain various benefits. She had provided as an example the law practice of “[D.]Ş. and Associates”, which had earned millions of euros from State-owned companies – located in a certain constituency – precisely at a time when V.P. had been both a senior partner at the law practice in question and a member of parliament representing the constituency in question.
Lastly, the applicant submitted to the Court an article published on 20 June 2018 on the Internet news portal HotNews, which stated that the Court of Cassation had convicted D.Ş. of influence peddling and had sentenced him to three years’ imprisonment. According to the article, D.Ş. had been indicted for influence peddling because from October 2011 to July 2014 he had claimed and received EUR 100,000 from a private party in order to facilitate the signing of legal-assistance contracts between a law firm and a large energy company in the country.
The former Civil Code, in force until 1 October 2011, provided that any person who was responsible for causing damage to another would be liable to make reparation for it, regardless of whether the damage was caused through his or her own actions, through his or her failure to act or through his or her negligence (Articles 998 and 999 – see Nicolae Virgiliu Tănase v. Romania [GC], no. 41720/13, § 68, 25 June 2019).
Articles 10 and 30 §§ 1 and 6 of the Constitution provide that Romania maintains and develops peaceful relations with all States and has good neighbourly relations based on the generally recognised principles and norms of international law. Freedom to express thoughts, opinions and beliefs orally, in writing, through images, or through other means of public communication is inviolable. Freedom of expression may not damage a person’s honour, dignity, private life or one’s right to one’s image.