The case originated in an application (no. 20436/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Ms Helena Wojtas-Kaleta (“the applicant”), on 6 October 2001.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged a breach of her right to freedom of expression guaranteed by Article 10 of the Convention as a result of a reprimand imposed on her by her employer, a public television company.
On 17 September 2007 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
Third-party comments were received from the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights, which had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2).
The applicant was born in 1943 and lives in .
The applicant was a journalist employed by Telewizja Polska Spółka Akcjna (TVP), the Polish public television company. On 1 April 1999 Gazeta Wyborcza, a national newspaper, published an article reporting that two classical music programmes had been taken off the air. The article cited well-known composers, critics and journalists who had expressed their concerns about the lack of support for classical music and about the fact that the quality of public television programmes was being negatively affected as a result of fierce competition from private broadcasters. The article also quoted an opinion which had been expressed by the applicant in an interview in her capacity as the President of the Polish Public Television Journalists’ Union (Syndykat Dziennikarzy Polskich Telewizji Polskiej).
The relevant part of the article read as follows:
“... Ms Kaletowa, the President of the Polish Public Television Journalists’ Union said: ‘We have received the decision very badly, especially as the new programme proposals are not concrete. Director K. stated that the changes were not aimed at getting rid of classical music but, on the contrary, at creating new possibilities for it. I take this statement at face value, although no steps have been taken so far which could confirm these good intentions’.”
The applicant also signed an open letter addressed by 34 representatives of cultural and artistic circles in  to the board of TVP. The letter stated that classical music was a common value and a pillar of national identity and that the lack of a stable and coherent policy with respect to the broadcasting of classical music constituted a threat to culture and to the amateur music movement. By way of example, the authors mentioned two music programmes which had been discontinued and replaced by “pseudo-musical kitsch”.
The open letter read, inter alia:
“Everybody involved in music is deeply concerned by the marginalisation of culture and music in our country and, in particular, in our region.
Music is the heritage of the nation. It is also the universal language of art, spoken by citizens throughout the world. Music constitutes one of the pillars of our national identity and we must preserve and disseminate both the work of previous centuries and of modern times. Chopin, Szymanowski, Górecki, Lutosławski, Kilar or Penderecki are composers of whom we are proud.
... All these achievements are seriously jeopardised. There is a lack of money and no stable and coherent policy of protection and no systematic co-operation with the media. As regards regional television, despite the principles governing the public TV’s mission, concerts, magazines, cultural and music programmes, such as ‘MAK’, ‘TUBA’, ‘Meeting Classical Music’ are disappearing and air time is being polluted by violence and pseudo-musical kitsch.
The NSZZ Solidarność Trade Union and the representatives of cultural and artistic circles ... protest against these measures.”
On 15 April 1999 the applicant was reprimanded in writing by her employer for failing to observe the company’s general regulation no. 14 § 2, which required her to protect her employer’s good name (see paragraph 18 below). The applicant argued in her appeal of 20 April 1999 to the Regional Director of TVP that when commenting on the employer’s decision she had been acting in her capacity as the president of a trade union.
The employer stated in reply that the comments in question did not refer to matters which could fall within the trade union’s scrutiny. In addition, the open letter which the applicant had signed contained untrue and tendentiously presented information that was harmful to the company’s good name.
The reprimand was to be kept in her records for a period of up to one year, depending on the applicant’s behaviour.
The applicant unsuccessfully objected to the reprimand. She argued that as a member of the trade union she had a right to criticise measures impairing the rights of employees.
On 13 May 1999 the applicant lodged a claim against TVP with the Wrocław District Court, requesting that the reprimand be withdrawn. She alleged that the reprimand had been an act of revenge by her employer for her trade-union activity and disagreed with the assessment made of her behaviour.
By a judgment of 9 January 2001 the Wrocław District Court dismissed her claim. The court agreed with the employer’s arguments that the issue of changes in television programming was not a matter on which the trade union could comment and that the applicant had failed to observe the obligation of loyalty imposed on her as an employee. The court found that the applicant was guilty of having behaved in an unlawful manner and that this was a necessary and sufficient prerequisite for the disciplinary measure imposed on her.
The applicant appealed, pleading a violation of the applicable provisions of the Trade Unions Act, read in conjunction with Article 54 of the Polish Constitution guaranteeing freedom of expression. She submitted, inter alia:
“The lower court has breached [inter alia] Article 54 of the Constitution in that it accepted that the applicant, as the President of the Polish Public Television Journalists’ Trade Union, was not entitled to make comments to the press and to sign the open letter concerning the situation in its regional branch, despite the fact that she was acting in the employees’ interest, in compliance with her legal obligations and without harming the employer’s good name. [The letter] had a close connection with the programming changes which were to the detriment of the musical culture in Lower Silesia, but, first and foremost, also infringed the material and moral interests of the employees who could lose their jobs and broadcasting time.”
On 10 April 2001 the  upheld the contested judgment. It stated that the applicant’s comments had not been aimed at the protection of employees’ rights in connection with her function in the trade union but had taken the form of an assessment of the changes in programming policy. It concluded that the applicant had acted to the detriment of the employer and had thus breached her obligation of loyalty. Consequently, the employer had been entitled to impose the reprimand on her.
Article 54 of the Constitution provides:
“1.  The freedom to express opinions, and to acquire and disseminate information shall be ensured to everyone.
Preventive censorship of means of social communication and licensing of the press shall be prohibited.”
The rights and obligations of employees are governed by the Labour Code. Pursuant to Article 108 of the Code, a reprimand may be imposed on an employee for a failure to observe regulations concerning the organisation of work, work safety and hygiene regulations, fire-protection regulations or regulations governing working hours. Under Article 111, the nature of the breach concerned, the degree of the employee’s guilt and previous work record shall be taken into consideration.
Section 21(1) of the Broadcasting Act of 29 December 1992 (ustawa o radiofonii i telewizji) reads:
“Public radio and television shall carry out their public mission by providing, on terms laid down in this Act, the entire society and its individual groups with diversified programme services and other services in the area of information, journalism, culture, entertainment, education and sports which shall be pluralistic, impartial, well balanced, independent and innovative, and marked by high quality and integrity of broadcasting”.
Section 21(3) of the Act provides:
“Programme services of public radio and television should:
(1) be guided by a sense of responsibility for the content of the message and by the need to protect the good reputation of public radio and television;
(2) provide reliable information about the vast diversity of events and processes occurring in  and abroad;
(3) encourage an unconstrained development of citizens’ views and the formation of public opinion;
(4) enable citizens and their organisations to take part in public life by expressing diversified views and approaches as well as by exercising their right to social supervision and criticism;
(5) assist the development of culture, science and education, with special emphasis on Polish intellectual and artistic achievements;
(6) respect the Christian system of values, being guided by the universal principles of ethics;
(7) strengthen family ties;
(7a) promote healthy life-styles;
(8) contribute to combating social pathologies.”
Under Regulation no. 14 of the TVP Employees Regulations the employee has a duty to uphold the company’s good name.
Section 10(1) of the Press Act (Prawo prasowe) provides:
“The journalist’s task is to serve the nation and the State. When carrying out this task a journalist should act in compliance with ethical standards and principles of social co-existence, within the limits set by law.”
Under section 10(2) of the Act a journalist who is also an employee is obliged to follow the broadcasting policy chosen by his or her employer, as set out in a statute or a regulation.
Recommendation CM/Rec(2007)3 of the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers to member states on the remit of public service media in the information society, adopted on 31 January 2007, provides, inter alia:
“Member states have the competence to define and assign a public service remit to one or more specific media organisations, in the public and/or private sector, maintaining the key elements underpinning the traditional public service remit, while adjusting it to new circumstances. This remit should be performed with the use of state-of-the-art technology appropriate for the purpose. These elements have been referred to on several occasions in Council of Europe documents, which have defined public service broadcasting as, amongst other things:
a)  a reference point for all members of the public, offering universal access;
b)  a factor for social cohesion and integration of all individuals, groups and communities;
c)  a source of impartial and independent information and comment, and of innovatory and varied content which complies with high ethical and quality standards;
d)  a forum for pluralistic public discussion and a means of promoting broader democratic participation of individuals;
e)  an active contributor to audiovisual creation and production and greater appreciation and dissemination of the diversity of national and European cultural heritage. (...)”
As a reference point for all members of the public, public service media “should offer news, information, educational, cultural, sports and entertainment programmes and content aimed at the various categories of the public and which, taken as a whole, constitute an added public value compared to those of other broadcasters and content providers”.
Its paragraph 14 further provides:
“Public service media should play an important role in promoting broader democratic debate and participation, with the assistance, among other things, of new interactive technologies, offering the public greater involvement in the democratic process. Public service media should fulfil a vital role in educating active and responsible citizens, providing not only quality content but also a forum for public debate, open to diverse ideas and convictions in society, and a platform for disseminating democratic values.”
Paragraph 20 reads:
“Public service media should stimulate creativity and reflect the diversity of cultural activities, through their cultural programmes, in fields such as music, arts and theatre, and they should, where appropriate, support cultural events and performances.”