The case originated in an application (no. 52884/09) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by the Religious Community of Jehovah’s Witnesses (“the applicant community”), on 28 September 2009.
The applicant community was represented by Mr R. Cook, Mr A. Carbonneau and Mr R. Kohlhofer, lawyers practising in London, New York and Vienna respectively. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicant community complained under Articles 9, 10 and 14 of the Convention that the domestic authorities had unlawfully interfered with its rights to freedom of religion and freedom of expression.
On 23 March 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Articles 9 and 10 of the Convention and Article 14 read in conjunction with Articles 9 and 10 of the Convention, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
On 13 June 2017 the non-governmental organisation Alliance Defending Freedom International (ADF) was given leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
The applicant community is the Religious Community of Jehovah’s Witnesses, registered by the Ministry of Justice on 22 December 1999. According to its charter, the purpose of the applicant community was “to satisfy the religious needs of believers in the Christian religion, with reference to Bible”.
According to the applicant community, from 2002 it had applied on a regular basis to the State Committee for Work with Religious Associations (“the Committee”) for permissions to import religious literature to be used in their religious activity and for sharing with those who were interested in it. Permissions had been granted by the Committee in a rather contradictory manner, namely that the same title had been allowed for import on one occasion but denied on another.
On 13 June 2008 the Committee granted one of the applicant community’s regular requests in part allowing import of three out of six requested titles, arguing that the remaining three could not be imported as they contained passages which were hostile towards other religions and beliefs.
On 11 July 2008 the applicant community lodged an action against the Committee with the Sabail District Court, asking the court to declare the decision of the Committee unlawful and quash it. Relying on the provisions of the Constitution, which provided for freedom to express one’s religion and conscience, and freedom to acquire and distribute information, and on Articles 9, 10 and 14 of the Convention, the applicant community submitted that the banned literature was based on the Holy Scriptures, which aimed to spread spiritual knowledge.
On 13 August 2008 the first-instance court rejected the claim. Finding that the Committee’s decision did not amount to a violation, the court referred to an expert report that had been commissioned, which stated:
“The book entitled “Worship the Only True God” presents subjects that reflect Jehovah’s Witnesses’ religious views. On page 25 it is emphasised that members of the Christian religion are two-faced and their involvement in politics is condemned. It is noted that such actions by Christians can be the cause of people’s negative attitude towards the Bible. Moreover, governments and all nations of the world are reproached for not submitting to Jesus Christ, the king designated by Jehovah. The incorrectness of these religions is established by citing examples [such as] the wars between adherents of the world’s religions [which have been] ignited by racial segregation. In addition, international religions are compared to a ‘rotting tree’.
On page 64 of the book entitled “What Does the Bible Really Teach?” it is claimed that other religions which do not agree with the religious views of ‘Jehovah’s Witnesses’ were created under the influence of Satan. Teaching for a religious purpose that a person suffers after death is unquestionably considered satanic. The author claims that every person [who is an] adherent of a false religion should immediately leave it and accept Jehovah. It is claimed that the celebration of Christmas is not correct, and that this was incorporated from idolatry. It is further noted that the Christian understanding of belief in the cross is not correct.
On page 6 of the book entitled “What Is the Purpose of Life?” it is stated that the world’s religions often hinder people’s progress and lead to hatred and wars. Furthermore, it is claimed that only the Bible is an accurate book and that other ancient holy books contain scientifically fictitious, inaccurate and inexplicable lies. Moreover, liturgical rites in traditional Christian churches are criticised and portrayed as being contrary to the Bible. On page 18 it is stated that ‘in addition to the false doctrines taught, the Christian world has also betrayed God and the Holy Book with its deeds.”
In summarising the parties’ submissions, the conclusion of the expert report, and applicable legal provisions, the court held:
“... the defendant, being an authority in charge of the production, import and distribution of religious literature and other religious material, examined the content of the literature listed in the Religious Community of Jehovah’s Witnesses’ request, and by the letter dated 13 June 2008 banned the import and unrestricted distribution [of that literature], as those titles contained information concerning religious hatred, sectarian discrimination, a threat to national security, religious and political sabotage, and so on. The reasons for not allowing the import of three titles have been explained in detail in the expert report ... the content of these books referred to detrimental ideas and other negative influence[s] which can adversely affect common understanding, mutual tolerance and reciprocal respect between religious communities of various faiths. Therefore, having considered the relevant expert report, the court finds that the defendant acted correctly in banning the import of the literature in question.”
On 3 December 2008 the Baku Court of Appeal rejected an appeal lodged by the applicant community, endorsing the reasoning of the firstinstance court in a summary fashion.
On 16 June 2009 the Supreme Court dismissed a cassation appeal by the applicant community and upheld the decision of the Baku Court of Appeal. In response to an argument by the applicant community that the ban on the import of particular titles was subjective and must be considered unlawful, the Supreme Court held as follows:
“... the import of the books in question was banned because of the views [expressing] religious intolerance which they contained. Moreover, religious intolerance can seriously damage the interests and security of the State, as such statements, [when] expressed by members of any religious community, may lead to [people having] a sense of dissatisfaction towards the members of other religious communities, and cause religious clashes and other negative consequences, as well as undermine religious tolerance and existing normal relations between various religious communities [which are] currently present in Azerbaijani society.”
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Constitution provided as follows:
Article 47. Freedom of thought and speech
“I.  Everyone enjoys freedom of thought and speech.
No one shall be forced to proclaim or repudiate his or her thoughts and beliefs.
Agitation and propaganda inciting racial, ethnic, religious [or] social discord and hostility are not allowed.”
Article 48. Freedom of conscience
“I.  Everyone enjoys freedom of conscience.
Everyone has the right to freely determine his [or her] attitude towards religion, to profess, individually or together with others, any religion, or to profess no religion, [and] to express and disseminate his or her beliefs concerning his or her attitude to religion. ...”
Article 22 (Religious literature and items of a religious nature) of the Law on Freedom of Religious Belief of the Republic of Azerbaijan, as in force at the material time, provided that individuals and religious communities might obtain and use religious literature and other items and material of a religious nature in any language. With the consent of the relevant executive authority for religious affairs, religious communities might import and freely distribute literature, items of a religious nature and other material containing religious content.
Paragraph 9.2 of the Regulation on the State Committee for Work with Religious Communities, as in force at the material time, provided that in fulfilment of its duties, the Committee should have the right to control and authorise the production, import and distribution of literature and items of a religious nature and material containing religious and non-religious content at the request of religious communities or relevant public authorities.
The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (the ECRI) Report on Azerbaijan, Fourth Monitoring Cycle (Strasbourg, 31 May 2011) states:
“70.  As regards the specific issue of the importation of religious literature, this is prohibited without the prior authorisation of the SCRRO [the State Committee for Relations with Religious Organisations]. Authorisation may be refused if the work in question promotes religious intolerance or includes insults to other religions. The SCRRO indicated that, in 2009, the distribution of 2 332 religious works was authorised, compared with 380 works that were banned. In 2010, the figures were approximately 1750 works authorised versus 375 banned. Some civil society sources underline that, even where the importation of a work is authorised, the SCRRO stipulates the number of copies that can be brought into the country, which is often far lower than the quantity requested and which the community that made the request may need.
The ECRI takes note that according to the information provided by the authorities, any interference by the State in the exercise of religious freedoms is carried out in strict conformity with the law. It observes that the introduction of restrictive legislation with regard to religious communities and a certain number of the restrictive practices described above seem to be the authorities’ way of responding to the fear that forms of politically motivated religious extremism may emerge in Azerbaijan. The ECRI underlines that, even if they are legitimate, fears of this kind must not cause the authorities to lose their objectivity vis-à-vis religious minorities or to introduce practices imposing unreasonable requirements on them. The ECRI refers to its concerns, as set out above, regarding the conformity of the legislation in force with the European Convention on Human Rights. In the same context, it also refers to its above considerations warning against the use with regard to persons belonging to minorities of provisions intended to safeguard national security or to prohibit incitement of hatred in such a way as to stifle the legitimate, peaceful expression of minority identities. It again underlines that such practices involve a danger of generating or heightening feelings of mistrust within the minorities being targeted and may thus prove counter-productive. It also points out that opening up to diversity and dialogue among the different groups in society helps both to combat racism and to reinforce national security.”
The Joint Opinion on the Law on Freedom of Religious Belief of the Republic of Azerbaijan by the European Commission for Democracy through Law (the Venice Commission) and the OSCE/ODIHR (Venice, 1213 October 2012) states:
“102.   ... [the] provision requesting prior consent before spreading information would appear to be in direct breach of Article 10 (1) of the ECHR and Article 19 (1) of the ICCPR. Freedom of expression entails the right to impart and receive information and ideas without interference by public authorities and regardless of frontiers. The requirement of prior consent for the production and dissemination of religious literature is arguably unnecessary in a democratic society and may violate both freedom of expression and freedom of religion norms. The UN Human Rights Committee has stated that ‘the freedom to manifest religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching encompasses a broad range of acts [...]; the practice and teaching of a religion or belief includes [...] the freedom to prepare and distribute religious texts or publication’. The UN General Assembly has similarly called upon States to ensure ‘the right to all persons to write, issue, and disseminate relevant publications in these areas [of religion or belief]. The OSCE Vienna Concluding Document (1989) likewise provides that OSCE participating States shall ‘respect the right of individual believers and communities of believers to acquire, possess, and use sacred books, religious publications [...] and other articles and materials related to the practice of religion or belief’ and ‘allow religious faiths, institutions and organizations to produce, import and disseminate religious publications and materials’. Any restriction of this right must satisfy the criteria of a pressing social need in a democratic society. To comply with international human rights, it is recommended that this clause is omitted.”