The case concerns a decision by the Russian courts that information about unfiltered-browsing technologies available from the applicant’s website constituted prohibited content.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Offenbach, Germany. He was represented by Mr S. Darbinyan, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
The Government were represented initially by Mr A. Fedorov, head of the office of the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is a Russian-born German politician and activist working to support freedom of expression on the Internet. In 2012, he founded, together with local Russian activists, the RosKomSvoboda website (rublacklist.net) dedicated to news, information, analysis and research relating to freedom of expression online, online privacy issues, copyright and digital communications. Its name is an abbreviation for “Russian Committee for Freedom”, an allusion to the name of the Russian telecoms regulator Roskomnadzor (“Russian Committee for Oversight”), which maintains a list of proscribed online content.
One page of the RosKomSvoboda website (rublacklist.net/bypass) provided a list and a short description of tools and software for bypassing restrictions on private communications and content filters on the Internet, such as virtual private networks (VPN), the Tor browser, the “invisible Internet” (I2P) technology, the “turbo” mode in web browsers, and the use of online translation engines for accessing content.
In 2015, a district prosecutor in the Krasnodar Region lodged a public-interest claim with the Anapa Town Court, seeking a decision that information on the rublacklist.net/bypass page should be prohibited from dissemination in Russia. The prosecutor submitted that the anonymising tools available from that page enabled users to access extremist material on another, unrelated website. On 13 April 2015 the Anapa Town Court, without informing the applicant about the proceedings, granted the prosecutor’s application. It noted that the information on the rublacklist.net/bypass page had been made freely available without a password or registration to any user who wished to read or copy it. The Town Court declared illegal the content of the rublacklist.net/bypass page and ordered Roskomnadzor to enforce the decision immediately by blocking access to the applicant’s website.
Roskomnadzor asked the applicant to take down the webpage rublacklist.net/bypass, otherwise the website would be blocked. The applicant complied with the request and deleted the offending information.
Counsel for the applicant lodged an appeal. He pointed out that the applicant’s full contact details were listed on the website and that the examination of the prosecutor’s claim in his absence had breached the principle of fairness. He also submitted that providing information about tools and software for the protection of the privacy of browsing was not contrary to any Russian law.
On 29 September 2015 the Krasnodar Regional Court rejected the appeal in a summary fashion, without addressing the applicant’s arguments.
Section 3 of the Information Act (Federal Law no. 149-FZ of 27 July 2006) establishes legal principles governing access to information and information technologies. Principle 1 guarantees the freedom to search for, receive, impart, create and disseminate information by all legal means. Principle 2 requires that any restriction on access to information be set out in a federal law. Principle 8 prohibits legal regulations from favouring the use of particular information technologies.
Section 15.1 gives the telecoms regulator, Roskomnadzor, the authority to maintain the Integrated Register of domain names, webpage references (URL) and network addresses of websites featuring content which is banned in the Russian Federation. Subsection (5) provides for three grounds on which content may be deemed illegal and added to the Integrated Register: first, where the competent executive body has decided that the material falls under any of seven categories of illegal content, such as child pornography, the manufacture or use of narcotics, or methods of suicide; secondly, where a “judicial decision ... identified particular Internet content as constituting information the dissemination of which should be prohibited in Russia”; and thirdly, where a bailiff has issued an order restricting access to libellous information. Subsection (7) requires the web hosting service provider – immediately upon being notified by Roskomnadzor that illegal content has been added to the Integrated Register – to inform the website’s owner and ask him or her to remove that content.
The Declaration on freedom of communication on the Internet, adopted by the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers on 28 May 2003, took note of the Member States’ commitment to abide by the following principles in the field of communication on the Internet:
Principle 3: Absence of prior state control
“Public authorities should not, through general blocking or filtering measures, deny access by the public to information and other communication on the Internet, regardless of frontiers ...”
The 2011  (A/HRC/17/27) expressed concerns about the excessive scope of blocking measures:
“29.  Blocking refers to measures taken to prevent certain content from reaching an end user. This includes preventing users from accessing specific websites, Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, domain name extensions, the taking down of websites from the web server where they are hosted, or using filtering technologies to exclude pages containing keywords or other specific content from appearing ...
States’ use of blocking or filtering technologies is frequently in violation of their obligation to guarantee the right to freedom of expression ... Firstly, the specific conditions that justify blocking are not established in law, or are provided by law but in an overly broad and vague manner, which risks content being blocked arbitrarily and excessively. Secondly, blocking is not justified to pursue aims which are listed under article 19, paragraph 3, of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and blocking lists are generally kept secret, which makes it difficult to assess whether access to content is being restricted for a legitimate purpose. Thirdly, even where justification is provided, blocking measures constitute an unnecessary or disproportionate means to achieve the purported aim, as they are often not sufficiently targeted and render a wide range of content inaccessible beyond that which has been deemed illegal. Lastly, content is frequently blocked without the intervention of or possibility for review by a judicial or independent body ...”
The , adopted on 1 June 2011 by the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Representative on Freedom of the Media, the Organization of American States Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression, and the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information, provides in particular:
General Principles
“a. Freedom of expression applies to the Internet, as it does to all means of communication. Restrictions on freedom of expression on the Internet are only acceptable if they comply with established international standards, including that they are provided for by law, and that they are necessary to protect an interest which is recognised under international law (the ‘three-part’ test) ...”
Filtering and Blocking
“a. Mandatory blocking of entire websites, IP addresses, ports, network protocols or types of uses (such as social networking) is an extreme measure – analogous to banning a newspaper or broadcaster – which can only be justified in accordance with international standards, for example where necessary to protect children against sexual abuse.”
In  (CCPR/C/GC/34), adopted at its 102nd session (11-29 July 2011), the United Nations Human Rights Committee stated as follows:
“43.  Any restrictions on the operation of websites, blogs or any other Internetbased, electronic or other such information-dissemination system, including systems to support such communication, such as Internet service providers or search engines, are only permissible to the extent that they are compatible with paragraph 3 [of Article 19]. Permissible restrictions generally should be content-specific; generic bans on the operation of certain sites and systems are not compatible with paragraph 3 ...”
Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)5 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on Internet freedom, adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 13 April 2016, recommended that member States be guided by, and promote, specific Internet freedom indicators when participating in international dialogue and international policy making on Internet freedom. When adopting this recommendation, the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation indicated that, in accordance with Article 10.2c of the Rules of Procedure for the meetings of the Ministers’ Deputies, he reserved the right of his Government to comply or not with the recommendation, in so far as it referred to the methodology for its implementation at national level. Section 2.2 of the Internet freedom indicators, “Freedom of opinion and the right to receive and impart information”, reads:
“2.2.1.  Any measure taken by State authorities or private-sector actors to block or otherwise restrict access to an entire Internet platform (social media, social networks, blogs or any other website) or information and communication technologies (ICT) tools (instant messaging or other applications), or any request by State authorities to carry out such actions complies with the conditions of Article 10 of the Convention regarding the legality, legitimacy and proportionality of restrictions.
2.2.  Any measure taken by State authorities or private-sector actors to block, filter or remove Internet content, or any request by State authorities to carry out such actions complies with the conditions of Article 10 of the Convention regarding the legality, legitimacy and proportionality of restrictions.
2.3.  Internet service providers as a general rule treat Internet traffic equally and without discrimination on the basis of sender, receiver, content, application, service or device. Internet traffic management measures are transparent, necessary and proportionate to achieve overriding public interests in compliance with Article 10 of the ECHR.
2.4.  Internet users or other interested parties have access to a court in compliance with Article 6 of the Convention with regard to any action taken to restrict their access to the Internet or their ability to receive and impart content or information.
2.5.  The State provides information in a timely and appropriate manner to the public about restrictions it applies to the freedom to receive and impart information, such as indicating websites that have been blocked or from which information was removed, including details of the legal basis, necessity and justification for such restrictions, the court order authorising them and the right to appeal.”