Judgments were given against the applicant, a journalist, in two sets of defamation proceedings following the publication of articles written by him in a local newspaper concerning two district court judges in Rostov. In the applicant’s view, the domestic courts examining the defamation claims did not apply the Convention standards pertaining to the right to freedom of expression.
The applicant was born in 1955. At the material time he lived in Rostov-on-Don. The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr E. Markov, a lawyer admitted to practice in Ukraine.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is a journalist. At the material time he was the sole owner of Informatsionnopravovoy Tsentr Aleksandra Tolmacheva (“IPT”), a legal entity responsible for editing the Argumenty Nedeli Yug newspaper (“the newspaper”).
On 27 May 2010 the newspaper published an article entitled “An Incident Involving the Judiciary” (ЧП судейского масштаба). The article was an editorial that followed on from a series of articles that had criticised certain judges in Rostov-on-Don – in particular, Ms M., President of the S. District Court. One of the earlier articles had reported allegations that Ms M. had usurped part of the communal space in a block of flats, to the detriment of her neighbours. The article of 27 May 2010 addressed a court hearing in that case.
On 22 June 2010 Ms M. brought civil proceedings for defamation against the applicant, IPT, the newspaper and another legal entity involved in the newspaper’s activities. She demanded a retraction of the following parts of the article:
“Many a man came to see how this lawless person in a judge’s robe could protect her tainted honour and dignity with the help of her colleagues ...
‘Ms M.’s unlawful position’
... I would like to know how the case pending before the Z. Court is related to the defamation claim of Ms M., president of the S. District Court, who has disgraced herself in front of the whole country. ... It is high time that Ms M. begged the ... members of the condominium [that she robbed] for forgiveness [and] apologises for her actions, yet she has taken an “offensive” position, having gained support from other lawless people just like herself. After all that has been done by the judges to discredit our newspaper I am persuaded that people like [name redacted] and Ms M. should not be vested with judicial powers. [Such people] use the [judicial powers] for their personal gain and are a disgrace to the Russian judiciary.”
Ms M. subsequently modified her statement of claim, asking that the following extract from another article by the applicant – entitled “Moscow ‘Teachers’ of Ethics” (Московские «учителя» этики) and published in the newspaper on 15 July 2010 – be declared defamatory:
“Even Mr O. himself could not say anything of essence. He ... covered up for the President of the S. District Court, Ms M., who had usurped communal space in the block of flats ...”
On 4 October 2010 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Rostov-on-Don (“the District Court”) allowed Ms M.’s defamation claim in part. It reasoned that the article of 27 May 2010 had contained negative information about Ms M., both as a private individual and as the holder of a public office. The District Court dismissed the claim in so far as it concerned the phrase “Ms M.’s unlawful position”, which had served as a subheading, and the phrase “I am persuaded that people like ... and Ms M. should not be vested with judicial powers”, which, in the District Court’s view, had constituted a value judgment. It described the remainder of the impugned extracts from the article as allegations that Ms M.’s had behaved unlawfully and engaged in immoral actions – that is to say as statements of fact. The applicant insisted that the article had contained his personal opinion regarding (i) Ms M., which had been supported by an official document confirming that some residents of the block of flats had unlawfully commandeered parts of the communal space in the building by installing partitions and (ii) Mr E., the owner of a flat in the building, who had appeared as a witness before the District Court to testify that Ms M. had installed a partition, cutting off other residents’ access to the communal space. The District Court summarily dismissed the applicant’s argument that those allegations had constituted value judgments and observed that (i) the official document confirming the installation of additional partitions had not named Ms M., and (ii) Mr E. had not been a reliable witness, as he had previously complained about Ms M. It accordingly found that the defendants had not submitted proof of the veracity of the impugned statements, and ordered that those statements be retracted. It furthermore ordered that the applicant and IPT each pay Ms M. 500,000 Russian roubles (RUB) in respect of non-pecuniary damage, together with RUB 7,500 as compensation for the fees incurred by the claimant in the course of the defamation proceedings – that is to say a total of RUB 1,015,000 (approximately 24,360 euros (EUR)). The District Court did not consider the applicant’s financial situation when making the award but did take into account the fact that the claimant had been a judge, which meant that the allegations of her improper conduct had been particularly cynical.
The applicant appealed. On 13 December 2010 the Rostov Regional Court (“the Regional Court”) dismissed the applicant’s appeal in its substantive part. However, it noted as follows:
“... the amount to be recovered [from the defendant] must be proportionate to the damage caused and should not infringe on the freedom of information or impose an excessive burden on mass media. Therefore, on the basis of Article 361 of the Civil Procedure Code, the appeal tribunal considers it necessary to lower the amount of compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage [to be paid by] each defendant from RUB 500,000 to RUB 100,000.”
The amounts awarded as compensation for the fees to be paid by each defendant remained unchanged. As a result, the applicant, the sole owner of IPT, was held liable to pay the total of RUB 215,000 (RUB 107,500 in his own name and RUB 107,500 in the name of IPT; approximately EUR 5,250). At the material time the monthly minimum wage under the domestic law was RUB 4,330 (approximately EUR 105).
The case material available to the Court contained no information indicating that the judgment in Ms M.’s favour was actually enforced.
On 11 July 2008 a judge of the L. District Court of Rostov-on-Don, Ms A., resigned from office. Around that time, the investigative authorities began a pre-investigation inquiry into acts of bribery allegedly committed by Ms. A.
On 31 July 2008 the newspaper published an article by the applicant entitled “A Judge’s Multiplication Table” (Судейская таблица умножения) covering, in particular, Ms A.’s resignation. The article read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“Deputy Head of the L. District Court Ms A. was caught taking a bribe. For almost a year this guardian of the law could not be removed from her office. It has just become known that she has been deprived of her powers and that a criminal case against her will finally be opened.”
In September 2008 the newspaper and ProRostov magazine published an article by the applicant entitled “What does the bitch have to do with it?” (А сука здесь причем?), which contained the following passage:
“The experience of the former judge of the L. District Court Ms A., who was caught taking bribes, has been standard practice among judges for a long time ...”
On 16 September 2008 Ms A. lodged a defamation claim against, among others, the applicant and IPT claiming that the two aforementioned articles were defamatory.
On 6 November 2008 the District Court allowed Ms A.’s claim in part, ordered a retraction of the impugned statements and made an award in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
However, after the applicant appealed, Ms A. withdrew her claim. On 29 December 2008 the Regional Court accepted her refusal to pursue her claim further, quashed the judgment of 6 November 2008 and discontinued the proceedings.
On 30 November 2009 it was decided not to initiate criminal proceedings against Ms A. in respect of alleged bribery and forgery of official documents.
On 10 June 2010 the newspaper published another article by the applicant entitled “Heirs to the Judiciary” (Наследники судебной власти), which read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“We covered this issue in the articles in which we shone the spotlight on the former judge of the L. District Court and bribe-taker, Ms A.”
On 21 June 2010 Ms A. lodged a defamation claim against the applicant and IPT in respect of the article of 10 June 2010.
On 13 July 2010 Ms A. died.
On 13 September 2010 the District Court terminated the proceedings in respect of Ms A.’s defamation claim in view of the fact that the claimant had died. It reasoned that her heirs could not pursue the defamation proceedings in Ms A.’s stead as the right to reputation was not transferrable.
On 9 November 2010 a claim for defamation in relation to the three articles concerning Ms A. were brought in the name of her minor son, Mr A., who was born in 1995. The applicant, ITP, and the newspaper’s publishing house, Glas (Глас) were listed as defendants. Mr A. argued that his late mother had suffered immensely because of the three articles, which had also caused profound suffering to him.
The District Court accepted the statement of claim and commenced the proceedings. It initially scheduled a hearing for 14 December 2010. Subsequently it rescheduled it twice – for 27 January and 28 February 2011. The applicant informed the court that he could not attend the hearing of 28 February 2011 because of a business trip and lodged a request for a postponement.
On 28 February 2011 the District Court, having dismissed the applicant’s request for postponement as unsubstantiated, examined the case in his absence. It found in the claimant’s favour. Briefly touching upon the issue of whether Mr A. had had standing to lodge a defamation claim in his own name following his mother’s death, the District Court emphasised that although the decision of 29 December 2008 remained res judicata, Mr A. was entitled to protect his right to reputation and dignity, as “dissemination of untruthful defamatory information regarding the deceased person defames to a certain extent [Ms A.’s] son as well.” The District Court furthermore asserted, without providing its reasons for doing so, that the impugned statements in the three articles constituted statements of facts, not value judgments, and that the applicant had submitted no proof of their veracity. The court did not refer to the fact that the applicant was a journalist or to the context in which the articles had been published, but it did emphasise that the impugned statements had suggested that Ms A. had committed unlawful acts. The District Court ordered that the allegations be retracted and ordered that the applicant and IPT each pay Mr A. RUB 500,000 (approximately EUR 12,500) – that is to say a total of RUB 1,000,000 (approximately EUR 25,000); it also ordered that the publishing house pay Mr A. RUB 250,000 (approximately EUR 6,250). The District Court did not explain what method it had employed to calculate the award. It noted that it had considered “the financial situation of each defendant”, but without providing any description of that financial situation. It also referred to Mr A. witnessing his mother’s psychological suffering after the publication of the impugned articles and the negative attention from classmates and their parents that the article must have drawn to him as a pupil at his school.
Following an appeal by the defendants, on 5 May 2011 the Regional Court summarily upheld the judgment in full. As regards the amount awarded, it reproduced the District Court’s reasoning word by word.
The case material before the Court contained no information regarding whether the judgment in Mr A.’s favour was actually enforced.
For the relevant domestic framework and practice concerning defamation proceedings see Cheltsova v. Russia (no. 44294/06, §§ 32-34, 13 June 2017).
Under Article 133 of the Labour Code of 2001, the level of the monthly minimum wage is set by federal law simultaneously for the entire territory of the Russian Federation and cannot be lower than the monthly subsistence minimum.
At the time of the two sets of defamation proceedings described above the monthly minimum wage in the Russian Federation set by Federal Law N 82-FZ of 19 June 2000, with amendments of 24 July 2009 (the Monthly Minimum Wage Act), was RUB 4,330 (approximately EUR 105).