The case originated in an application (no. 15449/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Stateless person, Mr Andrey Igorevich Margulev (“the applicant”), on 3 March 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms K. Kostromina, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 18 June 2013 notice of the complaint concerning the applicant’s right to freedom of expression was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Moscow.
At the material time the applicant was the head of a community-based non-governmental organisation, Tsaritsyno for Everyone (Царицино для всех), which was created to help preserve Tsaritsyno, an architectural complex of the late eighteenth century comprising an English landscape garden in the south of Moscow that has the status of a museum.
On 23 October 2007 the Moskovskiy Korrespondent newspaper (hereinafter “the newspaper”) published an article “Tsaritsyno is not going to survive the winter” (hereinafter “the article”) written by Ms G. The article reported in a critical tone on the restoration works at the Tsaritsyno museum complex that were being funded by Moscow City Council (Правительство Москвы). In particular, it suggested that the works had adversely affected the old English landscape garden on the Tsaritsyno grounds. The article contained attributed quotes by the applicant, whom Ms G. had interviewed, and included the following statements:
“... People have been deprived of their historical and cultural heritage. ... The restoration of Tsaritsyno is the desecration of a historical monument ...”
On 21 December 2007 Moscow City Council lodged a statement of claims for defamation against the newspaper’s editorial board and Ms G. with the Khamovnicheskiy District Court of Moscow (“the Khamovnicheskiy Court”). Alleging that the statements “[p]eople have been deprived of their historical and cultural heritage” and “[t]he restoration of Tsaritsyno is the desecration of a historical monument” had tarnished their business reputation, they sought their retraction.
On 18 March 2008 the Khamovnicheskiy Court transferred the case in accordance with the territorial jurisdiction rules to the Basmannyy District Court of Moscow (“the District Court”).
The applicant applied to the District Court to be admitted to the proceedings as a third party that had not lodged independent claims regarding the object of the dispute. The District Court allowed the application.
In April 2008 the production of the newspaper was suspended.
On 22 July 2008 the District Court heard the defamation case. Moscow City Council withdrew the claims against Ms G. The newspaper’s editorial board contested the claims, arguing that the impugned statements had in fact been value judgments not susceptible of proof. The applicant appeared before the District Court as a third party to the proceedings. He objected to the defamation claims for the reason that he had exercised his right to freedom of expression guaranteed by Article 29 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation when criticising the renovation works of the Tsaritsyno museum complex.
On the same day the District Court found for the claimant for the reason that the defendant had failed to prove the truthfulness of the impugned statements. It ordered that the newspaper’s editorial board publish, at their expense, a retraction in another newspaper that was distributed in the same area and had the same circulation and periodicity within ten days of the judgment’s entry into force. The judgment read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“... [T]he court finds that the article contains statements concerning the alleged breach by the claimant of the regulations in force in respect of preservation and usage of real-estate objects of historic and cultural heritage that tarnish the business reputation of Moscow City Council ...
The defendant has not presented any evidence to confirm the truthfulness of the disseminated statements regarding Moscow City Council. ...
The court dismisses the defendants’ arguments that the impugned statements represent an opinion, a value judgment of their author and thus could not be subject to a retraction under Article 152 of the Civil Code as unsubstantiated. ...
... expression of an opinion on any subject by third parties, including that under the guise of criticism of a public authority, does not give grounds for absolving from liability a person who has disseminated statements where [such statements] have unlawfully brought harm to the values protected by the Constitution and the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, that is to say honour, dignity and business reputation of a natural or legal person.
The court considers that criticism is understood as a negative opinion, an assessment of something. However, having analysed the impugned statements, the court has grounds to conclude that they represent statements of fact, specifically statements regarding the actions by Moscow City Council aimed at harming the Tsaritsyno museum complex ... That the author of the article mentioned [Mr Margulev] as the source of [the impugned] information cannot in itself serve as a sufficient basis to conclude that the article provides an assessment or contains a value judgment.
The defendant’s argument that the impugned statements and the article as a whole do not point at Moscow City Council and thus could not tarnish their business reputation cannot serve as grounds for dismissing the claims. ... Dissemination by the defendant of the statements regarding the harm to the ... museum complex tarnished the business reputation of Moscow City Council. ...”
The applicant and the newspaper’s editorial board appealed to the Moscow City Court stating, in particular, that the impugned statements represented value judgments expressing the applicant’s opinion on the matter and thus were not susceptible to proof.
On 11 September 2008 the Moscow City Court upheld the District Court’s judgment on appeal, stating that the defendant had not presented proof of the truthfulness of the impugned statements and briefly noting that the arguments raised in the statement of appeal had been analysed and correctly dismissed by the District Court.
Article 29 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation of 12 December 1993 guarantees freedom of thought and expression, freedom to receive and impart information, and freedom of the mass media.
Article 152 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation of 30 November 1994 provides that an individual may apply to a court with an application for the retraction of statements (сведения) that are damaging to his or her honour, dignity or business reputation unless the person who has disseminated the statements has proved them to be true. The aggrieved person may also claim compensation for loss and nonpecuniary damage sustained as a result of the dissemination of the statements.
Article 43 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation of 14 November 2002 provides that a third party to the proceedings that has not lodged independent claims regarding the object of a dispute may enter the civil proceedings on the side of either a claimant or defendant before the first-instance court delivers its judgment, where the judgment in a case may affect the third party’s rights and obligations vis-à-vis the claimant or defendant. The scope of procedural rights and obligations of the third party that has not lodged independent claims regarding the object of a dispute is identical to that accorded to the claimant and defendant except for the right to change the grounds and the subject-matter of the claims, to increase or decrease of the amount claimed, to withdraw or accept the claims, to conclude a friendly settlement, to bring a counterclaim, and to demand enforcement of a judgment.
Resolution no. 3 of the Plenary Supreme Court of the Russian Federation of 24 February 2005 defines “untruthful statements” as allegations regarding facts or events which have not actually taken place by the time the statements are disseminated. Statements contained in court decisions, decisions by investigating bodies, and other official documents amenable to appeal cannot be considered untruthful. Statements alleging that a person has broken the law, committed a dishonest act, behaved unethically or broken the rules of business etiquette tarnish that person’s honour, dignity and business reputation (section 7). Resolution no. 3 requires courts hearing defamation claims to distinguish between statements of fact, which can be checked for truthfulness, and value judgments, opinions and convictions, which are not actionable under Article 152 of the Civil Code since they are an expression of a defendant’s subjective opinion and views and cannot be checked for truthfulness (section 9).