The case originated in an application (no. 18597/13) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by GRA Stiftung gegen Rassismus und Antisemitismus (“the GRA Foundation against Racism and Anti-Semitism” — “the applicant organisation”), on 13 March 2013.
The applicant organisation was represented by Mr A. Joset, a lawyer practising in Liestal. The Swiss Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Schürmann.
The applicant organisation alleged, in particular, that the civil courts had violated its right to freedom of expression by finding it liable for the infringement of a politician’s personality rights.
On 12 October 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant is a non-governmental organisation which promotes tolerance and condemns all types of racially motivated discrimination. It was established under Swiss law and registered in Zürich.
On 5 November 2009 the youth wing of the Swiss People’s Party (Junge Schweizerische Volkspartei) held a demonstration in the train station square in the town of Frauenfeld concerning a public initiative to support the prohibition of the building of minarets in Switzerland. After the event the party published a report on its website, including the following excerpts:
“In his speech in front of the Thurgau government building [Thurgauer Regierungsgebäude], B.K., the president of the local branch of the Young Swiss People’s Party [“the JSVP”], emphasised that it was time to stop the expansion of Islam. With this demonstration, the Young Swiss People’s Party wanted to take an extraordinary measure in an extraordinary time. The Swiss guiding culture (“schweizerische Leitkultur”), based on Christianity, cannot allow itself to be replaced by other cultures, B.K. added. A symbolic sign, such as the prohibition of minarets, would therefore be an expression of the preservation of one’s own identity.”
In response, the applicant posted an entry on its website in the section called “Chronology – Verbal racism”, entitled “Frauenfeld TG, 5 November 2009”, including the following extract:
“According to the report of the event, B.K., the president of the local branch of the Young Swiss People’s Party, emphasised that it was time to stop the expansion of Islam. He added further: ‘The Swiss guiding culture, based on Christianity, cannot allow itself to be replaced by other cultures. A symbolic sign, such as the prohibition of minarets, would therefore be an expression of the preservation of one’s own identity.’ Swiss People’s Party of Switzerland canton representative H.L. also spoke to the few people who attended; nevertheless, the Young Swiss People’s Party speaks of a great success. (Verbal racism)”
On 29 November 2009 the popular initiative against the construction of minarets was accepted in a referendum and a constitutional amendment banning the construction of new minarets was introduced.
On 21 August 2010 B.K. filed a claim for the protection of his personality rights with the Kreuzlingen District Court (Bezirksgericht Kreuzlingen). He applied, firstly, to have the applicant organisation withdraw the entry in question from its homepage and, secondly, for it to be replaced with the court’s judgment. The applicant organisation replied that the title of the Internet entry had to be considered as a value judgment, which could only lead to an infringement of personality rights if it entailed an unnecessarily hurtful and insulting attack on the person concerned.
On 15 March 2011 the Kreuzlingen District Court dismissed B.K.’s action. It held that the publication of the impugned article on the applicant’s website had been justified since it had related to a political discussion on a matter of public interest.
On appeal, on 17 November 2011 the Thurgau Cantonal High Court (Obergericht des Kantons Thurgau) reversed the first-instance judgment. It held that classifying B.K.’s speech as “verbally racist” had been a mixed value judgment, which could lead to an infringement of personality rights if it was based on untruths. The High Court concluded that B.K.’s speech itself had not been racist. It therefore ordered that the impugned article be removed from the applicant’s website and replaced with the court’s judgment.
On 25 January 2012 the applicant organisation filed an appeal with the Federal Supreme Court (Bundesgericht), reiterating its argument that any interference with B.K.’s personality rights had been justified. One of the applicant’s main aims was to fight racism and to inform the public about hidden and open racist behaviour. Its website stated that public comments would be documented, even if they did not fall within the scope of the prohibition of racial discrimination enshrined in Article 261bis of the Swiss Criminal Code. To fulfil its role of watchdog in that sense, it published articles and interviews concerning current events relating to racism and antiSemitism.
On 29 August 2012 the Federal Supreme Court dismissed the applicant organisation’s appeal, finding as follows (unofficial translation):
“3. The classification of and commenting on a person’s statements as ‘verbal racism’ violate that person’s honour. Not only in the context of the criminal offence of racial discrimination (Article 261bis of the Criminal Code) but more generally, the term in question is, in the eyes of the average reader, capable of deliberately debasing the person whose comments have been classified as ‘verbally racist’, accusing him or her of behaviour which is frowned upon by society in the form of an act which is, at the very least, questionable in constitutional terms (cf. BGE 127 III 481 E. 2b / aa p. 487, 129 III 49 E. 2.2 p. 51 and 715 E. 4.1 p. 722). The appellant referred to the respondent’s speech at the public demonstration of 5 November 2009 on its website ... freely accessible on the Internet, commenting on the term ‘verbal racism’. It thereby violated the respondent’s honour as part of his personality within the meaning of Article 28 § 1 of the Civil Code. The infringement is unlawful if it is not justified by the consent of the injured party, by an overriding private or public interest or by law (Article 28 § 2 ZGB).
The main point in dispute is whether the appellant can rely on an overriding interest in classifying the respondent’s comments as ‘verbal racism’.
1. The case-law on press statements, on which the appellant relies, distinguishes between statements of facts on the one hand and value judgments on the other, and can be summarised as follows: ...
2. The appellant assigned the respondent’s statements to the section entitled ‘verbal racism’ ... That was a mixed value judgment. It contains a substantive core and, at the same time, a value judgment. In order to justify the substantive core, it is necessary to examine whether the respondent’s comments were indeed racist.
3. The term ‘racism’ is understood as ‘a doctrine’ which states that ‘certain races or nations are superior to others in terms of their cultural capacity’, and, on the other hand, a ‘certain attitude, manner of thinking and acting towards people of (certain) other races or nations’ (cf. Duden, The Great Dictionary of the German Language in Six Volumes, Vol. 5, 1980, p. 2099). The adjective ‘verbal’ describes racism as ‘[occurring] with words, with the help of language’ (cf. Duden, The Great Dictionary of the German Language in Six Volumes, Vol. 6, 1981, p. 2730). Verbal racism is, therefore, no longer merely a certain attitude, but an attitude in the instant case which was expressed publicly through language (as opposed to, for example, through deeds). ‘Verbal racism’ could therefore mean racial discrimination in the criminal sense, as the respondent claims. What is decisive, however, as the second-instance court correctly stated, is that the mere demonstration of a difference between two individuals or groups does not constitute racism. Racism begins where the difference amounts simultaneously to denigration of the victims and where the highlighting of differences is ultimately only a means to represent the victims negatively and to show disregard for their dignity.
4. The statements that led the appellant to conclude that there had been ‘verbal racism’ are the core phrases ‘it is time to stop the spread of Islam ... The Swiss guiding culture (“schweizerische Leitkultur”), based on Christianity, cannot let itself be repressed by other cultures ... A symbolic sign, such as the prohibition of minarets, is therefore an expression of the preservation of one’s own identity’.
4.1. In his public speech, the respondent expressed his opinion on the prohibition of minarets, which, in the opinion of the High Court, would not be compatible with freedom of religion and non-discrimination. He has, in that connection, compared his own beliefs (‘Christianity’) with foreign beliefs (‘Islam’), delimited them (‘to halt’, ‘preserving one’s own identity’) and described his own as worthy of protection and defence (‘Swiss leading culture’, ‘not to be repressed’). For the average listener, that does not result in the blanket denigration of the followers of Islam or show fundamental contempt for Muslims.
4.2. On the whole, it cannot be said that the comments made by the respondent, as understood by the average listener, could be described as ‘verbally racist’. Therefore, the substantive core does not apply and the assessment is not acceptable. It shows the respondent in the wrong light. Therefore, the mixed value judgment, which infringed personality rights, cannot be justified by any overriding interest within the meaning of Article 28 § 2 of the Civil Code.
4.3. That assessment cannot be altered by the fact that in the general interest of informing the public, there is an increased degree of publicity and a reduced level of protection for personality rights for people who engage in a political debate, such as the respondent in the campaign for the minaret initiative (see BGE 105 II 161 E. 3b p. 165, 107 II 1 E. 3b p. 5). That special framework allows for the assessment of breaches of honour on a somewhat different scale, but it can neither justify the dissemination of untruths nor the publication of value judgments that do not appear to be justified with regard to the underlying facts.”
The relevant part of Part One, Chapter One of the Swiss Civil Code, as in force at the material time, reads as follows:
“Any person whose personality rights are unlawfully infringed may petition the court for protection against all those causing the infringement.
An infringement is unlawful unless it is justified by the consent of the person whose rights are infringed or by an overriding private or public interest or by law.”
“The applicant may ask the court:
to prohibit a threatened infringement;
to order that an existing infringement cease;
to make a declaration that an infringement is unlawful if it continues to have an offensive effect.
In particular, the applicant may request that a rectification or court judgment be notified to third parties or published.
Claims for damages and satisfaction or for the handing over of profits are reserved, in accordance with the provisions which govern agency without authority.”
The relevant part of the Swiss Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, reads as follows:
“Any person who publicly incites hatred or discrimination against a person or a group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic origin or religion, any person who publicly disseminates ideologies that have as their object the systematic denigration or defamation of the members of a race, ethnic group or religion,
any person who with the same objective organises, encourages or participates in propaganda campaigns,
any person who publicly denigrates or discriminates against another or a group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic origin or religion in a manner that violates human dignity, whether verbally, in writing or pictorially, by using gestures, through acts of aggression or by other means, or any person who on any of those grounds denies, trivialises or seeks a justification for genocide or other crimes against humanity,
any person who refuses to provide a service to another on the grounds of that person’s race, ethnic origin or religion, when that service is intended to be provided to the general public,
is liable to imprisonment of up to three years or to a fine.”
In October 2008, the Swiss Federal Commission against Racism issued an opinion on the initiative against the construction of minarets, the relevant part of which reads as follows:
“The Federal Commission against racism recommends:
rejection of the initiative ‘against the construction of minarets’...
The initiative against the construction of minarets ...
... discriminates against and defames Muslim men and women
The initiative and the arguments of those who support it equate to discrimination against Muslims. They are aimed at an outright ban on minarets, whereas Christians and members of other religions, such as Hindus, Buddhists and others, are not subject to a similar prohibition.
The initiative against the construction of minarets spreads and reinforces negative stereotypes concerning Islam and thereby defames Muslims. The minaret thereby becomes, in one sweeping judgment, the symbol of a will to power which, according to the supporters of the initiative, calls into question fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution, for instance gender equality. The text suggests that part of a religious building is a risk to society. All Muslims are therefore criticised for dishonest and even unlawful behaviour. However, such reproaches are contradicted by the facts.
The initiative against the construction of minarets ...
...breaches fundamental and human rights
The intitiative violates the freedom of religion guaranteed by human rights and the liberty of conscience and faith guaranteed by the Federal Constitution (Article 15). A prohibition on constructing minarets limits the rights of Muslims to practise their religion alone and in community with others. No public interest justifies such a restriction ....
The initiative against the construction of minarets ...
... fuels fear and creates insecurity
The initiative fuels fear among members of the majority population and among minorities. Muslims are and feel limited in exercising their rights. There will be a greater feeling of insecurity in Muslim communities because they will wonder about the extent of the restrictions. Moreover, the supporters [of the initiative] fuel fears by talking about ‘rampant Islamisation’ which represents a danger for the country. They completely ignore the fact that in Switzerland there is no serious problem of the integration of Muslims as far it concerns the practice of their religion.
The initiative against the construction of minarets ...
...is an obstacle to integration
Spreading stereotypes encourages discrimination on an everyday basis. Young people looking for a place to learn are pushed to the sidelines if they have a name that makes people think they are Muslims because of a fear they will cause problems. Muslims are insulted in public or excluded by their neighbours, who fear them. Repeated instances of discrimination make young people less disposed to integrate ...”
The website of the Swiss Federal Commission against Racism has a “Definition of Racism”, which reads as follows:
“Despite numerous studies on the subject, to date there is no universally accepted definition of racism. The one used most frequently is that of the French sociologist Albert Memmi:
‘Racism is a generalising definition and evaluation of differences, whether real or imaginary, to the advantage of the one defining or deploying them, to the detriment of the one subjected to the act of definition, whose purpose is to justify hostility or privilege.’...
In addition to this strict definition of the term, which particularly applies to classic pseudo-biological racism, there is also racism in the wider sense, which relies on cultural, psychological, social or metaphysical arguments. ...”
In its General Policy Recommendation No. 7, adopted on 13 December 2012, the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) gave the following definition of racism:
“‘Racism’ shall mean the belief that a ground such as race, colour, language, religion, nationality or national or ethnic origin justifies contempt for a person or a group of persons, or the notion of superiority of a person or a group of persons....”
The relevant part of the Explanatory Memorandum to ECRI’s General Policy Recommendation No. 7 stated as follows:
“6. In the Recommendation, the term ‘racism’ should be understood in a broad sense, including phenomena such as xenophobia, antisemitism and intolerance. As regards the grounds set out in the definitions of racism ..., in addition to those grounds generally covered by the relevant legal instruments in the field of combating racism and racial discrimination, such as race, colour and national or ethnic origin, the Recommendation covers language, religion and nationality. The inclusion of these grounds ... is based on ECRI’s mandate, which is to combat racism, antisemitism, xenophobia and intolerance. ECRI considers that these concepts, which vary over time, nowadays cover manifestations targeting persons or groups of persons, on grounds such as race, colour, religion, language, nationality and national and ethnic origin. As a result, the expressions ‘racism’ and ‘racial discrimination’ used in the Recommendation encompass all the phenomena covered by ECRI’s mandate.”
The relevant parts of ECRI’s Fourth report on Switzerland (CRI (2009) 32), published on 15 September 2009, read as follows:
“III. Racism in political discourse
... 88. ECRI is deeply concerned at the changes in the tone of political discourse in Switzerland since the publication of its previous report. These changes are very closely linked to the growth of the UDC party (Union démocratique du centre/SVP Schweizerische Volkspartei). In the latest parliamentary elections at federal level, the UDC obtained the highest score: 29% of the votes. With 62 elected members of the National Council – the second chamber of parliament – (55 during the 2003 parliamentary term), the UDC now occupies a significant position in Swiss politics. This party alone has made “foreigners” its key issue. The programme, positions, campaigns, posters and other material produced by the party are described by all antiracism experts as xenophobic and racist....
ECRI is pleased to note that the federal authorities regularly and openly oppose various parliamentary motions and requests for referenda launched or supported by the UDC, explaining that they infringe or are likely to infringe human rights, as in the case of the request for a referendum intended to ban the construction of minarets. The Swiss people themselves, although 29% voted for this party, reject some of its more extreme positions in referenda. The Federal Commission against Racism, the Federal Commission for Migration Issues and other bodies constantly warn the general public about this threat to the country’s social cohesion.
ECRI reiterates that unrestrained racist and xenophobic political discourse inevitably leads to a range of serious consequences – some of which can already be observed in Switzerland – including ill-conceived proposals which could disproportionately affect particular groups or their capacity for exercising their human rights in practice. Such discourse risks the undermining of social cohesion and an incitement to racial discrimination and racist violence....
Vulnerable / Target groups
... 119. In particular, ECRI is concerned to learn that, in recent years, some political parties, including the UDC, have considerably exploited and encouraged prejudice and racist stereotypes concerning Muslims within the majority population, not only in their rhetoric but also in political campaign posters. As a result some parts of public opinion may equate the entire Muslim population with terrorists and religious extremists. The fear of seeing Switzerland ‘swamped by Muslims’ is also exploited. In some cases, this prejudice apparently leads to discrimination, notably in employment, since Muslims are refused jobs because of the suspicion surrounding them. In particular, women who wear the Islamic headscarf encounter difficulties of access to jobs, housing and goods and services for the public. Muslims are also vulnerable to discrimination in matters of naturalisation.
To take but one example of hostility towards Muslims displayed in recent years, reference can be made to the federal popular initiative ‘against the construction of minarets’, aimed at adopting through referendum a new provision in the Federal Constitution, whereby ‘the construction of minarets is forbidden’. This initiative obtained the 100 000 signatures required and will therefore be submitted to the people and the cantons. It has, however, been deemed clearly incompatible with freedom of religion by the Federal Council, and hence in breach of the Swiss Constitution and international law as binding on Switzerland, and the Federal Council has called on the people and the cantons to reject it. The Federal Commission against Racism itself has stated that the initiative ‘defames Muslims and discriminates against them.’ However, it seems that, under Swiss law, only a popular initiative to amend the Constitution which violated ‘mandatory international law’ (jus cogens) would be invalid. ECRI regrets to learn that an initiative which infringes human rights can thus be put to the vote and very much hopes that it will be rejected. It regrets in particular the tone taken by the political discourse of the initiative’s supporters with regard to Muslims, as it largely contributes to their stigmatisation and to the reinforcement of racist prejudice and discrimination against them by members of the majority community.”
In its Concluding observations on the combined seventh to ninth periodic reports on Switzerland of 13 March 2014, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination held as follows:
“C. Concerns and recommendations ...
Racism and xenophobia in politics and the media
The Committee is deeply concerned at racist stereotypes promoted by members of right-wing populist parties and sections of the media, in particular against people from Africa and south-eastern Europe, Muslims, Travellers, Yenish, Roma, asylum seekers and immigrants. It is also concerned at the display of political posters with racist and/or xenophobic content and of racist symbols, as well as at racist behaviour and at the lack of prosecution in such cases. The Committee is further concerned at the xenophobic tone of popular initiatives targeting non-citizens, such as the initiative ‘against the construction of minarets’, adopted in November 2009, the initiative on the ‘expulsion of foreign criminals’, adopted in November 2010, and the initiative ‘against mass immigration’, adopted in February 2014. The Committee notes that such initiatives have led to a sense of unease among the affected communities and in Swiss society generally ...”