The case originated in an application (no. 17229/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Oleg Dmitriyevich Fedchenko (“the applicant”), on 10 January 2013.
The applicant was represented by Ms M.A. Ledovskikh, a lawyer practising in Voronezh. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a breach of his right to freedom of expression on account of defamation proceedings against him.
On 19 September 2016 the complaint under Article 10 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Suponevo, the Bryansk Region.
The applicant has been editor of a weekly newspaper, Bryanskiye Budni (Брянские будни), since he founded it in 1999.
In June 2010 the prosecuting authorities conducted a check into compliance with fire safety rules at the Tymoshkovykh shopping centre (ТРЦ Тимошковых). The report stated that fifteen breaches of the rules had been found.
On 21 June 2010 the prosecutor applied to a court with a request, inter alia, to order N.K. Timoshkov, the owner of the shopping centre, to rectify the breaches.
By a final decision of 2 August 2010 the application was allowed in that part.
Enforcement proceedings were instituted and subsequently discontinued.
In September 2011 the prosecuting authorities conducted another check. They found that the breaches had not been rectified and, moreover, found new ones. Overall, fifty violations of fire safety regulations were found, of which fifteen were considered to pose a threat to the life and health of people inside the centre.
The bailiffs’ decision to discontinue the enforcement proceedings was set aside.
At the same time the prosecutor instituted new court proceedings against the shopping centre, seeking to have the fire safety breaches rectified. The prosecutor also asked the court to close the shopping centre temporarily as a provisional measure until fire safety regulations had been complied with fully.
On an unspecified date the Bryansk Regional Court ordered the shopping centre to close temporarily. The proceedings on the merits remained pending, and a further hearing was scheduled for 27 March 2012.
On 23 March 2012 the Regnum Centre news portal published an article on its website about the temporary closure of the Tymoshkovykh shopping centre due to breaches of fire safety rules.
On 26 March 2012 the iBryansk.ru news portal published an article on its website about a meeting between Mr Timoshkov and representatives of the Ministry of Emergency Situations, the Bryansk prosecutor, the head of the Bryansk Administration and Mikhail Klimov, a deputy governor of the Bryansk Region.
On 27 March 2012 the bnews32.ru news portal published an article about a court order to close the shopping centre. The article also stated that the owner of the shopping centre considered the measure to be too severe, and that Nikolay Denin, governor of the Bryansk Region, had instructed Mr Klimov to personally take charge of the matter.
On the same date Regnum Centre published an article that at the 27 March 2012 hearing the Bezhitskiy District Curt of Bryansk had dismissed an application to lift the provisional measure. The article also stated that Mr Timoshkov had been very active in connection with the closure of the shopping centre and had already met representatives of the Ministry of Emergency Situations, the Bryansk prosecutor, the head of the Bryansk Administration and Mr Klimov. The news portal reported that as the court hearing had taken place after the meeting, Mr Timoshkov had been outraged by the decision and had said as follows: “In my opinion, which is shared by officials at the Ministry of Emergency Situations and Deputy Governor Klimov, there is no threat to people’s safety. I do not know why [the court delivered] such a decision. We shall appeal against it.”
On 29 March 2012 the province.ru news portal published an article on its website saying that the Bryansk prosecutor’s office had applied to the court to lift the suspension of the shopping centre’s activities, as announced by the deputy prosecutor, A. Stupak, at a meeting of the regional Duma. The article said that he had stated that the breaches that had been found were not considered by the Ministry of Emergency Situations as posing a threat to the life of employees and customers at the centre and that the owner had rectified some of them.
On 30 March 2012 the Tymoshkovykh shopping centre reopened.
On 11 April 2012 province.ru published an article on its website which read as follows:
“On 27 March the building was closed due to breaches of fire safety rules. By a court decision provisional measures were applied for one month pending rectification of the breaches.
Those events caused a stir. Businessmen talked to the regional prosecutor. Town and regional officials pleaded on behalf of the business. As a result, on 30 March the prosecutor’s office withdrew its complaint and the shopping centre opened again.
However, yesterday the regional court refused to lift the provisional measures. That means that before 27 April the building may be closed again. Today the shopping centre is open as usual. However, tenants say that bailiffs might visit them again on 13 April. In the meantime, the businessmen are going to again ask the prosecutor’s office for clarification.”
On 29 March 2012 the applicant published an article in Bryanskiye Budni no. 639/12 headlined “... and were Timoshkov’s errand boys” (“... и служили у Тимошкова на посылках”), where he criticised the officials who had taken the side of the shopping centre in the above events. The relevant part of the article reads as follows:
“The finest forces were mustered in support of Timoshkov. The most notorious sages gathered at the table – deputy governor Mikhail Klimov, the head of the town administration Sergey Smirnov and other officials. They were ordered to rescue their patron Timoshkov, and they did so. Quite a few establishments have been closed on account of a breach of fire safety rules, yet no such cavalry ever came to their rescue. The highest officials rushed to defend the interests of businessman Timoshkov ...
The corrupt Bryansk officials gave themselves away and did not even understand what had happened. Actually, they would not have been very embarrassed even if they had realised that they had revealed their connections. ‘Who are you with, masters of culture?’ they used to say in the times of Stalin. Another question needs to be asked in Bryansk: ‘Who are you with, masters of thievery? Who are you defending?’”
The original Russian version is given below:
“На подмогу Тимошкову бросили лучшие силы. За столом собрались самые отъявленные мудрецы – заместитель губернатора Михаил Климов, глава городской администрации Сергей Смирнов и другие чиновники. Им дали команду спасать кормильца Тимошкова, и они спасали. Мало ли заведений было закрыто из-за нарушений противопожарных норм, но никому не бросали на выручку такой десант. Интересы отдельно взятого коммерсанта Тимошкова кинулись защищать высшие чиновники ...
Брянские коррупционеры засветились и даже не поняли, что случилось. Впрочем, не слишком бы и смутились, если бы все-таки сообразили, что приоткрыли свои связи. «С кем вы, мастера культуры?» - говаривали при Сталине. Для Брянска напрашивается другой вопрос: «С кем вы, мастера воровского ремесла? Кого защищаете?”
On 23 April 2012 Mr Klimov brought an action for defamation against the applicant and sought damages of 500,000 Russian roubles (RUB). He asserted, in particular, that the following passages were untrue and damaging to his honour and reputation:
“The finest forces were mustered in support of Timoshkov. The most notorious sages gathered at the table – deputy governor Mikhail Klimov, the head of the town administration Sergey Smirnov and other officials. They were ordered to rescue their patron Timoshkov, and they did so ... The highest officials rushed to defend the interests of businessman Timoshkov.”
“The corrupt Bryansk officials gave themselves away and did not even understand what had happened.”
“Another question needs to be asked in Bryansk: ‘Who are you with, masters of thievery? Who are you defending?’”
On 27 September 2012 the Bryansk District Court of the Bryansk Region allowed the claim. In its decision it relied on a linguistic expert’s examination of 1 August 2012. According to the expert’s report, the passages in question were susceptible of being looked at in terms of their factual accuracy. In the first and second passages the information had been presented in the form of assertions. The third passage had contained rhetorical questions which had expressed the author’s opinion. However, there was also an implied assertion that those concerned, including the claimant, were “masters of the thieves’ trade”, that is they had been engaged in unlawful activities.
The court dismissed the applicant’s argument that all the facts described in the article were true, whereas in the passages concerned he had expressed his opinion. Relying on the above report, the court found that the claimant had been referred to in the passages concerned, which constituted negative statements that had discredited his moral character and damaged his honour, dignity and business reputation.
The court ordered the applicant to publish a retraction within ten days of the judgment’s entry into force and awarded the claimant damages of RUB 5,000 (approximately 125 euros (EUR)).
The applicant appealed.
On 27 November 2012 the Bryansk Regional Court upheld the judgment.
On 19 February 2013 the Bryansk Regional Court refused leave to the applicant to lodge a cassation appeal.
Article 29 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation guarantees freedom of thought and expression, and freedom of the media.
Article 152 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation provides that an individual can apply to a court with a request for the correction of statements (сведения) that are damaging to his or her honour, dignity or professional reputation if the person who disseminated such statements does not prove their truthfulness. The aggrieved person may also claim compensation for losses and non-pecuniary damage sustained as a result of the dissemination of such statements.
Resolution no. 3 of the Plenary Supreme Court of the Russian Federation of 24 February 2005 defines “untruthful statements” as allegations of facts or events which have not taken place in reality by the time of the statements’ dissemination. Statements contained in court decisions, decisions by investigative bodies and other official documents amenable to appeal cannot be considered untruthful. Statements alleging that a person has breached the law, committed a dishonest act, behaved unethically or broken rules of business etiquette tarnish that person’s honour, dignity and business reputation (section 7). Resolution no. 3 requires courts hearing defamation claims to distinguish between statements of fact, which can be checked for their veracity, and value judgments, opinions and convictions, which are not actionable under Article 152 of the Civil Code since they are an expression of the defendant’s subjective opinion and views and cannot be checked for their veracity (section 9).