The case originated in an application (no. 48176/99) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Talat Turhan (“the applicant”), on 1 April 1999.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Özsoy, a lawyer practising in İzmir. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
By a decision of 28 September 2004, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant was born in 1924 and lives in . He is the author of a book titled “Extraordinary War, Terror and Contra Guerrilla” (“Özel Savaş Terör ve Kontragerilla”).
On 6 January 1993 Orhan Sefa Kilercioğlu, the then Minister of State brought a civil action for compensation against the applicant, before the Ankara First Instance Court in Civil Matters. He claimed that the alleged defamatory remarks in the applicant’s book constituted an attack on his reputation and requested that the court award him compensation of 100,000,000 Turkish liras (TRL) for non-pecuniary damage.
During the proceedings the court evaluated the following passages:
“In an interview I gave in  I commented on the “1 May 1977” massacre and the possibility of a coup d’état during that period. It seems that a magazine carried out research following these assertions and reached some interesting conclusions.
According to the magazine, the Minister of State, Orhan Kilercioğlu, had established contacts with the Special War Department (Özel Harp Dairesi). He had been involved in the coup that was co-ordinated by General Namık Kemal Ersun together with Generals Recai Engin, Musa Öğün and Rüştü Naipoğlu. The names of these generals had appeared in several foreign and domestic newspapers where they were presented as the authors of the massacre carried out on 1st of May and of other provocative acts. The magazine interviewed Mr Orhan Kilercioğlu. He said the following:
The applicant argued before the court that the passages concerning Mr Kilercioğlu were quoted from an interview published by a magazine. He drew the court’s attention to the fact that Mr Kilercioğlu had never exercised his right of reply; nor had he contested the publication of his statements in that magazine. The applicant claimed that he was exercising his right to freedom of expression in making those remarks.
On 2 February 1994 the first instance court rejected Mr Kilercioğlu’s claims. It decided that the passages in question were merely the applicant’s criticisms of Mr Kilercioğlu’s statements, in the light of his political beliefs, and they did not constitute an attack on the plaintiff’s reputation.
Mr Kilercioğlu appealed. On 1 December 1994 the Court of Cassation quashed the decision of the first instance court. It considered that the following extracts from the book went beyond the limits of acceptable criticism. It held that they were based on hearsay alone and they therefore amounted to an attack on the reputation of the plaintiff:
“... he is admitting to having belonged to the junta...”, “...his presence in the fascist wing, which dedicated itself to protecting the interests of business circles.”, “After his retirement he was ready to serve those business circles. I wonder: how will he be able to fight against corruption and illegal trade after having flown from the Yaşar Holding to the ministerial chair? ... ”
The Court of Cassation concluded that the plaintiff should be awarded compensation for non-pecuniary damage under Article 49 of the Code of Obligations.
On 5 June 1995 the Court of Cassation rejected the applicant’s request for rectification of the judgment.
On 14 September 1995, after having considered the Court of Cassation’s decision, the Ankara First Instance Court in Civil Matters decided to award Mr Kilercioğlu the sum of TRL 100,000,000 as compensation for non-pecuniary damage, together with interest rate of 30% per annum running from 4 December 1992.
The applicant appealed. On 11 April 1996 the Court of Cassation quashed the decision of 14 September 1995 on the ground that the amount of compensation awarded was disproportionate to the damage suffered by the plaintiff.
On 19 July 1996 the Ankara First Instance Court in Civil Matters considered that its decision of 14 September 1995 was in accordance with the law and that the amount of compensation awarded was proportionate to the damage suffered by the plaintiff. It decided not to follow the decision of the Court of Cassation.
Mr Kilercioğlu lodged an appeal with the Joint Civil Chambers of the Court of Cassation, which quashed the decision of the Ankara First Instance Court in Civil Matters on 26 March 1997.
On 8 October 1997 the Ankara First Instance Court in Civil Matters awarded Mr Kilercioğlu compensation in the amount of TRL 60,000,000 for non-pecuniary damage, together with interest rate of 30% per annum running from 4 December 1992. Upon Mr Kilercioğlu’s request, the court also ordered the publication of its decision in a newspaper.
The applicant appealed. On 19 March 1998 the Court of Cassation upheld in part the judgment dated 8 October 1997. It considered that the amount of compensation awarded to the plaintiff was in accordance with law. However, the plaintiff’s request to the first instance court asking for publication of its decision was not raised before the Court of Cassation. It therefore quashed that part of the decision.
On 30 September 1998 the Ankara First Instance Court in Civil Matters followed the Court of Cassation’s decision of 19 March 1998. The applicant was notified of this decision on 23 January 1999.
On 19 February 1999 the applicant paid TRL 231,500,000 to the plaintiff as compensation.
Article 49 of the Code of Obligations provides as follows:
“Any person who alleges that his personality rights have been illegally violated can claim compensation for non-pecuniary damage.
The judge shall take into account the parties’ socio-economic situation, their occupation and social status when determining the amount of compensation.
The judge may also decide on a form of redress other than compensation or may restrict himself to condemning the violation. He may also order the publication of the decision.”