The case originated in an application (no. 17888/12) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Ms Galyna Mykolayivna Shvydka (“the applicant”), on 21 March 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr D.O. Ilchenko, a lawyer practising in Kherson. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms Nataly Sevostianova.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that her right to freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention had been violated. She also complained that she had not been afforded the right of appeal under Article 2 of Protocol No. 7.
On 14 October 2013 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Kyiv.
On 24 August 2011, as part of the Independence Day festivities, there was a wreath-laying ceremony at a monument to Taras Shevchenko, a famous Ukrainian poet and public figure, with the participation of the then President of Ukraine Mr Yanukovych.
The applicant, as a member of the opposition party Batkivshchyna, took part in a public gathering organised by it on the occasion of Independence Day. According to her, the beginning of the meeting was delayed because of the aforementioned wreath-laying ceremony.
After the ceremony the applicant approached the wreath laid by Mr Yanukovych and detached part of the ribbon bearing the words “the President of Ukraine V.F.Yanukovych” without damaging the wreath itself. This was meant to express her opinion that Mr Yanukovych could not be called the President of Ukraine for a number of reasons.
The case file contains several copies of photos of the applicant in the aforementioned setting. In four of them she is seen near the wreath detaching the ribbon from it in a careful and concentrated manner, without changing the position of the wreath. In another photo the applicant holds the already detached ribbon in front of her and seems to be either laughing or saying something. There are many people next to her. In the last photo the applicant seems to be trying to tear the ribbon apart. Her face expresses either effort or contempt.
The applicant’s action was video recorded by one of the police officers in charge of maintaining public order. The aforementioned photos may also have been taken by the police.
On the same day the police officer in question established the applicant’s identity and reported the incident to his superiors.
On 25 August 2011 the applicant was apprehended (for less than three hours – see paragraph 16 below) and taken to the Shevchenkivskyy district police station, where a report was drawn up indicating that her actions amounted to petty hooliganism in breach of Article 173 of the Code of Administrative Offences. The applicant, who was not allowed to consult a lawyer, refused to sign that report.
On 30 August 2011 the Shevchenkivskyy District Court of Kyiv, at a hearing attended by the applicant and the lawyer retained by her in the meantime, found the applicant guilty of petty hooliganism on account of the incident of 24 August 2011 and sentenced her to ten days’ administrative detention. The court explained that it had decided to apply such a penalty given the nature of the offence, the applicant’s cynical attitude towards it and her failure of admit her guilt. The applicant submitted at the hearing that she had been expressing her civil position and that she had not damaged the wreath, but had merely taken a piece of the ribbon to show her children and grandchildren and also her acquaintances who had voted for Mr Yanukovych.
On the same day the applicant’s lawyer lodged an appeal on her behalf. He argued that the applicant’s action had been an expression of her civil position and that it had been neither prompted by hooligan motives nor aimed at disturbing public order or breaching the peace. The appeal further referred to Article 10 of the Convention and the Court’s case-law, according to which the notion of “expression” concerned not only words, but also actions intended to convey a certain message or information. Referring to paragraph 16 of Resolution of the Plenary Supreme Court no. 10 of 22 December 2006 (see paragraph 18 below), the lawyer also submitted that the penalty imposed was excessively severe.
On 21 September 2011 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal, at a hearing attended by the applicant’s two lawyers, upheld the first-instance court’s decision in a final ruling. By that time the applicant had served her sentence in full.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Administrative Offences (hereafter referred to as “the Code”) read as follows:
“Administrative detention shall be applied only in exceptional cases, in respect of specific types of administrative offences, for a maximum term of fifteen days. ...”
“Petty hooliganism – that is, swearing in public, offensive behaviour or other similar actions which amount to a breach of the peace or disturb public order – shall be punishable with a fine ranging from three to seven times the non-taxable minimum income, or correctional labour for one to two months, with retention of twenty per cent of the earnings. Where in the circumstances of a particular case the above measures are deemed insufficient having regard to the character of the perpetrator, the penalty shall be administrative detention for up to fifteen days.”
“Administrative apprehension of a person [suspected of] an administrative offence shall last no longer than three hours.”
“A ruling on an administrative offence may be challenged by the person in respect of whom it was issued and the victim.
A [court] ruling imposing an administrative sanction may be challenged under the procedure envisaged by this Code.”
“An appeal against a ruling on an administrative offence may be lodged within ten days of the date of the pronouncement of the ruling.”
“A court ruling on an administrative offence shall enter into force after the expiry of the time-limit for lodging an appeal, except for a ruling imposing a sanction envisaged by Article 32 of this Code ... .
An appeal shall be examined by a judge of the appellate court within twenty days of its receipt. ...
A ruling of the appellate court shall be final. ...”
“... Damage caused to a person by the unlawful imposition of administrative detention ... as a sanction shall be compensated under the procedure established by law.”
According to the Theoretical and Practical Commentary to the Code (Р.А.Калюжний, А.Т.Комзюк, О.О.Погрібний та ін.; К.: Всеукраїнська асоціація видавців Правова єдність, 2008, стор. 404-05), “other similar actions” within the meaning of Article 173 may be extremely varied. They include, but are not limited to, violently breaking into certain public places in violation of an official prohibition; disturbing others by unjustified or insulting telephone calls; singing indecent songs; exclamations or whistling during a film in a cinema; making noise at night time; using as a toilet facility places not designated for that purpose; appearing naked in public; unjustifiably stopping any means of public transport; drawing indecent graffiti; giving untruthful notification of the death of a relative including where this does not lead to serious consequences; queue barging; destroying or damaging, for hooligan motives, property of an insignificant amount; and so on.
Pursuant to paragraph 16, when deciding on an applicable sanction under Article 173 of the Code of Administrative Offences, the judge must in each particular case take into account the nature of the offence committed, the character of the offender, the degree of his or her guilt, his or her property situation, as well as any mitigating or aggravating circumstances. As a rule, administrative sanctions or social measures, rather than detention, should be applied to persons involved in a socially useful activity and enjoying positive character references at their place of work, study or residence.
The relevant provisions read as follows:
“Under the provisions of this Law, a person is entitled to compensation for damage caused by
...
2) unlawful application of administrative detention ...;
...”
“The right to compensation for damage in the amount of and in accordance with the procedure established by this Law shall arise in cases of
...
4) termination of an administrative prosecution.”
 “In the cases referred to in section 1 of this Act the applicant shall be compensated for
1) earnings and other income lost as a result of the unlawful actions;
4) legal costs and expenses ... and
5) non-pecuniary damage.”