The case originated in an application (no. 20509/10) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Engin Ayaydın (“the applicant”), on 9 March 2010.
The applicant was represented by Ms R. Bataray Saman, a lawyer practising in Diyarbakir. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged that his criminal conviction under section 7(2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713) had constituted a breach of his rights guaranteed under Articles 9, 10 and 11 of the Convention.
On 28 November 2011 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1985 and lives in the Kızıltepe district of Mardin.
On 30 March 2006 the applicant participated in a march and the reading out of a press statement held by the Party for a Democratic Society (Demokratik Toplum Partisi –“the DTP”) in Kızıltepe. The protesters gathered in front of the building of the Kızıltepe branch of the DTP and walked to the building of the district branch of the Justice and Development Party (Adalet ve Kalkınma Partisi), where a press statement was read out. The press statement concerned the clashes that had occurred between demonstrators and the police in Diyarbakır on 29 and 30 March 2006. The protestors then returned to the DTP building. During the march the protesters chanted slogans. The applicant participated in the march and the reading out of the press statement as a member of the DTP.
On 8 March 2007 the Diyarbakır public prosecutor filed an indictment charging the applicant and eleven other individuals with disseminating propaganda in favour of the PKK under section 7(2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713). The public prosecutor claimed that the applicant had attended the demonstration of 30 March 2006 and chanted the slogan “Tooth for tooth, blood for blood, we are with you Öcalan” (“Dişe diş, kana kan, seninleyiz Öcalan”).
Within the context of the criminal proceedings initiated following the indictment dated 8 March 2007, an expert who had examined the police video recordings of the public gathering of 30 March 2006 observed that the applicant had acted together with the crowd, but that it could not be established whether he had chanted the above-mentioned slogan since he had covered his mouth and nose.
On 22 April 2008 the Diyarbakır Assize Court convicted the applicant under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713. In its judgment, the court noted that the applicant had accepted that he had participated in the march and the reading out of the press statement, but denied the veracity of the allegation that he had chanted any slogan. The Assize Court found it established that the march and the gathering at which a press statement had been read out on 30 March 2006 had turned into a propaganda event in favour of the PKK and an illegal demonstration, and that the accused, including the applicant, had actively participated in that event. The Assize Court further observed that although, according to the expert report, it could not be established that the applicant had chanted the slogan, on the basis of the photographs in the case file, it was established that he had acted together with the demonstrators. Noting that there were other demonstrators who had covered their mouths and that the police documents showed that the applicant had actively taken part in the demonstration and instructed others to chant slogans, the Assize Court concluded that the applicant had committed the offence of dissemination of propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation. The applicant was sentenced to ten months’ imprisonment.
On 2 July 2009 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of 22 April 2008.
On 4 February 2011 the applicant started serving his prison sentence. On 21 June 2011 he was conditionally released.
The relevant domestic law applicable at the material time can be found in Belge v. Turkey (no. 50171/09, § 19, 6 December 2016).
At the time of the events giving rise to the present application, section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 read as follows:
“Any person who assists members of the above-mentioned [terrorist organisations] or who disseminates propaganda inciting others to violence or other methods of terrorism shall be liable to [serve] a term of imprisonment of one to five years and [receive] a judicial fine of five million liras to one billion liras ...”