The case originated in an application (no. 49379/13) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Ștefan Ciorhan (“the applicant”), on 25 July 2013.
The applicant was represented by Ms S.A. Borza, a lawyer practising in Oradea. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr V. Mocanu, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 16 September 2014 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Carei.
The applicant was formerly a member of the Carei branch of the Association for Sport Fishermen and Hunters (Asociația Vânătorilor şi Pescarilor Sportivi, hereinafter “the Carei AVPS”). Among other things, the AVPS represented the interests of all Romanian hunters and fishermen at national and international level, managed national hunting and fishing grounds, and issued hunting and fishing licences.
In 2011 the applicant and fifty-three other members of the Carei AVPS signed a petition notifying the Romanian Ministry of Agriculture about what they considered to be unlawful acts committed by the president of the Carei AVPS and other members of that branch, in particular: the poor management of fishing and hunting grounds, and the claiming of unlawful fees from members of the association.
An investigation report produced on 7 October 2011 by the Romanian Ministry of Agriculture noted several irregularities concerning fees and the management of the relevant fishing and hunting grounds. Consequently, it suspended the association’s activity for three months.
On 28 March 2012 the applicant went to the Carei AVPS to pay the fee for his fishing licence. A disagreement about the amount due developed into a quarrel with the organisation’s accountant. On the same date the applicant lodged a criminal complaint against the accountant with the Carei police department, and informed the local newspaper Informația Zilei about the incident.
On 29 March 2012 the above-mentioned local newspaper wrote an article under the heading “The fishermen’s stream of complaints against the leadership of the Carei AVPS continues”. The article started by informing readers that several complaints against the Carei AVPS had been lodged over the previous year on account of, among other things, the fees which its members were charged. The article then quoted a statement by the applicant which described the incident of 28 March 2012 and informed the public about the complaints made against the management of the Carei AVPS in 2011. The relevant parts read as follows:
“I inform you that in 2011 I was a member of the Carei AVPS. In the autumn of that year, together with other members, I signed a petition against abuses and illegalities on the part of the Carei AVPS management.
...
As a result of [the incident of 28 March 2012] and the numerous petitions and grievances of the fishermen, it would be desirable to initiate an investigation into the activity of this association. The police too would certainly have something to investigate”.
The article also included a rebuttal from the president of the Carei AVPS concerning the applicant’s statement.
On 5 April 2012 the police fined the Carei AVPS accountant for her behaviour during the incident on 28 March 2012.
On 20 April 2012 the Carei AVPS brought civil proceedings against the applicant, seeking compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage. It argued that the article had tarnished its public image. It also claimed costs and expenses.
In a decision of 14 December 2012 the Carei District Court allowed the action and ordered the applicant to pay the organisation 5,000 Romanian lei (RON – approximately 1,300 euros (EUR)) for
“The manner in which the defendant formulated his letter to the newspaper suggests that the whole petition was based on real ‘abuses and illegalities’ imputable to the claimant association’s management board. This assertion is defamatory and causes damage to the claimant’s image and good reputation.
...
The available evidence showed that, in addition to the applicant’s petition, there had been only one more press article, published by [E.I.Z.], a former member of the association, therefore it cannot be maintained that there were numerous petitions and grievances.
In addition, the statement that the police would certainly have something to investigate suggests that the claimant association’s management committed criminal offences, thus it is a tendentious statement.
In conclusion, the court considers that these statements are also defamatory towards the claimant association.”
The applicant appealed against the judgment. He argued, among other things, that the Carei AVPS could not claim that its public image had been tarnished, as its membership had increased in 2012.
In a final decision of 16 April 2013 the Satu-Mare County Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It held as follows:
“The press article was aimed at raising doubts about the lawfulness of the association’s actions, generating mistrust among its members, and making them want to leave the association.
The applicant consciously made the defamatory statements in question in the press without having concrete and precise data about irregularities or offences on the part of the association.”
On 28 October 2013 the applicant received notification from a bailiff’s office that he had to pay the sum ordered by the courts, as well as enforcement costs of RON 885.10 (approximately EUR 200). The bailiff’s office made an attachment of earnings order in respect of his wages.
The relevant provisions of the Romanian Civil Code concerning civil liability for damages read as follows:
Article 1357
“(1)  Any person who causes damage to another through an illicit act committed with intent or through negligence is liable to make reparation for it.”