The case originated in an application (no. 51165/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Askerbiy Shabanovich Milinov (“the applicant”), on 13 August 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Gaydash, a lawyer practising in Krasnodar. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, violations of the right to freedom of expression and the right to liberty.
On 22 March 2013 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1941. At the material time he lived in Maykop, in the Republic of Adygeya.
On the morning of 26 September 2007 a meeting (митинг) was organised in the main square in Maykop to celebrate the 450th anniversary of the peaceful unification of Adygeya with Russia.
At 10 a.m. the applicant entered the square holding a placard that read “Why were my magnificent, noble people exterminated and expelled?” («За что истребили и выгнали мой прекрасный, благородный народ?»), to express his disagreement with the official interpretation of historic events (in his view, the unification with Russia had not been voluntary for the people of Adygeya). Almost immediately he was approached by a man in police uniform and a man in plain clothes. The latter introduced himself as an officer of the Federal Security Service (“the FSB”) and demanded that the applicant leave the meeting. The applicant asked why such a demand was being made, and the FSB officer pulled the placard out of his hands and grabbed his right hand. In the meantime, the uniformed police officer had forced the applicant’s left hand behind his back. The two officers then dragged the applicant to a police minivan parked nearby, where a larger group of police officers stood. The applicant felt pain in his right shoulder and screamed.
Once they had got close to the minivan the police officers took note of the details of the applicant’s identity document. One of the officers, G., escorted the applicant to his parked car and ordered him to leave.
At about 3 p.m. the applicant arrived home and saw G. and another police officer, N., outside his house. G. demanded that the applicant get in the police car in order to go to the police station housing the Department of the Interior of the town of Maykop (“the police station”) because the head of the police station wanted to have a “preventive conversation” («профилактическая беседа») with him. The applicant obeyed, as he feared that otherwise the police officers would use force. On the way to the police station, the police car made a stop at a medical analysis laboratory, where the applicant underwent an alcohol concentration test, which showed that he was not inebriated.
At 4 p.m. G. escorted the applicant into the police station, placed him in a room designated as a place where officers could study while they were on duty (“the study room”) and told him to wait to be called for an interview with the head of the police station.
Having waited for about an hour, the applicant decided to leave the police station. He approached an officer on duty, Sh., and asked him why he was being detained without any record having been made. Sh. made a phone call to his superiors, informed the applicant that he had not received permission to release him, and told him to return to the study room. The applicant could not leave the police station without Sh.’s permission, because the latter had his identity document and the entry was guarded by an armed police officer.
After two more hours had passed the applicant again asked Sh. if he could leave. Sh. made another phone call and said that he had not received permission to release the applicant.
At some point the applicant’s daughter arrived at the police station. She complained verbally that her father was being arbitrarily detained.
At 7.40 p.m. Sh. received permission from his superiors to let the applicant go. He returned the applicant’s identity document to him and told the armed police officer to allow the applicant and his daughter to pass.
Later that day the applicant visited a traumatology centre, where a duty doctor recorded his complaints of pain in the right shoulder. The applicant was diagnosed with a muscle strain in the right shoulder and prescribed treatment.
On 1 October 2007 the applicant asked the Forensic Medical Expert Bureau of the Republic of Adygeya to give a medical expert opinion on the nature of his shoulder injury. An expert report issued on 24 December 2007 confirmed the diagnosis of a muscle strain and noted that it had most probably been caused by “an unusual and abnormal movement of the shoulder blade”.
The applicant complained to the Maykop investigation department of the prosecutor’s office of his illtreatment by the police and unlawful arrest on 26 September 2007.
On 2 November 2007 a senior investigator of the investigation department refused to open a criminal case, having found no prima facie case of ill-treatment. In particular, the investigator noted that the applicant had not been subject to administrative arrest or found guilty of an administrative offence, and had only been taken to the police station because he had scared children with his placard and his appearance.
The applicant appealed against the decision of 2 November 2007 to the head of the investigation department, who upheld it on 11 February 2008.
The applicant brought civil claims against the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Adygeya, the FSB Department of the Republic of Adygeya, and the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation, seeking compensation for the non-pecuniary damage caused to him by the actions of the police and FSB officers on 26 September 2007 – the ill-treatment, unlawful detention and interference with his freedom of expression.
On 24 January 2008 the Maykop Town Court (“the Town Court”) dismissed the claims, having reasoned, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“... As the court has established, the President’s Office and the Committee of Ministers of the Republic of Adygeya scheduled a meeting for 10 a.m. on 26 September 2007 to celebrate the 450th anniversary of the voluntary unification of Adygeya with Russia. ... There was a short delay before the meeting. On 26 September 2007 the claimant arrived at the square early, having brought a placard [which stated] ‘Why were my magnificent, noble people exterminated and expelled?’ At the same time he chose to stand in a place where there were [children]. [The claimant] had not informed the organisers of the meeting of the above-mentioned action. [His] action did not correspond to the aim of the public event. Given the existing historic traditions and the practice of celebrating holidays and memorial dates, [and taking into account] their important social and political character, the law of the Republic of Adygeya ... set specific holidays and memorial dates in the Adygeya Republic. One of those dates is 21 May, the Day of Remembrance and Sorrow for Victims of the Caucasus War in the 19th century. On 21 May Mr Milinov’s actions might have been acceptable.
Moreover, the claimant, dressed in dark clothes, was near small children from performing arts groups; he held the placard protesting against the event which a large group of people – leaders of the Republic of Adygeya and many guests from other regions of the Russian Federation – had gathered together to celebrate. Therefore, the claimant’s behaviour could not but attract attention from [representatives] of State agencies entrusted with maintaining public order at the meeting. As Mr Milinov has explained himself, he expected a similar reaction.
Having approached the claimant from behind, police officers addressed him, which provoked an inappropriate reaction on his part. As the claimant explained at the court hearing, he rudely asked the police officers [what they wanted and whether it was the time of Yezhov and Beria again]. The claimant was asked to hand over the placard; he ignored the request and the placard was taken from him by force. The claimant was agitated, and he was surrounded by small children and their parents who, in turn, started expressing their disapproval of his behaviour. The claimant was invited to step aside to give explanations; however, he ignored that request from the police officers.
...
Mr Milinov’s actions – including his rude refusal to exit the crowd of children, in response to a request from the police officers – therefore called for lawful and wellfounded actions by the police officers ..., in particular: [his] removal from the crowd so that he could be identified and explanations could be sought as regards the slogan on his placard.
...
... the claimant’s argument that he was unlawfully detained is unsubstantiated and does not correspond to reality, as [he] absolutely agreed to go to the police station voluntarily. He was not coerced [into doing this] by anyone; the police officers on duty at the police station merely announced to the claimant – who approached [them] on a number of occasions – that the head of the police station had asked him to wait for him. Had he wished to do so, [the claimant] could have left the police station at any time during those three hours and forty minutes mentioned by him, as he ultimately did. He remained in the study room at the police station, and not in a cell for those subject to administrative arrest, and on a number of occasions he freely went out into the police station’s courtyard to smoke.
In such circumstances, Mr Milinov’s claim for compensation for non-pecuniary damage should be dismissed, in view of its manifestly ill-founded character.”
On 22 February 2008 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Adygeya (“the Supreme Court”) upheld the judgment of 24 January 2008 on appeal, having fully endorsed the Town Court’s reasoning. In particular, the Supreme Court supported the Town Court’s finding that the police officers had correctly responded to the applicant’s “refusal to exit the crowd of children” by removing him from the crowd to check his identity, and that the applicant had failed to provide any evidence in support of his claim that the officers’ actions had been unlawful. The Supreme Court also held that the time the applicant had spent at the police station – three and a half hours – did not amount to deprivation of liberty, as the applicant had voluntarily followed the police officers to the station, had remained in the study room and not in a cell, had freely moved around the police station, had left the police station to go into the courtyard to smoke, had used a mobile phone, and had freely left the police station.
Article 29 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation guarantees freedom of thought and expression, freedom to receive and impart information, and freedom of the mass media.
Section 6(3)(1) and (2) of the Federal Law on Gatherings, Meetings, Demonstrations, Processions and Pickets, no. 54-FZ of 19 June 2004 (“the Public Events Act”), as in force at the material time, provided that participants in a public event should comply with all lawful requirements imposed by: the organiser of the public event and persons authorised by the organiser, a representative of the executive authority of a constituent entity of the Russian Federation or a municipal authority, and police officers. Participants in a public event should also comply with the rules on public order and the regulations governing the public event.
Section 18(1) of the Public Events Act states that the organiser of a public event, public officials and third parties have no right to hinder participants in the public event from expressing opinions, provided that such opinions are expressed in a manner compatible with the rules on public order and the regulations governing the public event.