The case originated in an application (no. 22169/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Nina Aleksandrovna Ostanina (“the applicant”), on 1 April 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Strogiy, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 8 March 2017 the complaint concerning freedom of expression was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Prokopyevsk, Kemerovo Region.
On 19 November 2009 in the newspaper “Rossiya” and on 27 November 2009 in the newspaper “Kemerovo” the applicant published an article under the heading “A need for new approaches”. The relevant extracts of the article read as follows:
“Another specific feature of Kuzbass is its dependence on the federal budget. I am not sure (because I am not familiar with that mechanism) but I assume that some of financial resources provided by the centre to Kuzbass are redirected back to Moscow under kickback schemes. It is clear that in the centre there have already been for long time some corrupted officials, including members of the State Duma from the governing party.”...
Kuzbass is a good example of an authoritarian political system which ‘tightens the screws’ and where the fear, unfair elections, restriction on the freedom of expression and on the right to interact with the authorities prevail.”
On 30 November 2009 the Electoral Commission of the Kemerovo Region, Kemerovo Region Administration and the Kemerovo Regional Branch of the United Russia Party, the governing party, initiated defamation proceedings against the applicant stating that her article had prejudiced their reputation.
On 16 August 2010 the Tsentralnyy District Court of Kemerovo allowed their claim. It held that the applicant had not mentioned the claimants in her publication, however she had implied that they had been responsible for the situation in Kuzbass described above. It further held that the applicant had failed to provide the relevant evidence confirming the statements described above. It also ordered to publish a retraction and to pay 486,146 Russian roubles (about 7,018 euros) in nonpecuniary damage and legal expenses.
Article 29 of the Russian Constitution guarantees freedom of expression.
Under Article 152 of the Civil Code of Russia, citizens may apply to the court for retraction of information discrediting their honour, dignity or business reputation, unless the person who has disseminated such information proves it to be true. A citizen who is the subject of information which has been disseminated and which discredits his or her honour, dignity or business reputation has the right to a retraction and to claim compensation in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage.
In Ruling no. 3 of 24 February 2005, the Plenary Supreme Court noted that Article 29 § 3 of the Constitution provided that no one could be compelled to express an opinion or belief or be compelled to refrain from expressing them.