The case originated in an application (no. 15428/16) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Illés Szurovecz (“the applicant”), on 12 March 2016.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Hüttl, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged a breach of his right to freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention, in particular the right to impart information, on account of the domestic authorities’ refusal to grant him access to the Debrecen Reception Centre (“the Reception Centre”), which accommodated asylum-seekers. He also alleged a violation of Article 13 of the Convention in that he had no effective remedy to challenge this decision.
On 9 June 2016 the complaints concerning Articles 10 and 13 of the Convention were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The applicant and the Government each filed written observations on the admissibility and merits. In addition, third-party comments were received from Media Legal Defence Initiative, Index on Censorship, The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, the European Publishers Council, PEN International, the Hungarian Helsinki Committee, the Dutch Association of Journalists, and the European Centre for Press and Media Freedom, acting jointly, which had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1993 and lives in Mezőberény.
The applicant is a journalist at abcug.hu, an Internet news portal. On 7 May 2015 he contacted a civil society organisation with a view to covering their activities at the Vámosszabadi Reception Centre for asylum-seekers and refugees. He was informed that a request for authorisation to enter the Reception Centre should be addressed to the Office of Immigration and Nationality (hereinafter “the OIN”).
The applicant’s request was dismissed by the OIN’s press department on 12 May 2015, relying on the personality rights of the people accommodated in the Reception Centre.
On 14 September 2015 the applicant lodged a new request with the OIN. He sought permission to enter the Debrecen Reception Centre to interview the people staying there and prepare a report on the living conditions, that would include pictures. He specified that photographs would only be taken with the permission of the individuals concerned and that should it be necessary he would obtain a written waiver each time. The reason for the applicant’s choosing the Debrecen Reception Centre was to provide an objective account of the living conditions there, in particular since in April 2015 the Commissioner for Fundamental Rights had issued a report in accordance with the Optional Protocol to UN Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment condemning the living conditions there, which amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment. Furthermore, the Reception Centre was constantly presented in the State-owned media as part of the Government’s antiimmigration campaign.
On 14 September 2015 the OIN rejected his request, relying on Article IV § 1 of the Fundamental Law and section 2(5) of Regulation no. 52/2007 (XII.11) of the Ministry of Justice and Law-Enforcement. The OIN noted that there was constant media interest in asylum-seekers and regular visits to the Reception Centre would infringe their private lives. Moreover, many people accommodated in the Reception Centre had fled from some form of persecution and information about them appearing in the press could endanger both their and their families’ security. It was the domestic authorities’ responsibility to ensure that persecutors could not receive information on the asylum-seekers’ whereabouts through the press.
The applicant sought judicial review of the refusal of his request. On 12 November 2015 the Budapest Administrative and Labour Court declared his action inadmissible since the Office of Immigration and Nationality’s reply had not been an administrative decision within the meaning of section 12 of the Administrative Procedure Act no. CXL of 2004, thus it was not subject to judicial review.
In June 2016 the applicant intended to visit the Reception Centre in Körmend together with a Member of Parliament (MP). While the MP was allowed to enter that centre, the applicant was denied access. Subsequently, on 12 July 2016 the applicant published an article on the basis of the MP’s account.
Government Decree No. 301/2007 (XI.9.) on the implementation of the Act on Asylum, as in force the material time, provided as follows:
Section 12
“...
(3) A reception centre is a facility operated by the refugee authority in order to accommodate and care for person seeking recognition, refugees, beneficiaries of subsidiary or temporary protection and persons with tolerated stay.
...”
Decree no. 52/2007 (XII.11) of the Ministry of Justice on the organisational structure of the asylum system provides, in its relevant part, as follows:
Section 2
“...
(5) A visitor may enter and stay on the property of the reception centre with the permission of its director.”
Annex to decree no. 52/2007
House rules of the reception centre
“1.  Persons placed at the reception centre and visitors shall equally comply with the rules of conduct specified in the house rules.
Persons placed at the reception centre and visitors shall comply with the instructions of the staff of the reception centre. Visitors who breach the house rules shall be requested to leave the area of the reception centre.
Persons placed in the reception centre and visitors shall behave in such way as not to infringe the rights or disturb the peace of the other inhabitants of the reception centre.
...
Persons seeking recognition placed at the reception centre shall announce in advance to the officer of the asylum authority their intention to leave the centre.”
In its General Comment no. 34 on Article 19 (Freedoms of opinion and expression) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, published on 12 September 2011, the United Nations Human Rights Committee stated as follows:
“45.  It is normally incompatible with paragraph 3 to restrict the freedom of journalists and others who seek to exercise their freedom of expression (such as persons who wish to travel to human rights-related meetings) to travel outside the State party, to restrict the entry into the State party of foreign journalists to those from specified countries or to restrict freedom of movement of journalists and human rights investigators within the State party (including to conflict-affected locations, the sites of natural disasters and locations where there are allegations of human rights abuses).”
On 13 April 2016 the Committee of Ministers adopted Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)4 to member States on the protection of journalism and safety of journalists and other media actors, which, in its relevant part reads as follows:
“26.  The State should not unduly restrict the free movement of journalists and other media actors, including cross-border movement and access to particular areas, conflict zones, sites and forums, as appropriate, because such mobility and access is important for news and information-gathering purposes.”
On 26 September 2017 the Declaration by the Committee of Ministers on the protection and promotion of investigative journalism was adopted, which contains the following:
“The Committee of the Ministers of the Council of Europe
...
Calls on member states to protect and promote investigative journalism, having regard to Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, the relevant case-law of the European Court of Human Rights and other Council of Europe standards, and in this context:
...
to ensure the freedom of movement of media professionals and their access to information in line with Council of Europe standards and facilitate critical and in-depth reporting in service of democracy;
...”
All member States have national legislation that regulates immigration and asylum. However, not all specifically regulate access to and visiting rights in respect of centres. Additionally, national legislation differs in respect of the individuals and centres it applies to. Some national regulations apply to all types of immigrants and foreigners, while others are more specific regarding to which types of immigrants they apply. In many cases, national legislation dealing with the rights of asylum seekers is supplemented by rules for individual centres or by additional (sometimes regional or local) regulation specifying the conditions for visits.
Whether visiting is possible as a result of national legislation, regional or local regulations, or centre-specific rules, most reception centres impose some practical conditions on access, such as visiting hours, timelimits, designated visiting areas, registration or prior authorisation. Many States also reserve the right of the centres to restrict access. The most common grounds invoked for restrictions on access are security, privacy, welfare and sanitary reasons.
In twenty-four member States, regulations are silent on media access to reception centres; they neither provide them with additional or easier access, nor do they outright limit their ability to visit the centres. In at least ten member States media representatives are required to gain prior authorisation or give prior announcement of their intent to visit reception centres (Armenia, Austria (under federal law), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Estonia, France, Latvia, the Netherlands, Norway and Poland). In a few States, journalists are afforded somewhat broader access than ordinary visitors (Germany, Italy, Romania, Russia, Serbia and Turkey), mainly rooted in legislation concerning freedom of the press or freedom of information of public interest.