The case concerns the applicant’s criminal conviction for breaching the confidentiality of administrative custody proceedings concerning her granddaughter.
The applicant was born in 1954. The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms L. Horvat, a lawyer practising in Zagreb.
The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 20 May 2007 the applicant’s daughter and son-in-law died in a car accident. The couple’s daughter N.G., who was a five-month-old baby at the time, was also injured in the accident.
Following the death of her parents, on 24 May 2007 the local Social Welfare Centre gave provisional custody of N.G. to her uncle (her father’s brother).
Soon afterwards a family dispute arose over custody of N.G., including issues of where she should live and with whom she should have contact. Paternal and maternal family members took up opposing sides. The dispute resulted in several sets of administrative proceedings before the Centre (first the D.S. and then the K. Social Welfare Centre; hereinafter “the Centre”) and the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (Ministarstvo zdravstva i socijalne skrbi, hereinafter “the Ministry”), and judicial proceedings before the relevant courts.
On 22 January 2009 the Centre gave custody of N.G. to her uncle but, upon an appeal by the applicant’s family, on 26 February 2009 the Ministry quashed this decision and remitted the case to the Centre.
In the resumed proceedings, on 20 October 2010 the Centre again gave custody of N.G. to her uncle, and this decision was upheld by the Ministry on 24 February 2011. According to the information available to the Court, on 28 March 2011 the applicant’s family challenged this decision in the relevant administrative court.
Owing to its tragic circumstances, the accident itself and the ensuing family dispute attracted significant media coverage.
In the context of such media interest, the applicant was interviewed in an article of 14 November 2007 in Jutarnji list (a newspaper with national coverage) in which she discussed the circumstances in which the Centre had granted custody of N.G. to her uncle and how that decision had been quashed by the relevant court. She also explained that the proceedings concerning contact rights were ongoing before the court. The information which the applicant provided was confirmed by the Centre’s director, who also stated that the Centre had unsuccessfully sought to reconcile the views of the two families. The name of the child was explicitly mentioned by both the applicant and the Centre’s director.
On 10 April 2008 a television show (Provjereno), which was broadcast on a private television channel with national coverage, discussed the case in detail. It contained interviews with neighbours of the deceased couple who spoke about how they had felt upon learning of the tragic accident in which the couple had died. The television report also discussed the fact that custody of N.G. had been granted to the father’s family and how the mother’s family could not accept that. N.G.’s name was explicitly mentioned by the journalist in that report. Part of the television report was filmed on the premises of the Centre. During the report, the Centre’s director talked about the details of the circumstances in which the initial custody order had been made (see paragraph 6 above), and explained that it was being challenged on appeal. The director also expressed her views on what would be the best solution as regards custody rights.
On 16 March 2010 an article was published in Večernji list (a newspaper with national coverage) in which the applicant contended that the child had been given to her uncle without anybody even consulting the applicant or her family. The article further suggested that the applicant and her family had managed to have the case transferred to the K. Centre owing to a fear that the D.S. Centre which had initially dealt with the case had lacked impartiality. It also suggested that the applicant and her family had undergone a psychiatric assessment in respect of their suitability to participate in the child’s upbringing. The K. Centre declined to comment on the case.
In a further article of 18 March 2010 in Jutarnji list, the applicant contended that she suspected that various “connections” had been instrumental in the D.S. Centre’s adoption of the decision in favour of the uncle. She also pointed to the findings of an expert report produced by Z.K., according to which custody of the child should be granted to the applicant’s family. In the same article, the D.S. Centre explained how the proceedings had been transferred to the K. Centre, which refused to comment on the case. N.G.’s uncle also declined to comment on the case.
On 7 April 2010 a television show (Proces) was broadcast on the national television channel (HRT) in which the applicant took part, together with her other daughter, D.Š., and her husband. During the interview, a bundle of papers could be seen in front of them. The applicant and D.Š. raised various issues regarding the alleged malfunctioning of the social welfare system, including the relevant court proceedings concerning custody of N.G. and contact rights in respect of her. The applicant’s husband did not speak. Further explanations about details of the case were provided by the journalist. Part of the television report was filmed on the premises of the Ministry, where a senior official was interviewed about the relevant procedures to be followed in cases such as the one in question.
The relevant parts of the television report contain the following scenes:
-  While the journalist discusses details of the Centre’s failure to follow the relevant procedures, a scene shows, in focus, the introductory and operative parts of a decision of the Ministry of 22 February 2009 by which a decision of the K. Welfare Centre of 22 January 2009 on custody rights over N.G. was quashed and remitted for further examination. No details of the reasoning are shown. It is also not possible to see whether somebody is holding or showing the document. The name of the child is visible;
-  In the next scene, the journalist speaks about misgivings that the applicant’s family members have as to the reasons why the Centre decided in favour of the uncle. At one point during the journalist’s speech, the camera briefly scrolls through the reasoning of a decision, from which the name of the child and her uncle can be discerned, as well as the fact that the uncle was granted custody rights and the applicant’s family lodged an appeal. It is not clear which decision was filmed nor is it possible to see whether somebody is holding or showing the document;
-  In a later scene, the applicant is seen opening a file and touching a document, but it is not possible to see anything specific on the documents in the file;
-  The report then goes back to the Ministry’s premises. In the introduction to this scene, the journalist states that the Ministry is aware of the Centre’s mistakes but cannot provide further details, as the case is confidential. The senior Ministry official is then shown reading some documents from a file, and she again explains the relevant procedures;
-  The report further refers to the psychiatric assessments that the families underwent. While the journalist speaks, the operative part of a decision on the award of custody rights to the uncle is seen in focus. It is not clear which decision this is, nor can it be seen whether somebody is holding or showing the document. A pen is also shown, in focus, going through a psychological assessment favourable to the applicant, and in the next scene the signature of Z.K., the expert, assisted by L.B., another expert, is shown in focus. It is not possible to see who is holding the pen.
Following the broadcast of the Proces television show, N.G.’s uncle lodged a criminal complaint against the applicant and D.Š. with the relevant State Attorney’s Office (Općinsko državno odvjetništvo), alleging that they had breached the confidentiality of the administrative proceedings before the Centre, in particular by disclosing N.G.’s full identity.
On 31 August 2011 the State Attorney’s Office indicted the applicant and D.Š. on charges of breaching the confidentiality of the administrative proceedings, in relation to the applicant’s disclosure of N.G.’s identity in the Proces television show. The indictment read as follows:
“On an unspecified day in April 2010 ..., in front of the S.K. restaurant, while filming a report for the Proces television show on HRT, broadcast on 7 April 2010 at 9.50 p.m., [and] although aware that the administrative proceedings before the K. Welfare Centre concerning custody of N.G. were confidential, while speaking about the course of the proceedings,[and while] a decision of the K. Welfare Centre adopted in the proceedings in question was shown on the television camera, depicting N.G.’s name, which made her identity known to the general public,
[The applicant], the first person accused, and D.Š., the second person accused, disclosed without authorisation what they had learned in the administrative proceedings, which, according to the law, is considered to be confidential.,
and thereby they committed a criminal offence against justice – breaching the confidentiality of proceedings – punishable under Article 305 § 1 of the Criminal Code.”
The case was initially examined by the Zlatar Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Zlataru, hereinafter “the Municipal Court”), which issued a penalty notice (kazneni nalog) on the same day without holding a hearing, finding the applicant and D.Š. guilty as charged and sentencing them to two months’ imprisonment, suspended for a year.
The applicant and D.Š. challenged that decision and the case was forwarded to the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court (Općinski kazneni sud u Zagrebu, hereinafter “the Municipal Court”) for trial.
At a hearing on 13 April 2012 the applicant pleaded not guilty, as did D.Š. The trial court allowed a request by the prosecution for D.G. to be questioned. The defence proposed that the court review the Proces television report and question its editor, journalist and cameraman in order to ascertain whether the applicant and her daughter could have influenced what would be filmed and later shown in the report. The trial court agreed to review the television report and reserved its decision on hearing witnesses, asking the defence to provide further contact details for these persons.
A further hearing was held on 17 May 2012. The record of the hearing indicated that N.G.’s uncle, who was also her legal guardian, attended the hearing as a victim and a witness. During the questioning he stated that in the Proces television show the applicant and her daughter had shown documents related to N.G.’s custody taken from a set of proceedings which had in the meantime become final. He also pointed out that the name of the child had been visible on those documents, although the officials of the relevant welfare centre had informed the applicant and her daughter several times that the public was excluded from the proceedings.
At the same hearing the defence reiterated their request for the editor and journalist of Proces to be heard, providing further contact details for these witnesses. The trial court refused that request on the grounds that their evidence was irrelevant to the subject matter of the proceedings. However, of its own motion, it decided to ask the K. Centre to provide its file on the case concerning N.G.’s custody rights.
At a hearing on 19 July 2012 N.G.’s uncle was present as the victim. At the hearing the trial court inspected the file of the K. Centre and other documents in the file. It also reviewed the disputed television report.
The defence again reiterated their proposal that those responsible for preparing the television report be heard, and also asked that the applicant’s son and husband, both of whom had been present during the preparation of the report (the latter could be seen in the report, whereas the son did not appear on camera, see paragraph 15 above), be heard as witnesses. The defence argued that they could provide evidence about the circumstances in which the Centre’s decision had appeared in the report, including evidence about the journalists’ awareness that the name of the child should not be disclosed. The defence also argued that the applicant’s son and husband could give evidence as to the question of whether the accused had warned the journalists that the child’s name should not be disclosed. The defence further asked that the court review the Provjereno television show, which would confirm that the Centre’s director had already disclosed the main information about the proceedings, which had confused the accused as to the extent of the information they could provide.
The trial court dismissed all the proposals of the defence on the grounds that all relevant facts had already been established. It then proceeded to hear the applicant’s and her daughter’s defence and the parties’ closing arguments.
In her defence, the applicant argued that she had had no intention to disclose the documents or N.G.’s name in public. She explained that she had simply had the documents with her in order to demonstrate how many things had gone wrong in the proceedings. However, the details of the case had already been disclosed earlier by the Centre’s director, who had participated in another television show. The applicant stressed that she had not shown the documents to the camera and she had warned the journalist not to disclose the child’s name, which he had promised not to do. In this connection, she explained that during the proceedings before the Centre she had not been warned that the proceedings were confidential but her lawyer had warned her that she should not disclose the identity of the child. The applicant also explained that the documents had been brought to the place where the report had been filmed by her son, who had been the person who had arranged for them to participate in the television report. The applicant also pointed out that she had shown one of the documents to the journalist simply to confirm what she had been saying, but he had not been able to see the child’s name. She also explained that she and her daughter had not always been at the place where the report had been filmed, so it was possible that the camera had recorded the document without their knowledge. Moreover, the applicant suspected that the document could have been shown by the State official who had taken part in the show.
Following the hearing on 19 July 2012, the Municipal Court found the applicant and her daughter guilty as charged (see paragraph 18 above) and sentenced them to four months’ imprisonment, suspended for two years. It also ordered each of them to pay 1000 Croatian kunas (HRK – approximately 130 euros (EUR)) for costs and expenses incurred in the proceedings.
The Municipal Court started its judgment by explaining that it had dismissed the request by the defence to hear the journalists who had prepared the television report on the grounds that the recording of the report clearly showed that the applicant had had a bundle of documents in front of her and had displayed one of those documents while discussing the course of the administrative proceedings with the journalist. In the Municipal Court’s view, in criminal proceedings, it was very rare to have such clear evidence showing that a criminal offence had been committed.
The Municipal Court further found it established that the applicant had clearly known that the public had been excluded from the administrative custody proceedings before the Centre. In particular, that was indicated by several transcripts of the proceedings in which it was clearly stated that the public was excluded from the proceedings. Moreover, the applicant had admitted that her lawyer had advised her that the name of the child should not be disclosed. For the Municipal Court, the circumstances in which the television report had been filmed – in particular the fact that the applicant had described the course of the administrative proceedings to the journalist and had even shown a document on that occasion, after which another document from the administrative proceedings with N.G.’s name on it could be seen in focus – left no doubt that she had acted knowingly and deliberately when disclosing the circumstances of the administrative proceedings at issue.
The Municipal Court did not accept the applicant’s defence that the fact that the Centre’s decision had been shown was the responsibility of the journalists. It stressed that the applicant bore responsibility for making the documents from the administrative proceedings available to the journalists, and that the journalists could not have known that the public had been excluded from the proceedings. For the Municipal Court, there was no logical explanation other than that the applicant (and her daughter) had provided to the journalist and the cameraman the document containing the child’s name. Although the Municipal Court could not exclude the possibility that the applicant had asked the journalists not to disclose the child’s name, it stressed that it was the applicant herself who had failed to observe that duty. Moreover, according to the Municipal Court, she had had a motive to do that, as she had wanted to influence the development of the administrative proceedings at issue.
The Municipal Court also stressed that it could not accept the applicant’s arguments that she had not known that information about the administrative proceedings should not be made available to the public because the relevant information had already been disclosed. In the Municipal Court’s view, if the applicant had believed this to be the case, then she would not have advised the journalists that the proceedings were confidential, as she claimed to have done.
In sum, the Municipal Court considered that by disclosing what had happened in the administrative custody proceedings and the child’s name, the applicant had committed the criminal offence under Article 305 § 1 of the Criminal Code, taken in conjunction with Section 271 of the Family Act. When deciding on the sanction, the Municipal Court stressed that the applicant was not a problematic person in any sense, and that this was an isolated incident in her otherwise law-abiding life. However, the Municipal Court considered as an aggravating factor the fact that the offence had been committed to the detriment of her granddaughter, whose interests she was obliged to protect. In this connection, the Municipal Court stressed that although the applicant had intended to protect the interests of her granddaughter, she had chosen the wrong way to do it (commission of a criminal offence).
The same findings described above were accordingly applied to the applicant’s daughter, who had participated in the disputed television show with the applicant.
The applicant challenged that judgment before the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu, hereinafter “the County Court”). She argued, in particular, that the Municipal Court had failed to take into account the context and background of the case, and had failed to establish the circumstances related to the fact that the public had known about the relevant information before it had been disclosed in the disputed television report. She also argued that the Municipal Court had failed to establish the circumstances in which the Centre’s report had been shown in the television report.
On 8 January 2013 the County Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal as unfounded, endorsing the findings of the Municipal Court.
The applicant then lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), complaining, inter alia, of a breach of her right to a fair trial under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (d) and freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention, and the corresponding Articles 29 and 38 of the Constitution (see paragraph 39 below). She argued that the proceedings before the Municipal Court had fallen short of the requirements of a fair trial, owing to the fact that all her proposals to examine evidence had been dismissed. In connection with her complaint under Article 10 of the Convention, the applicant argued that she had been unjustifiably prevented from discussing the matters related to the custody proceedings concerning her granddaughter N.G. Relying on the Court’s case-law, she contended that her criminal conviction had not pursued any legitimate aim and had not been lawful, as the provision of Article 305 § 1 of the Criminal Code had not been sufficiently clear and foreseeable.
On 25 April 2013, by means of a summary reasoning, the Constitutional Court endorsed the reasoning of the lower courts and declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded, on the grounds that there was nothing disclosing an issue of a breach of her rights.
The relevant part of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 56/1990, with further amendments) provides as follows:
Article 29
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.
In case of any criminal charge brought against him, the suspect, defendant or accused shall have the following rights ...
- to question witnesses for the prosecution or to have them questioned and to have witnesses for the defence questioned under the same conditions as witnesses for the prosecution ...”
Article 38
“Freedom of thought and expression shall be guaranteed.
 Freedom of expression shall include in particular ... freedom of speech and public expression ...”
Article 117
“...
The public may be excluded from proceedings or part thereof for reasons necessary in a democratic society in the interest of morals, public order or national security, in particular ... in ... proceedings connected with custody ... but only to the extent which is, in the opinion of the court, absolutely necessary in the specific circumstances where publicity may harm the interests of justice.”
The relevant part of section 62 of the Constitutional Court Act (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 49/2002) reads as follows:
“1.  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that an individual act of a State body, a body of local and regional self-government, or a legal person with public authority, concerning his or her rights and obligations, or a suspicion or an accusation of a criminal act, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms or his or her right to local and regional self-government guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter, ‘a constitutional right’) ...
If another legal remedy exists in respect of the violation of the constitutional right [complained of], a constitutional complaint may be lodged only after that remedy has been used.”
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette no. 110/1997, with further amendments) which was applicable at the relevant time read:
Chapter I General provisions
Article 8
“(1)  Criminal proceedings in respect of criminal offences shall be instituted by the State Attorney’s Office in the interest of the Republic of Croatia and its citizens.
(2)  In exceptional circumstances the law may provide for criminal proceedings in respect of certain criminal offences to be instituted on the basis of a private prosecution, or for the State Attorney’s Office to institute criminal proceedings following [a private] application.”
Chapter XXII Criminal offences against the judiciary
Breach of the confidentiality of proceedings
Article 305
“(1)  Whoever, without authorisation, discloses what he or she has learnt in ... administrative proceedings ... and what, pursuant to the law or a decision based upon the law, is deemed to be confidential, shall be punished by a fine or a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months.”
The relevant provisions of the currently applicable Criminal Code (Official Gazette no. 125/2011, with further amendments) read:
Article 307
“(1)  Whoever, without authorisation, discloses what he or she has learnt in ... administrative proceedings ... and what, pursuant to the law or a decision based upon the law, is deemed to be confidential, shall be punished by a term of imprisonment of up to three years.
(2)  The sanction under paragraph 1 of this Article shall be applicable with respect to anyone who, without a court authorisation, discloses the course of the proceedings which are according to the law or the court decision confidential or who, without court authorisation, discloses the course of ... the proceedings concerning the protection of the rights and interests of a child, or who discloses a decision from those proceedings.”
The Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette no. 110/1997, with further amendments), as applicable at the relevant time, provided as follows:
Article 2
“(1)  Criminal proceedings shall only be instituted and conducted upon the order of a qualified prosecutor. ...
(2)  In respect of criminal offences subject to public prosecution, the qualified prosecutor shall be the State Attorney, and in respect of criminal offences that may be prosecuted privately, the qualified prosecutor shall be a private prosecutor.
(3)  Unless otherwise provided for by law, the State Attorney shall undertake a criminal prosecution where there is a reasonable suspicion that an identified person has committed a criminal offence subject to public prosecution, and where there are no legal impediments to the prosecution of that person.
...”
Article 173
“(1)  Criminal complaints shall be submitted to the competent State Attorney in writing or orally.”
Article 174
“(1)  The State Attorney shall reject a criminal complaint by a reasoned decision if the offence in question is not an offence subject to automatic prosecution, if the prosecution is time-barred or an amnesty or pardon has been granted, or [if] other circumstances excluding criminal liability or prosecution exist, or [if] there is no reasonable suspicion that the suspect has committed the offence. ...”
Article 321
“(1)  The taking of evidence concerns matters which the trial court considers relevant for the judgment ...”
Article 322
“(1)  The parties and the victim may lodge requests for the taking of further evidence up to the end of the hearing ...
...
(4)  A request for the taking of evidence may be dismissed if ...
...
2)  if the facts of the matter at issue have already been established or are irrelevant, or if there is no link between the matter whose facts are supposed to be established and the operative matters in the case, or if such a link cannot be established because of some legal impediment (an irrelevant request)
3)  if there is a suspicion that, with the evidence proposed, the facts of the relevant matter could either not be established at all or could only be established with significant difficulties, or if the evidence at issue could not be obtained in the course of the proceedings and it is probable that it cannot be obtained within a reasonable time (an inapplicable request) ...
(5)  The decision by which the request for the taking of evidence is dismissed must be reasoned ...”
Article 354
“A judgment acquitting the accused shall be adopted when:
(1)  the offence with which the accused is charged is not a criminal offence under the law;
(2)  there are circumstances that exclude the accused’s guilt;
(3)  it has not been proved that the accused committed the criminal offence with which he or she is charged.”
The relevant provision of the applicable Family Act at the time (Obiteljski zakon, Official Gazette no. 116/2003, with further amendments) provided as follows:
Court proceedings
General provisions
Section 263
“The provisions of this part of the Act provide for the rules which the courts must apply when deciding in civil disputes, non-contentious proceedings and the special execution or interim measures proceedings in marital and family matters and other matters regulated under this Act.”
Section 264
“In the proceedings referred to in Section 263 of this Act the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act and the Enforcement Act shall apply, if something is not differently regulated under this Act.”
Section 271
“In the proceedings concerning [personal] status matters the public is excluded.”
The Administrative Procedure Act (Zakon o općem upravnom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991 and 103/1996), applicable at the relevant time, provided:
Section 1
“This Act shall be applicable when administrative and other State bodies (in administrative matters) directly applying the law decide on the rights and obligations or legal interests of citizens ...”
Article 150
(1)  The oral hearing is open to the public.
(2)  The official conducting the proceedings may close either all or part of the oral hearing to the public:
...
3)  if relations within a family have to be discussed;
...
(3)  Any interested party may file an application for the public to be excluded.
(4)  As regards the public being excluded, an order [in this regard] has to be adopted, which has to be explained and publicly pronounced.
(5)  The public may not be excluded at the moment when the order is pronounced.
Form and content of a decision
Article 206
“(1)  Every decision has to be identified as such. ...
(2)  The decision has to be adopted in writing. ...
(3)  A written decision shall include: an introduction, an operative part, a statement of reasons, instructions about the legal remedy, an indication of which authority [has adopted the decision], with the number and date of the decision, [and] a signature of the [relevant] official and a seal of the authority. ...
...
(5)  The party has to be provided with either the original [decision] or a certified copy of the decision.
 Section 207
(1)  The introduction of the decision shall include: an indication of which authority is adopting the decision, rules on its jurisdiction, the name of the party and his or her legal [and other] representative, if he has one, and a brief explanation of the subject matter of the proceedings”
Section 208
“(1)  The operative part shall contain an indication of the decision on the subject matter of the proceedings and on all parties’ requests which have not been separately decided during the proceedings.
(2)  The operative part shall be brief and specific and, when necessary, may be divided in several points.”
The relevant provision of the Media Act (Zakon o medijima, Official Gazette no. 59/2004) reads as follows:
Section 16(1)
“The media shall respect the privacy ... particularly of children ... It is prohibited to publish information disclosing the identity of a child if that endangers the well-being of the child.”
The Code of Honour of Croatian Journalists (Kodeks časti hrvatskih novinara, 2009) provides that journalists should not abuse the trust of their sources and should advise the source of the context in which the given information will be published (paragraph 8). Journalists must also comply with the provisions on the confidentiality of data. Breaches of these provisions are permitted only if such provisions are abused with a view to prevent the publication of information of a particular public interest (paragraph 10).
Furthermore, journalists must act to protect privacy from any sensationalistic reporting. Breaches of a person’s privacy are permitted only if that is justified by an overriding public interest (paragraph 14). Special care is required when reporting about, amongst other, accidents and family tragedies. Journalists should avoid interviewing or showing persons who are directly or indirectly affected by the events in question, unless there is an overriding public interest. However, in that case, the journalist must take into account honour and reputation and dignity of the person subject to the reporting (paragraph 15). When reporting about court proceedings, the journalist must respect the integrity and feelings of all parties to a dispute (paragraph 17). Journalists should not take any action endangering wellbeing of a child which includes, amongst other, direct or indirect disclosure of the child’s identity. In this connection, the well-being of the child overrides the public interest (paragraph 19).
The relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, 20 November 1989, read as follows:
Article 3
“1.  In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.”
Article 16
“1.  No child shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to unlawful attacks on his or her honour and reputation.
The child has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.”
The relevant parts of the General comment No. 14 (2013) on the right of the child to have his or her best interests taken as a primary consideration (art. 3, para. 1) read as follows:
“A.  Legal analysis of article 3, paragraph 1
“In all actions concerning children”
(a)  “in all actions”
Article 3, paragraph 1 seeks to ensure that the right is guaranteed in all decisions and actions concerning children. This means that every action relating to a child or children has to take into account their best interests as a primary consideration. The word “action” does not only include decisions, but also all acts, conduct, proposals, services, procedures and other measures.
Inaction or failure to take action and omissions are also “actions”, for example, when social welfare authorities fail to take action to protect children from neglect or abuse.
(b)  “concerning”
The legal duty applies to all decisions and actions that directly or indirectly affect children. Thus, the term “concerning” refers first of all, to measures and decisions directly concerning a child, children as a group or children in general, and secondly, to other measures that have an effect on an individual child, children as a group or children in general, even if they are not the direct targets of the measure. As stated in the Committee’s general comment No. 7 (2005), such actions include those aimed at children (e.g. related to health, care or education), as well as actions which include children and other population groups (e.g. related to the environment, housing or transport) (para. 13 (b)). Therefore, “concerning” must be understood in a very broad sense.
...
“Shall be a primary consideration”
The best interests of a child shall be a primary consideration in the adoption of all measures of implementation. The words “shall be” place a strong legal obligation on States and mean that States may not exercise discretion as to whether children’s best interests are to be assessed and ascribed the proper weight as a primary consideration in any action undertaken.
The expression “primary consideration” means that the child’s best interests may not be considered on the same level as all other considerations. This strong position is justified by the special situation of the child: dependency, maturity, legal status and, often, voicelessness. Children have less possibility than adults to make a strong case for their own interests and those involved in decisions affecting them must be explicitly aware of their interests. If the interests of children are not highlighted, they tend to be overlooked.
In respect of adoption (art. 21), the right of best interests is further strengthened; it is not simply to be “a primary consideration” but “the paramount consideration”. Indeed, the best interests of the child are to be the determining factor when taking a decision on adoption, but also on other issues.
However, since article 3, paragraph 1, covers a wide range of situations, the Committee recognizes the need for a degree of flexibility in its application. The best interests of the child – once assessed and determined – might conflict with other interests or rights (e.g. of other children, the public, parents, etc.). Potential conflicts between the best interests of a child, considered individually, and those of a group of children or children in general have to be resolved on a case-by-case basis, carefully balancing the interests of all parties and finding a suitable compromise. The same must be done if the rights of other persons are in conflict with the child’s best interests. If harmonization is not possible, authorities and decision-makers will have to analyse and weigh the rights of all those concerned, bearing in mind that the right of the child to have his or her best interests taken as a primary consideration means that the child’s interests have high priority and not just one of several considerations. Therefore, a larger weight must be attached to what serves the child best.
Viewing the best interests of the child as “primary” requires a consciousness about the place that children’s interests must occupy in all actions and a willingness to give priority to those interests in all circumstances, but especially when an action has an undeniable impact on the children concerned.”
The Guidelines of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on child-friendly justice, 17 November 2010, in the part concerning the protection of private and family life in the context of judicial proceedings, provide as follows:
“6.  The privacy and personal data of children who are or have been involved in judicial or non-judicial proceedings and other interventions should be protected in accordance with national law. This generally implies that no information or personal data may be made available or published, particularly in the media, which could reveal or indirectly enable the disclosure of the child’s identity, including images, detailed descriptions of the child or the child’s family, names or addresses, audio and video records, etc.
Member states should prevent violations of the privacy rights as mentioned under guideline 6 above by the media through legislative measures or monitoring selfregulation by the media.
Member states should stipulate limited access to all records or documents containing personal and sensitive data of children, in particular in proceedings involving them. ...
...
Professionals working with and for children should abide by the strict rules of confidentiality, except where there is a risk of harm to the child.”
In the Explanatory memorandum to the Guidelines, it is further explained as follows:
“59.  Other possible ways to protect the privacy in the media are, inter alia, granting anonymity or a pseudonym, using screens or disguising voices, deletion of names and other elements that can lead to the identification of a child from all documents, prohibiting any form of recording (photo, audio, video), etc.
Member states have positive obligations in this respect. Guideline 7 reiterates that monitoring on either legally binding or professional codes of conduct for the press is essential, given the fact that any damage made after publication of names and/or photos is often irreparable.
Although the principle of keeping identifiable information inaccessible to the general public and the press remains the guiding one, there might be cases where exceptionally the child may benefit if the case is revealed or even publicised widely, for example, where a child has been abducted. Equally, the issue at stake may benefit from public exposure to stimulate advocacy or awareness raising.”
The relevant part of the Recommendation CM/Rec(2018)7 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on Guidelines to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the digital environment, 4 July 2018, provides as follows:
“26.  Children have a right to private and family life in the digital environment, which includes the protection of their personal data and respect for the confidentiality of their correspondence and private communications.
States must respect, protect and fulfil the right of the child to privacy and data protection. States should ensure that relevant stakeholders, in particular those processing personal data, but also the child’s peers, parents or carers, and educators, are made aware of and respect the child’s right to privacy and data protection.”
In the European Union Fundamental Rights Agency (FRA) study on Child-friendly justice: Perspectives and experiences of professionals on children’s participation in civil and criminal judicial proceedings in 10 EU Member States (2015) the following was noted:
“A child’s privacy is also at serious risk when he or she comes into contact with the justice system, especially when the case catches the attention of the media. Bearing this in mind, the Council of Europe guidelines establish a range of safeguards to ensure that children’s privacy is fully protected. In particular, personal information about children and their families, including names, pictures, addresses, should not be published by the media. The use of video cameras should be encouraged whenever a child is being heard or giving evidence. In these cases, the people present should be limited to those who are directly involved, and any information provided by the child should be kept confidential if there is a risk that the child might be hurt. Furthermore, access to and transfer of personal data should take place only when absolutely necessary, and taking into account the child’s best interests.”
In the further FRA study on Child-friendly justice – perspectives and experiences of children and professionals (2017), the following was noted:
“Children convey being scared and stressed about insufficient confidentiality and data protection when they participate in legal proceedings. They are afraid that details of their cases and the proceedings may become public. Several children complained about details of their judicial cases becoming known in their schools, communities or neighbourhoods. Children reported feeling distressed when people in their environment knew about their role in proceedings, their family situation or the court’s decisions. Sometimes children also reported being bullied or stigmatised by their peers or in the local community due to information revealed by teachers, parents, relatives, professionals, or through the media.”
Accordingly, FRA expressed the following opinion (Opinion 24):
“EU Member States and, as appropriate, the EU must ensure that appropriate legislation and measures protect the identity and privacy of children involved in court proceedings – for example, by excluding the public from the court room or using live video links or pre-recorded testimony in hearings. Steps need to be taken to ensure that children’s personal data remain strictly confidential and are kept from the media and the general public. Recordings need to be safely stored and children’s identities protected online, in all areas of law and independent of the child’s role in proceedings. Personal data should only be accessed and transferred when absolutely necessary, and always take the child’s best interests and opinions into account.”