The applicant, a columnist, was criminally convicted for defamation for having criticised a journalist in an opinion piece. He complains that the conviction, which included imposition of a fine and a prison sentence in the event he defaulted on the payment, violated his freedom of expression protected under Article 10 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Skopje. He is represented by Mr F. Medarski, a lawyer practising in Skopje. The Government of North Macedonia (“the Government”) were represented by their former Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov, succeeded by their current Agent, Ms  D.  Djonova.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Mr D.P.L. (“the plaintiff”) was the editor-in-chief of the newspaper Večer and the news segment of the television channel Sitel. Between December 2008 and March 2009 he published weekly opinion columns on current political events in the above newspaper. The relevant parts of some of his columns, published on 2 and 16 February and 23 March 2009 respectively, read as follows:
“The [construction of the] the Mother Theresa memorial house is important because it sets the stage for a whole array of buildings ... If someone left the country before the coming to power of Gruevski [the then Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski] and came back several years later, they would see ... a new football stadium, over a hundred new sports halls [спортски сали], a completely different main square [in the capital], a new concert hall [Универзала Сала], a new national theatre, new motorways ...
[B., a journalist,] was caught taking money from SDSM [Социјалдемократски сојуз на Македонија – an opposition political party at the time] to create news more favourable for them. [B. was] a journalist who ... has tried out with every television station in the city. He has been everywhere, and he has been kicked out of everywhere. Together with seven or eight more, they are attached to SDSM ...
If I had any doubts as to the investigation into the criminal liability of Zoran Zaev [the President of SDSM], I have none any more. The man is a liar [тешка лажовчина] rare even by Macedonian standards.”
On 28 March 2009 a group of students from the School of Architecture [Архитектонски факултет] gathered for a peaceful protest, which had been duly declared to the authorities, on the main square in Skopje to express their disagreement with the construction of a church on the square, as had been announced by the Government. Another group, protesting in opposition, gathered at the same time on the square to disrupt the students’ protest. In the 2009 Progress Report regarding the respondent State, the EU Commission stated the following:
“With regard to freedom of assembly and association, the overall situation is satisfactory. However, there were two occasions when peaceful and legal public events were violently disrupted. One was a student protest in Skopje against the government’s plan to build a church on the main square ...”
On 31 March 2009 in an article published in the daily newspaper Utrinski Vesnik under the title “Megaphones from the Fuhrer’s alley” (Мегафоните од фиреровиот сокак), the applicant, a regular columnist and contributor, commented on the above events. The relevant parts of the article, which was also published on the website of the newspaper, read as follows:
“[The plaintiff and several other journalists] are not problematic in view of their clear political agenda: to transform the country into a totalitarian underdeveloped village [касаба] of little black ‘Grujo’ [referring to the then Prime Minister, Nikola Gruevski], his bums and vagrants [гуланфери, гилиптери] and bus-driven bandits [башибозук] that are transported all around as part of the project called ‘Fraternity of cities (bastards)’ [Братимења на г(р)адови][1]. [In order] to discipline those who think otherwise (attackers come from Gostivar to beat fifty students gathered on their own city square in order to publicly express their opinion). ... When the battering buses of VMRO [Внатрешна македонска револуционерна организација  Демократска партија за македонско национално единство – the political party in power at that time] arrive next time, the people of Skopje will be better organised, at least to protect their children; and the bear of violence will dance in front of the doors of the inciters, such as D.P.L. [and two other journalists].
 [One of the journalists above] and others like him, I say, are not problematic only because they have transformed journalism and working for the public into a spin service of a political and mafia-type partnership with the aim of the dissolution of the Republic of Macedonia, but they are problematic because in the most direct and blatant way they violate the highest, and still valid, legal document of this State: the Constitution [the applicant here cites the constitutional provisions which regulate freedom of expression and peaceful assembly and association] ... All this speaks to the fascist nature of the government of Nikola Gruevski and his threatening phalanxes ...”
On an unspecified date D.P.L. lodged a criminal complaint against the applicant accusing him of defamation and insult regarding the above article published in Utrinski Vesnik. Both crimes were punishable under the Criminal Code applicable at the time.
On 10 June 2010 the Skopje Court of First Instance (“the trial court”) found the applicant guilty on both accounts, imposed on him a fine of 600  euros (EUR), with thirty days’ imprisonment in the event of default, and ordered him to pay the court fee and a further EUR 150 to cover the plaintiff’s trial costs. The court found that the applicant had intentionally put forward untruths and unsubstantiated assertions in his article (see paragraph 6 above), thereby interfering with the plaintiff’s reputation and dignity. By doing this the applicant had presented the public with an image of the plaintiff as dishonest and incompetent. The court dismissed the applicant’s arguments that he had discussed the political views and behaviour of the journalists mentioned, including the plaintiff, which in no way could have been understood as an attack of their reputation and dignity. In this context, according to the applicant, the plaintiff’s public statements had contained hate speech (see paragraph 4 above) and the applicant’s article had been aimed at protecting people from that political “lynching”. His aim had also been to safeguard the constitutional values, including the freedom of assembly and the free association of students.
The applicant appealed arguing, inter alia, that his columns had contained his own opinions, which had been value judgments and not statements of fact. According to him, defamation was supposed to be measured against objective criteria and the simple fact that the plaintiff had felt insulted by his column was insufficient for a finding of guilt.
On 22 September 2011 the Skopje Court of Appeal (Апелационен суд Скопје) ruled partly in favour of the applicant and upheld his conviction only in respect of defamation (it found that the applicant could not be held guilty on both accounts for the same article). It reduced the fine to EUR  320, with sixteen days’ imprisonment to be imposed in the event of the applicant defaulted on payment. The court dismissed the applicant’s argument that the article had contained a value judgment. In this connection the court stated:
“In order for a statement to be regarded as a value judgment, it should not be related to a specific event or happening, and it should be made in abstracto. In the present case, the published text concerns a specific event ... and it contains a factual assertion that is subject to substantiation, proof and determination. The burden of proof is on the ... accused.”
By a decision of 2 May 2012, served on the applicant on 21 May 2012, the Constitutional Court (Уставен суд) dismissed a constitutional appeal by the applicant, in which he complained of a violation of his freedom of conscience, thought and public expression of thought. The court reproduced the judgments of the courts of general competence and found, inter alia, the following:
“In the present case, through their judgments, the courts punished a publicly expressed opinion of [the applicant], as a necessary measure for the protection of the reputation, dignity and authority of another citizen. That was because [the applicant], relying on his freedom of public expression, had violated the protected right of another citizen, namely [D.P.L.]
...
It is clear that the article articulates the author’s personal opinion about the policies of the ... political party [in power] in the Republic of Macedonia, with which he obviously disagrees. In the impugned parts ... [the applicant] describes [the plaintiff], a journalist and an editor-in-chief, as a spokesperson, affiliate and a ‘megaphone’ of those policies, which, according to the author of the article, are of a fascist nature.
... the court finds that the reasons given by the trial and appeal courts are acceptable and that the State’s interference is proportionate to the legitimate aim of protecting the reputation of the victim ...”