The case originated in an application (no. 609/14) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Hungarian nationals, Mr Gábor Scheiring and Ms Rebeka Katalin Szabó (“the applicants”), on 20 December 2013.
The applicants were represented by Mr D.A. Karsai, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, Ministry of Justice.
On 4 January 2018 notice of the complaint under Article 10 of the Convention, concerning the decision to fine the applicants for their conduct in Parliament, was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants, Mr Gábor Scheiring and Ms Rebeka Katalin Szabó, were born in 1981 and 1977 respectively and live in Budapest.
At the material time the applicants were independent members of parliament.
At a plenary session of 9 December 2013, during the adoption of a decision on the agenda of the parliamentary session, the applicants carried a large banner into the centre of the Chamber and exhibited it there, displaying the words: “Who do you protect? Stop lying about the NAV case [a whistleblowing scandal concerning a large-scale tax fraud and corruption in government circles].”
The Speaker warned the applicants to terminate their conduct by repeatedly ringing the bell and calling for order. Several members of parliament were shouting out comments about the applicants’ conduct.
Since the applicants continued to display the banner, the Speaker informed them that he would propose, under section 49(4) of the Parliament Act (see paragraph 11 below), to impose similar sanctions on them to ones imposed in previous cases for comparable disruptions.
The applicants then moved the banner to the gallery of the Chamber and displayed it above the seats of the officers of the House, while a member of an opposition party was in the process of making an interpellation. The banner remained displayed in the gallery until it was removed by the ushers.
On 12 December 2013 the Speaker submitted a proposal to fine Mr Scheiring 50,000 Hungarian forints ((HUF) – equivalent to 170 euros (EUR)) and Ms Szabó HUF 131,000 (equivalent to EUR 440) for their conduct, which had been recorded in the minutes and was considered to be seriously offensive to parliamentary order, in application of section 49(4) of the Parliament Act. The proposal stated that Ms Szabó had to be subjected to an increased fine as she had previously been sanctioned for similar seriously disruptive conduct. The plenary adopted the proposal on 16 December 2013 without debate.
A detailed account of the domestic law provisions and practice is contained in Karácsony and Others v. Hungary ([GC], nos. 42461/13 and 44357/13, §§ 24-41, 17 May 2016).