The applicant is the president of an association for the protection of women victims of domestic violence. She was convicted for stating that a certain D.O. had abused his wife after she had sought shelter at the association’s refuge for women. The case concerns the applicant’s complaint of the violation of her right to freedom of expression guaranteed by Article 10 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in Zagreb. She was represented by Mr I. Jelavić, a lawyer practising in Zagreb.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is the president of the Zagreb Autonomous Women’s House (Autonomna ženska kuća Zagreb, hereinafter “the Association”), an association established with the aim of providing women victims of violence with support.
The Association had intervened in a family dispute between a certain D.O. and his wife C.O. following a request for help from the latter. C.O. and the couple’s minor daughter had stayed at the Association’s refuge for women from February to August 2003; afterwards C.O. had taken the child abroad.
On 18 September 2003 the national daily newspaper Večernji list published an interview with D.O. in which he alleged that the Association was responsible for the fact that his daughter had been kidnapped by her mother, who had fled with the child abroad.
Later on the same day, the applicant was invited to give a telephone interview about the case on a live radio show, where she explained the circumstances of the Association’s actions in the case and denied its involvement in the kidnapping of the child. According to the applicant, D.O. was also invited to join in the show, but he never replied. The transcript of the relevant parts of the interview reads as follows:
“The host: C.O. came to you because she had been abused?
The applicant: Of course, because she had been abused. I was surprised that the journalist stated that, having met D.O. several times, she had concluded that he was not an abuser. I am literally asking that journalist how long she has been an expert in assessing whether or not somebody is an abuser. In her role, personally I would never have dared to come to such a conclusion, also because it has been a well-known fact for the past twenty years that abusers abuse in the privacy of their own homes; they are not rude or aggressive [when they are] in contact with the police, or [when they are] in contact with doctors [and say] ‘oh my, that is horrible, how could she slip and fall down the stairs like that’; when they speak to social workers they are always very polite and very cooperative.
The host: And the police usually buy their story?
The applicant: Of course, police officers are somehow always on the side of the man. Of course, that is the tragedy and the perversion of the whole story. Of course, [the abusers] will not, or will very rarely, in a low percentage of cases, be equally rude and equally aggressive, verbally or physically, towards third parties ... [To the outside world], they always give a good impression of themselves, and only their wives, who are the victims, know how they act within the four walls of their home.
...
The host: So what is the aim of this pressure, only to make the Association accountable or tarnish its reputation, or to accomplish something more concrete?
The applicant: Well, I would not say so, I would not say that it was only about that. I would say that the issue is D.O., who was abusing his wife, I’m afraid, I have to confirm that because practice – not only that of [the Association], but also that of all [women’s] refuges in the world – has shown that victims speak about only one third of what they have been through, not everything. That means that there was certainly much more to it than what C.O. managed to tell us; women are ashamed to speak about it in detail, so I do not have any doubt that C.O. was a victim of abuse [perpetrated] by her husband D.O. However, I would not say that the aim was to diminish the authority or reputation of [the Association]. I would say that it was an attempt, but I dare say a poor one, to present the abuser as the victim and the victim as the abuser. So we switch roles, which is absolutely unacceptable in domestic violence cases, because this is a burning issue, which will soon be confirmed by numbers [which the Association has managed to obtain]...”
On 19 December 2003 D.O. brought a private criminal prosecution against the applicant in the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court (Općinski kazneni sud u Zagrebu), on charges of defamation relating to her allegations that he had abused his wife. He provided a copy of the recording of the radio show and an expert report concerning its authenticity, asking that those be admitted in evidence.
During the proceedings, the first-instance court heard evidence from several witnesses. The witness V.O. stated that there had been a police intervention concerning problems between D.O. and C.O., and the witness S.M.K. also gave evidence to that effect.
On 24 May 2007 the first-instance court acquitted the applicant. That judgment was quashed on appeal and the case was remitted, the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) holding that the relevant facts should be established with the assistance of an expert and by questioning the radio show host.
In the resumed proceedings, the first-instance court commissioned an expert report from a sworn-in court expert concerning the authenticity of the audio-recording of the radio show submitted by D.O.
On 6 April 2009 the expert attested to the authenticity of the substance of the recording and provided a transcript of the applicant’s interview.
The applicant challenged the findings of the expert, asking for his opinion to be excluded from the case file. In particular, she argued that the expert had contacted D.O.’s lawyer directly during the preparation of his report, without going through official court channels.
On 21 April 2009 the applicant sought the disqualification of the expert witness, but her request was dismissed on the grounds that the expert had been authorised to take all necessary measures in preparing the report.
The first-instance court also dismissed the applicant’s proposal that the radio show host and two other witnesses, as well as one witness proposed by D.O., should be questioned, on the grounds that their testimony was irrelevant because the expert witness had already been heard.
On 18 May 2009 the first-instance court found the applicant guilty of insult, finding that she had tarnished D.O.’s honour and reputation by alleging that he had abused his wife. It sanctioned the applicant with a judicial admonition (sudska opomena) and ordered her to pay the costs and expenses of the proceedings in the amount of 500 Croatian kunas (HRK; approximately 70 euros (EUR)) as well as the necessary expenses incurred to D.O. and to his lawyer, the amount of which was to be determined by a subsequent court decision. The relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“In the present case, the court finds it established that [the applicant’s] conduct comprised all subjective and objective characteristics of the criminal act of insult ... and not defamation...
Namely, the criminal act of defamation ..., content-wise, requires the stating of a fact which is presented as being true, whereas it is untrue, [a statement] which, objectively interpreted, contains [reference to] a certain event (something which actually occurred), whose truthfulness can be established in the same way for all people. A factual statement may include a statement about a certain characteristic, but only if it represents a certain physical or psychological characteristic, whereas in all other cases a statement about a person’s characteristic normally contains a judgment about the value of a person, and therefore concerns the criminal act of insult, and not defamation. In the present case, it has been established that [the applicant] called [D.O.] an abuser, which is not an event or a physical or psychological characteristic of [D.O.], and can therefore only be interpreted as an expression of a negative attitude or negative opinion about the value of [D.O.] as a person, the truthfulness of which cannot be assessed.
However, it should be pointed out that the court established that [D.O.] had not been convicted and [that the applicant] had never alleged that she suspected or knew that criminal proceedings had been instituted against [him], or that he had been convicted of possible domestic violence. In the criminal act of insult, the object of protection is [an individual’s] honour, that is, the requirement to respect the person, whereas the content of an insult consists in a disrespecting, negative judgment on [D.O.’s] value. In this court’s opinion, [the applicant] overstepped the permissible limit by critically assessing in the said radio show [D.O.’s] respect or failure to respect of a final and enforceable decision... Public criticism may relate to a critical attitude or opinion about a person’s actions, but may not include subjective insulting judgments. By referring to [D.O.] as an abuser, [the applicant] stated a generally negative opinion of him, which is objectively insulting for the person it is directed at.
...
In the light of the above, the court considers that the impugned allegations made by [the applicant] on the radio show cannot be considered justified criticism within the meaning of Article 203 of the Criminal Code, which refers to the exclusion of unlawfulness in cases of criminal offences against honour and reputation. Namely, the court has established, on the basis of [the applicant’s] manner of speech, and by placing the disputed allegation in relation to and in the context of all the content of the disputed radio show, that [the applicant] spoke about [D.O.] in a condescending manner and presented a negative and insulting judgment about [his] value as a person.”
The first-instance court also dismissed the applicant’s request for the expert opinion to be excluded from the case file as unlawfully obtained evidence, but provided no reasoning as to why the radio show host had not been questioned.
On 7 July 2009 the second-instance court dismissed an appeal by the applicant as ill-founded. It held that although the first-instance court had failed to provide any reasons concerning the failure to question the radio show host, that did not render the proceedings as a whole unfair, given that there had been sufficient evidence for the applicant’s conviction. It also considered that the first-instance court had struck a fair balance between the applicant’s freedom of expression and the protection of D.O.’s rights.
The applicant challenged those findings before the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), which on 13 December 2012 dismissed her complaints as ill-founded.
The Constitutional Court’s decision was served on the applicant on 19 December 2012.
Relevant domestic law has been cited in Miljević v. Croatia (no. 68317/13, §§ 31-32, 25 June 2020).
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette no. 110/97 with subsequent amendments) provide as follows:
Article 66 § 1
“A judicial admonition is a criminal sanction which may be imposed as a warning to the perpetrator of a criminal offence for which the law prescribes a prison sentence of up to one year or a fine, if the perpetrator’s modus operandi, and the consequences of the crime suggest that the offence [committed] was light in nature. [It may also be imposed] where in view of the circumstances regarding the perpetrator and particularly his or her attitude towards the victim and the compensation for the damage inflicted by the offence, it is considered that the purpose of the [sanction] can be achieved without imposing a penalty.”
Article 199
“2.  Whoever insults another through the press, radio [or] television, in front of a number of persons, at a public assembly, or in another way in which the insult becomes accessible to a large number of persons, shall be punished by a fine of up to one hundred and fifty daily wages.”