The case originated in an application (no. 10947/11) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Marcin Kącki (“the applicant”), on 5 February 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms B. Czechowicz, a lawyer practising in Warsaw. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that finding him criminally responsible for defamation of a politician amounted to an interference with his right to freedom of expression, in breach of Article 10 of the Convention.
On 27 August 2014 the complaint concerning the alleged violation of Article 10 of the Convention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Poznań.
.  On an unspecified date A.R., a member of the political party SelfDefence of the Republic of Poland (“Samoobrona”) sent Gazeta Wyborcza, a daily newspaper, an electronic mail containing information about an alleged “sex scandal” in the party.
The following day the applicant, who is a journalist, contacted A.R. on the telephone. After their conversation he informed her that he had recorded the call and that he intended to use the transcript for an article.
On 6 December 2006 the applicant published an interview with A.R. in the Gazeta Wyborcza. The interview, entitled “Payment for sex, the choice is yours” (“Płaca ze seks, wybór należy do pani”) concerned the “sex scandal” story which had broken in Poland earlier in 2006. Public figures, including Samoobrona activists, had offered and accepted sexual favours in the course of exercising public functions. A.R. told the newspaper that she had begun working with the party through her contacts with A.K. Initially, she had been unpaid and when she had demanded payment, one of the activists, K.Z., had told her:
“I will pay if you go to bed with me”
She also said that in July 2004 during a party organised by A.K. a prominent Samoobrona activist, B.S., had offered to find a post for her in a parliamentary deputy’s office – specifically R.C.’s – in return for sexual favours. According to A.R., B.S. was so forward that she had to ask K.S. for help. K.S. then called a taxi to take B.S. home
Then the applicant asked A.R.:
“Did you get the job?”
R. replied:
“No, the job was given to M.C.’s daughter”.
On the same page, to the right of the article, the newspaper quoted three prominent Samoobrona activists referred to in the interview, namely K.Z., B.S. and K.S. They all, denied that there had been any sexual propositions made to A.R.
Also on the same page the newspaper published a short interview with A.K. who confirmed that she knew A.R. but had never recommended her for any work. When asked about the “sex scandal” A.K. said:
“What are you saying? I have never heard of it. This cannot be true.”
On 30 November 2007 M.C., a Member of the European Parliament, lodged a private bill of indictment against the applicant. He demanded that the applicant be charged with defamation. According to the indictment the defamation consisted of the publication of the interview with A.R. in which she said that B.S. could arrange a job for her in M.C.’s office in return for sexual favours. According to M.C. this suggested to readers that he had been involved in the “sex scandal”. He also claimed that he had been defamed in the published interview at the point where A.R. had accused him of nepotism by saying that he had employed his own daughter.
On 16 March 2010 the Warsaw District Court ruled the indictment partially accurate: it then discontinued the proceedings for a probationary term of one year and ordered the applicant to pay 1,000 Polish zlotys (PLN – 232 euros (EUR)) to charity and to pay the costs of the proceedings.
The District Court found the applicant guilty of the defamation of M.C. with respect to his publication of the statements made by A.R. concerning nepotism (see paragraph 23 below). According to the court the applicant neglected his professional obligations because he did not verify that the job had been offered to M.C.’s daughter. At the trial it became clear that this information could not be accurate because M.C. did not have a daughter. It did not accept the applicant’s argument that he had acted with due diligence because before publication he had sent the text of the interview to A.R. who had accepted its contents and returned it to the applicant without making any objection or comment (autoryzacja).
The District Court did not hold that the applicant was guilty of defamation when he had suggested that M.C. had been involved in the “sex scandal”. It found that in this respect the applicant had fulfilled his professional obligations because he had published the statement of B.S., who had denied propositioning A.R. For the above reasons, in the District Court’s view, the average reader should not have had the impression that M.C. was involved in the “sex scandal”.
The applicant and M.C.’s lawyer appealed against the firstinstance judgment.
On 18 June 2010 the Warsaw Regional Court upheld the challenged judgment, repeating in essence the same reasoning as the District Court. Regarding the applicant’s arguments concerning his right to freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention, it noted that “in the light of the journalist’s right to publish critical comments (prawo do krytyki dziennikarskiej), an individual’s right to legal protection of good name and reputation should also be taken into account”.
On 3 February 2011 the applicant’s lawyer requested the Ombudsman to lodge a cassation appeal on the applicant’s behalf.
On 6 May 2011 the Ombudsman informed the applicant that she had found no grounds to lodge a cassation appeal.
.  Article 14 provides as follows:
“The Republic of Poland shall ensure freedom of the press and other means of social communication.”
.  Article 31 § 3 of the Constitution, which lays down a general prohibition on disproportionate limitations on constitutional rights and freedoms (the principle of proportionality) provides:
“Any limitation upon the exercise of constitutional freedoms and rights may be imposed only by statute, and only when necessary in a democratic State for the protection of its security or public order, or to protect the natural environment, health or public morals, or the freedoms and rights of other persons. Such limitations shall not violate the essence of freedoms and rights.”
.  Article 54 § 1 of the Constitution guarantees freedom of expression. It states, in so far as relevant:
“The freedom to express opinions, to acquire and to disseminate information shall be ensured to everyone.”
Article 212 of the Criminal Code 1997 provides as follows:
“§ 1.  Anyone who imputes to another person, a group of persons, an institution, a legal person or an organisation without legal personality, such behaviour or characteristics, as may lower this person, group or entity in the public’s opinion or undermine public confidence in their capacity to fulfill a certain position or occupation or perform a type of activity, shall be liable to a fine or restriction of liberty.
§ 2.  If the perpetrator commits the act described in paragraph 1 through a means of mass communication, he or she shall be liable to a fine, restriction of liberty or imprisonment not exceeding 1 year.
§ 3. When sentencing for an offence specified in §1 or 2, the court may adjudge a supplementary payment in favour of the injured person or the Polish Red Cross, or another social purpose designated by the injured person (nawiązka).
§ 4. The prosecution of the offence specified in § 1 or 2 shall occur upon a private charge.”
.  Article 213 provides as follows:
“§ 1. The offence specified in Article 212 § 1 is not committed, if the allegation not made in public is true.
§ 2. Whoever raises or publicises a true allegation shall be deemed not to have committed the offence specified in Article 212 § 1 or 2;
If the allegation regards private or family life, the evidence of truth shall only be produced when it serves to prevent a danger to someone’s life or to prevent abuse of a minor.”
.  Article 214 provides as follows:
“The absence of an offence resulting from a reason specified in Article 213 does not exclude the liability of a perpetrator for the insult by reason of the manner of announcing or publicising the allegation.”
On 30 October 2006 the Constitutional Court, ruling on a legal question referred to it by the Gdańsk District Court, declared Article 212 §§ 1 and 2 of the Polish Criminal Code compatible with Articles 14 and 54 § 1 read in conjunction with Article 31 § 3 of the Constitution.
.  The Constitutional Court found that in some circumstances the protection of rights and freedoms like dignity, good name and privacy may prevail over the protection of freedom of expression. The Constitutional Court further found that there was no basis to assume that protection of freedom of expression merely by means of civil law (provisions on personal rights) would be as efficient as criminal law. Protection of freedom of expression by means of criminal law did not in itself infringe the relevant provisions of the Constitution.
Three judges, out of twelve, expressed dissenting opinions on the Constitutional Court’s judgment of 30 October 2005.