The case originated in an application (no. 51000/11) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Silvano Radobuljac (“the applicant”), on 26 July 2011.
The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic courts’ decision to fine him for contempt of court had violated his freedom of expression.
On 28 May 2014 the complaint concerning freedom of expression was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Zagreb.
He is an advocate. In that capacity, he represented the plaintiff in civil proceedings instituted on 5 February 2009 before the Vukovar Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Vukovaru), in which his client sought payment of a certain amount of money from the defendant.
On 16 November 2009 the Municipal Court held a hearing, which the applicant attended. At the end of the hearing, the court scheduled the next one for 17 December 2009.
The applicant did not attend the hearing of 17 December 2009, at which the court made a decision to suspend the proceedings (mirovanje postupka) in accordance with section 216(1) of the Civil Procedure Act (see paragraph 18 below).
On 31 December 2009 the applicant, on behalf of the plaintiff, lodged an appeal against that decision.
He explained that he had been unable to attend the hearing owing to a vehicle malfunction, and that he had tried to contact the court and the defendant’s representative, with a view to informing them of the reason for his absence. He further stated that, after the hearing, he had spoken by telephone with the defendant’s representative, who had told him that, despite his (the representative’s) suggestion to proceed and hear the defendant’s testimony, the court had decided to adjourn the hearing and suspend the proceedings. The applicant argued that, if that was true, the court’s decision to suspend the proceedings had had no legal basis. He explained that suspending proceedings was an instrument for maintaining procedural discipline, the effect of which was to delay proceedings and thereby penalise the parties for their inaction. Yet, in his case, he and his client had been penalised by a delay even though it was through no fault of his own that he had failed to attend the hearing. He then stated:
“With a view to highlighting the unacceptable conduct of the judge, the following circumstances have to be mentioned.
The parties’ representatives and the defendant attended the hearing held on 16 November 2009.
The plaintiff did not attend because no testimonies from the parties were scheduled, he is of low income, and he resides in Pula.
The hearing in question was characterised by the fact that the party present at court did not give evidence and the judge attempted to adjourn the hearing without scheduling another one.
The judge [eventually] adjourned the hearing, and only at the insistence of the plaintiff’s representative scheduled another one for 17 December 2009.
Such conduct from the judge is absolutely unacceptable. In behaving in this way, he seeks to give the impression that he is proceeding with the case [i.e. that the case is being dealt with], whereas, essentially, hearings are being held which are devoid of substance.
Since the plaintiff’s representative has no reason to doubt the defendant’s representative’s statement that he had suggested hearing the defendant’s testimony at the hearing in question [the hearing of 17 December 2009], that statement indicates that the court could not have issued the contested decision.
...
The contested decision should therefore be quashed.”
By a decision of 13 January 2010, Judge M.R. – who was the first-instance single judge in the above case – fined the applicant 1,500 Croatian kunas (HRK) for contempt of court. The relevant part of that decision reads:
“... the advocate in the appeal ... first admitted not having attended the hearing scheduled for 17 December 2009 ... owing to a vehicle malfunction ...
Instead of asking for the proceedings to be restored to the status quo ante [restitutio in integrum ob terminem elapsum, povrat u prijašnje stanje] as a result of objective reasons and force majeure, the advocate in question, for no reason whatsoever, states on the second page of the appeal, ‘Such conduct from the judge is absolutely unacceptable. In behaving in this way, he seeks to give the impression that he is proceeding with the case [i.e. that the case is being dealt with], whereas, essentially, hearings are being held which are devoid of substance.’ [T]hat statement is certainly offensive to the court and the judge [concerned], and as such constitutes unacceptable communication between the court and the advocate representing one of the parties.
By making that offensive statement, the advocate in question implies that the judge hearing the case proceeds pointlessly, and most likely proceeds pointlessly with all other cases, which represents a serious insult to both the court and the judge.
For that insult, the court fined the advocate HRK 1,500. Such a fine will most likely [discourage] the advocate from insulting the court and judge hearing the case in future, in his appeals and [other] submissions, and encourage him to pay them due respect in all circumstances.”
The applicant appealed against that decision, arguing that his statement had not been offensive or demeaning. Rather, by making that statement, he had criticised the first-instance court’s inefficiency in conducting the proceedings. In particular, in his appeal, the applicant wrote, inter alia, the following:
“The operative provisions [of the contested decision] indicate that the fine was imposed for offending the court in the appeal of 31 December 2009 by stating, ‘Such conduct from the judge is absolutely unacceptable. In behaving in this way, he seeks to give the impression that he is proceeding with the case [i.e. that the case is being dealt with], whereas, essentially, hearings are being held which are devoid of substance’.
I consider the contested decision to be without basis.
The quoted statement does not represent an insult. [Rather,] it is an assessment of how usefully the proceedings in the present case were conducted.
The statements quoted in the contested decision ... cannot in themselves, and especially having regard to the behaviour of the judge hearing the case, [be regarded as] disrespectful, which would justify the need to issue a decision on the fine.
...
In addition to the plaintiff’s representative, the defendant and [her] representative attended the hearing scheduled for 16 November 2009. The record [of that hearing] states that [the plaintiff] reaffirmed his action and the submissions of 30 March 2009, and that the defendant maintained the arguments expressed in [her] response ... of 11 March 2009. Beside this, nothing else happened at that hearing.
...
Apart from acknowledging the facts as stated above, the judge hearing the case did not carry out any action intended to bring the proceedings to an end, except for scheduling the next hearing.
At that hearing, he did not even oblige the defendant to provide evidence for the claims expressed in [her] response.
At that hearing, not even a decision to hear testimonies from the parties was adopted. Only at the request of the plaintiff’s representative did the judge decide to schedule the next hearing.
...
In the circumstances, it is evident that the hearing scheduled for 17 December 2009 would have been identical ... to the previous hearing.
The plaintiff’s representative considers such conduct to be at odds with the purpose of law.
...
Given that the purpose of a hearing is concentrated deliberation, that purpose is frustrated when such concentrated deliberation is lacking. One should also bear in mind that such conduct increases the costs of proceedings ... [without] rational justification.
...
No intention to offend was expressed in the submissions in question [that is, the appeal of 31 December 2009]. The quoted statement represents a view assessing how usefully the proceedings were being conducted.
In the reasoning [of the contested decision], it is stated that the representative implies that the judge hearing the case ‘most likely proceeds pointlessly with all other cases’. That view is not supported by any argument and has no basis [in what was written in the appeal].”
By a decision of 7 July 2010 the Vukovar County Court (Županijski sud u Vukovaru) dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the first-instance decision. The relevant part of that decision, which was served on the applicant on 16 July 2010, reads:
“When deciding to fine the representative for contempt of court ... the first-instance court correctly held – and gave valid reasons for its view – that such statements constituted unacceptable communication between the court and an advocate ..., the assessment of which is within the discretion of the court before which the proceedings are pending.
Those statements ... go beyond the limits of an advocate’s role in the proceedings ... and may be legally characterised as abuse of process on account of inappropriate communication.”
On 17 August 2010 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint against the decisions of the ordinary courts. In so doing, he complained that those decisions were in breach of his freedom of expression. He explicitly relied on Article 38 of the Croatian Constitution (see paragraph 16 below) and Article 10 of the Convention.
By a decision of 27 January 2011 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible on the grounds that the contested decision was not open to constitutional review. That decision was served on the applicant on 11 February 2011.
The relevant Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 56/90, with subsequent amendments) read:
“(1) Rights and freedoms may be only restricted by law in order to protect the rights and freedoms of others, the legal order, public morals or health.
 (2) Every restriction of rights and freedoms should be proportionate to the nature of the necessity for the restriction in each particular case.
...
“(1) Freedom of thought and expression shall be guaranteed.
 (2) Freedom of expression shall include, in particular, freedom of the press and other media, freedom of speech and [the freedom] to speak publicly, and the free establishment of all media institutions.”
...”
The relevant provision of the 1999 Constitutional Act on the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 99/99, with subsequent amendments – “the Constitutional Court Act”), which has been in force since 15 March 2002, reads:
“(1)  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that the decision of a State authority, local or regional government, or a legal person vested with public authority, on his or her rights or obligations, or as regards a suspicion or accusation of a criminal offence, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms, or the right to local or regional government, guaranteed by the Constitution (‘constitutional rights’)...”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 4/77, with subsequent amendments, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 53/91, with subsequent amendments), which has been in force since 1 July 1977, read as follows:
“(1)  ...
 (2)  Unless otherwise provided for by this Act, the court shall fine a natural person between 500 and 10,000 [Croatian] kunas, or a legal entity between 2,500 and 50,000 [Croatian] kunas, if they seriously abuse the rights they have in the proceedings.
(3)  The fine referred to in paragraph (2) of this section may be imposed on a party or an intervener, or on their representative if he or she is [found to be] responsible for an abuse of rights.
(4)  The fine shall be imposed by the first-instance court. Outside the main hearing, the fine shall be imposed by a single judge or the presiding judge.
...
(12)... If, within a year of service of ... a decision referred to in paragraph (2) of this section, [the Tax Administration] does not succeed in collecting the fine, [it] shall inform ... the court [thereof], whereupon the fine shall be converted into a prison sentence, in accordance with the rules of criminal law on converting fines into prison sentences, following which the court that imposed the fine shall issue a decision.
...”
“(1)  The first-instance court shall fine a natural person between 500 and 5,000 [Croatian] kunas, or a legal person between 2,000 and 20,000 [Croatian] kunas, if in his, her or its submissions, they have insulted the court, a party or other participant in the proceedings. The fine may also be imposed on a party’s representative or an intervener if he or she [is found to] have insulted the court.
(2)  The provisions of section 10 of this Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to cases referred to in paragraph (1) of this section.
(3)  The provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this section shall apply in all cases where the court imposes a fine in accordance with the provisions of this Act, unless otherwise expressly provided for in particular cases.
...”
“(1)  Parties shall have the right to consult the case file of civil proceedings in which they participate and to copy [documents from] it.
 (2)  Other persons with justified reason to do so may be allowed to consult particular case files and copy [documents from] them. While proceedings are ongoing, permission shall be given by the single judge [hearing the case] or the president of the panel. [A]fter proceedings have concluded, [permission shall be given] by the court’s president or by a judge he or she has designated.
...”
“(1)  Proceedings shall be suspended if: both parties agree on it [i.e. the suspension] before the conclusion of the main hearing; both parties fail to attend a preparatory hearing or one of the hearings during the main-hearing stage of the proceedings; the parties who are present at the hearing refuse to litigate; or a party who was duly summoned fails to attend and the other [party] asks for suspension.
(4)  If, during the same proceedings, the conditions for suspension are fulfilled again, the action shall be considered withdrawn.
...”
“(2)  Proceedings shall remain suspended until one party applies for their continuation. Such an application cannot be submitted before three months have passed from the day on which the proceedings were suspended.
(3)  If, within four months of the day on which the proceedings were suspended, no party submits an application for their continuation, the action shall be considered withdrawn.
...”
“An appeal against the decision ... declaring the proceedings suspended (section 216) does not postpone its effects [i.e. the effects of that suspension decision].”
On 28 March 2003, the Constitutional Court adopted decisions UIII-3285/2002 and U-III-231/2003 by which it declared inadmissible constitutional complaints lodged against decisions of criminal courts imposing fines for contempt of court. In the first case counsel for the accused had been fined for disrupting the order in the courtroom and disobeying court orders. In the second case, a witness had been fined for her failure to attend a hearing. The Constitutional Court held that the contested decisions were not open to constitutional review by individual constitutional complaint. The Constitutional Court’s decisions were published in the Official Gazette on 24 May 2003.
The Constitutional Court adopted the same view in decision no. UIII-4772/2004 of 25 February 2005, and thus declared inadmissible a constitutional complaint lodged against a decision of a criminal court, where counsel for the accused in criminal proceedings had been fined for disrespecting and offending the court. The decision was published in the Official Gazette of 14 March 2005.
The Constitutional Court followed this practice in decisions no. UIII-4366/2013 of 4 November 2013 and U-III-3532/2010 of 6 June 2014, in which it likewise declared inadmissible constitutional complaints lodged against decisions of enforcement and civil courts, where the representatives of a debtor in enforcement proceedings and of a plaintiff in civil proceedings respectively had been fined for having offended the court. Both decisions were published on the Constitutional Court’s website.
On 15 July 2004 the Constitutional Court published on its website instructions for filling out the constitutional complaint form (Upute za ispunjavanje obrasca ustavne tužbe). The document in question contained a list of decisions not open to constitutional review by means of an individual constitutional complaint. It listed, for example, decisions fining parties or their representatives or witnesses in civil and criminal proceedings. As evidence of that being established practice, it referred to the Constitutional Court’s decisions nos. U-III-2541/2001, U-III-1752/2001, U-III-3285/2002, U-III-231/2003, U-III-3413/2003 and U-III-738/2004. The third and fourth of the above-mentioned decisions were published in the Official Gazette (see paragraph 19 above).
According to the Government, in 2009 the list was updated by referring to the Constitutional Court’s decisions nos. U-III-1838/2007 and U-III-4366/2013, the latter of which is available on the court’s website (see paragraph 21 above).
On 8 July 2014 the document in issue was divided into several separate documents (examples of the constitutional complaints; practical instructions on how to fill out a constitutional complaint form; and a list of decisions not open to constitutional review by means of an individual constitutional complaint) and updated. The new list (Popis pojedinačnih akata koji se ne smatraju aktima iz članka 62. stavka 1. Ustavnog zakona o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske) refers to the Constitutional Court’s decisions nos. U-III-3413/2003, U-III-3140/2005, U-III-361/2007, U-III-3273/2008, U-III-3885/2011 and U-III-1502/2014. None of those decisions was published in the Official Gazette, nor is their text available on the Constitutional Court’s website.