The case originated in an application (no. 10247/09) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Ms Bożena Sosinowska (“the applicant”), on 14 February 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr L. Mrozek, a lawyer practising in Chorzów. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that the disciplinary proceedings against her had been unfair in violation of Article 6 of the Convention and that there had been an interference with her right to freedom of expression in breach of Article 10 of the Convention.
On 26 April 2010 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government.
The applicant is a specialist in lung diseases. She had worked since 1992 in a hospital in Ruda Śląska. On an unspecified later date W.R.K. became chief physician of the ward in which the applicant worked. A serious conflict arose between them, the applicant becoming increasingly critical of various decisions taken by W.R.K. in the diagnosis and treatment of the ward’s patients.
On 16 September 2004 the applicant wrote to Professor J.K. who was at that time a regional consultant for lung diseases. She submitted that W.R.K.’s conduct had demonstrated that she [that is, W.R.K.] lacked appropriate skills to run the ward as her clinical experience and judgment left much to be desired. The applicant referred to the cases of seven patients who had been treated in the ward and indicated shortcomings which she perceived as errors in their diagnosis and treatment. She stated that W.R.K. had often behaved in a manner contrary to professional ethics, by questioning the applicant’s clinical judgment and by denigrating her in the eyes of patients and the ward’s medical staff. She declared that she would not have bothered the professor with this problem if not for the fact that W.R.K. had threatened her with dismissal for refusing to comply with her orders.
On 5 November 2005 the hospital dismissed the applicant on the grounds of a serious failure to comply with her duties within the meaning of Article 52 of the Labour Code.
The applicant filed a compensation claim for unlawful dismissal with the Labour Division of the Ruda Śląska District Court.
During the proceedings the court heard as witnesses W.R.K., E.Ch., who was at that time the director of the hospital, J.W. - the former Head Physician of that hospital, two doctors working in the ward M.M. and Z.L., and H.W., the leader of the trade union branch at the hospital. It also had regard to the applicant’s employment file and to the medical records of various patients treated in the ward.
By a judgment of 22 December 2005 the court allowed the applicant’s claim and awarded her compensation in the amount of 9,413 Polish zlotys (PLN) with statutory interest payable from 6 November 2004.
The court found that the applicant was a very good specialist. It further established that a serious and long-standing conflict had arisen between her and W.R.K. On an unspecified date in 2004 the former chief physician of the hospital, J.W., had decided to intervene in the conflict, but had subsequently given notice on his contract in September of that year and had left before doing so. Dr E.Ch. had taken over his duties. In 2004 she had reviewed the ward patients’ medical records and found no irregularities. On an unspecified date, apparently also in 2004, the applicant had informed the director of her doubts as to the correctness of certain diagnostic and therapeutic decisions made by W.R.K. The applicant had also informed Dr E.Ch. that she had shown certain patients’ records to the regional consultant, asking for his opinion. She had handed over to Dr E.Ch. a copy of her letter to the consultant. Dr E.Ch. had expressed no objections.
The court further found that it had been normal practice in the ward that medical records were kept by the treating doctor. It had not been established, in the light of the evidence before the court, that the applicant had made any irregular changes, amendments to or comments in the records kept by other doctors or had otherwise tampered with their content.
The court noted that the evidence given by W.R.K. concerning the allegations that the applicant had improperly amended the medical records and refused to follow her orders lacked credibility. It was not in dispute between the parties that a serious conflict between the applicant and W.R.K. had made it almost impossible for the ward to function normally. W.R.K., in her capacity as head physician of the ward, had proved unable to take any steps to defuse that conflict. Likewise, the hospital’s medical director, Dr E. Ch., had not taken any reasonable steps to address the situation. The court was of the view that the applicant had been dismissed because the hospital authorities had considered that her dismissal was simply the easiest way of getting rid of the problem.
The court further held that the allegations that the applicant had made errors and about the alleged irregularities in the manner in which she had administered the patients’ medical records had not been confirmed by the evidence. The fact that the applicant, when she had been in doubt as to the correctness of the medical decisions taken in respect of some patients, had shown their records to the regional consultant asking for guidance, did not amount to any irregularity. Indeed, such conduct was expressly recommended by the Law on the Profession of Physicians. The applicant’s conduct also had to be seen in the context of the fact that she could not expect any assistance, clinical or otherwise, from her superior W.R.K.
The court observed that it was the superior’s obligation to organise the work of the ward in such a way as to make full use of the employees’ professional potential and their time. It was unethical on the superior’s part to exacerbate a conflict with a member of staff.
The court referred to the procedure by which the applicant had been dismissed, including the consultation with the local branch of the trade union. It found that the procedure had not complied with the requirements laid down in the Labour Code.
The court concluded that the applicant’s dismissal was unjustified and unlawful as her conduct could not reasonably have been said to amount to a serious breach of her professional obligations and awarded her compensation.
The hospital appealed. By a judgment of 28 June 2006 the  dismissed the appeal.
By a letter of 3 November 2004 the applicant requested the Katowice Regional Medical Chamber to intervene in the conflict between herself and W.R.K. She submitted, inter alia, that the head physician had perceived her as a professional threat. As she could not find genuine reasons to criticise the applicant, she had started to bully her. Ultimately, she had untruthfully complained to the then director of the hospital that the applicant had been refusing to comply with her orders. As a result, the applicant had been dismissed. The applicant requested that a professional supervision commission be set up to examine W.R.K.’s working methods. She attached a list of professional errors which, in the applicant’s view, W.R.K. had committed and which had come to light during her numerous confrontations with W.R.K.
By a decision of 20 January 2005 the Katowice Regional Attorney for Professional Liability (Okręgowy Rzecznik Odpowiedzialności Zawodowej – “the Regional Attorney”) refused to institute an investigation, finding that the applicant had submitted her request against the background of the conflict with her boss.
The applicant appealed. She submitted, inter alia, that she was upset by the arguments advanced by the Regional Attorney that she had no right to criticise the head physician even when the latter was acting to the patients’ detriment.
On 31 May 2006 the Principal Attorney for Professional Liability (Główny Rzecznik Odpowiedzialności Zawodowej) quashed the decision of 20 January 2005 and remitted the case.
On 18 August 2006 the Katowice Regional Attorney refused to institute proceedings following the applicant’s complaint against W.R.K.
On 22 August 2006 he instituted an investigation against the applicant based on suspicion of unethical behaviour towards a colleague and superior. On 13 October 2006 he brought a case against her before the Katowice Regional Medical Court (“the Regional Medical Court”) for offences specified by Articles 52 (1), 52 (2), 52 (3) and 1 (3) of the Code of Medical Ethics inter alia for “openly criticising her superior’s diagnostic and therapeutic decisions, in the presence of other colleagues and members of medical and nonmedical staff”.
The  subsequently questioned as witnesses W.R.K., E.Ch. and K.K., a director of the hospital.
On an unspecified later date a copy of the judgment of the  (see paragraphs 8 to 17 above) was included in the case file.
On 14 September 2007 the  found the applicant guilty of unethical conduct, punishable under Article 52, paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of the Code of Medical Ethics as amended in 2003 and under Article 1 paragraph (3) of that Code. The conduct was said to consist of: failure to comply with her superior’s orders (paragraph 1); publicly making disparaging statements about her superior to the medical staff of the ward (paragraph 2); informing other doctors about what she perceived to be erroneous decisions on her superior’s part and taking patients’ medical records out of the hospital to show them to the regional consultant (paragraph 3); and inability to work in a medical team (Article 1 paragraph 3 of the Code).
The court imposed a reprimand (nagana) on the applicant.
The court found that the applicant had been in conflict with W.R.K.; that she had openly and persistently expressed negative opinions about W.R.K.’s qualifications in the presence of other doctors and medical staff and even in the presence of patients and their families, which constituted an offence under Article 52 (2) of the Code of Medical Ethics. The applicant was also found guilty of refusing to comply with her superior’s orders and of amending medical records without informing her superior, an offence punishable under Article 52 (1) of that Code. She was further found to be in breach of Article 52 (3) by having informed other doctors of the allegedly erroneous decisions of her superior and by having taken the medical records out of the ward to show them to the regional consultant.
The applicant’s lawyer filed an appeal against the judgment with the  (Naczelny Sąd Lekarski). He submitted that the court had failed to respect the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure governing the proceedings, by disregarding the applicant’s request for evidence to be admitted from the file of the labour case; disregarding the applicant’s requests that the evidence submitted in her written reply to the charges brought against her be considered and failing to make a formal decision refusing to take this evidence; failing to specify the time and place where the applicant had committed the alleged offences and by putting leading questions to the witnesses.
It was further argued that the first-instance court had entirely failed to take into consideration the findings of fact made by the labour court.
It was further submitted that the applicant should not have been penalised for expressing her views. The court had breached the Code of Medical Ethics, Article 52 (4) of which provided that informing the Medical Chamber of a breach of medical ethics committed by another doctor or about his or her professional incompetence could not be interpreted as a violation of ethical rules. The applicant had informed the Medical Chamber in 2004 about W.R.K.’s conduct which had been, in her view, both unprofessional and unethical. She had also requested the Chamber’s assistance in defusing the professional conflict. However, the Chamber had chosen to penalise her instead.
In addition, the court had erred in law in that it had failed to show that the applicant’s conduct had resulted in W.R.K. losing the confidence of other doctors or patients and their families, this being necessary for the commission of the offence under Article 52 (2).
By a decision of 13 March 2008, served on the applicant’s lawyer on 1 September 2008, the  dismissed the appeal. It dismissed the applicant’s argument that the court had disregarded her request for evidence to be taken. The applicant’s dismissal from work had been unlawful, but, in the court’s opinion and contrary to the labour court’s view, it did not mean that it had not been justified.
As to the firstinstance court’s failure to establish the dates of the acts with which the applicant had been charged, the second-instance court established that they had occurred between 1 July 2002 and 5 November 2004.
The court further noted that the first-instance court had been free and independent in its assessment of the evidence gathered in the proceedings.
It further observed that Article 1 (3) of the Code of Medical Ethics provided that any conduct which undermined confidence in the profession was in breach of the profession’s dignity. Hence, it was of no relevance that the applicant had first requested the Medical Chamber to intervene.
Article 54 § 1 of the Polish Constitution which entered into force on 17 October 1997 guarantees freedom of expression. It states, in so far as relevant:
“Everyone shall be guaranteed freedom to express opinions and to acquire and to disseminate information.”
A right to lodge a constitutional complaint was introduced in Article 79 § 1 which provides as follows:
“In accordance with principles specified by statute, everyone whose constitutional freedoms or rights have been infringed shall have the right to appeal to the Constitutional Court for its judgment on the conformity to the Constitution of a statute or another normative act upon which basis a court or organ of public administration has made a final decision on his freedoms or rights or on his obligations specified in the Constitution.”
Under its settled caselaw, the Constitutional Court has jurisdiction only to examine the compatibility of legal provisions with the Constitution and is not competent to examine the way in which courts interpreted applicable legal provisions in individual cases (e.g. SK 4/99, 19 October 1999; Ts 9/98, 6 April 1998; Ts 56/99, 21 June 1999).
Article 1 § 3 of the Code of Medical Ethics (Kodeks Etyki Lekarskiej) reads:
“Any conduct which undermines trust in the profession amounts to a breach of professional dignity (godność zawodu).”
Article 10 of the Code, set out in Chapter I, entitled “Relations between a physician and his patient” (Postępowanie lekarza wobec pacjenta) reads, in so far as relevant:
“1.  A physician should not exceed the limits of his or her professional competence when carrying out diagnosis, prophylaxis and treatment...”
Article 52 of Chapter III of the Code of Medical Ethics, entitled “Mutual relations between physicians” (Stosunki wzajemne między lekarzami), originally read:
“1.  Physicians must show respect to each other.
A physician should not express an unfavourable opinion on the professional conduct of another physician or discredit him in any other way in the presence of a patient, his or her environment or [in the presence of] assisting staff.
All comments on the observed erroneous conduct of a physician should, in the first place, be passed on to him or her. Informing a medical court of the observed unethical behaviour or professional incompetence of another physician does not undermine the principle of professional solidarity.”
On 20 September 2003 Article 52 § 2 was amended. It reads as follows:
“A physician should display particular caution in formulating opinions on the professional conduct of another doctor and in particular he should not in any way discredit him publicly.”
Pursuant to Article 54 of the Code, in the event of any diagnostic or therapeutic doubts, a doctor should, in so far as possible, seek the opinion of another doctor. Such an opinion shall only be of an advisory nature as it is the treating doctor who remains entirely responsible for the therapy and treatment.
According to section 19 of the Law of 17 May 1989 on Medical Chambers (Ustawa o Izbach Lekarskich), as it stood at the material time, a regional medical chamber included all physicians whose names are entered on its register.  Bodies of a regional medical chamber included, among others, a regional medical court (okręgowy sąd lekarski) and a regional attorney for professional liability (section 20). The  (Naczelny Sąd Lekarski) was a body of the Supreme Medical Chamber (section 31).
Section 41 of the Law, in Chapter 6, entitled “Professional Liability” (Odpowiedzialność zawodowa), provided:
“Members of the medical self-government shall be professionally liable before medical courts for any conduct in breach of the principles of professional ethics and deontology and for any breach of the provisions governing the exercise of the medical profession.”
Section 42 read, in so far as relevant:
“1.  The medical court may impose the following penalties:
1)  ensure (upomnienie),
2)  reprimand (nagana),
3)  suspension from practice (zawieszenie prawa do wykonywania zawodu) for a period from six months to three years,
4)  revocation of the right to practise medicine (pozbawienie prawa wykonywania zawodu).
A physician, on whom the Supreme Medical Court sitting at second instance has imposed any penalty referred to in subsections (3) or (4), has the right to lodge an appeal with the Supreme Court within 14 days from the date on which the [court’s] decision has been served on him or her...”
According to section 46, matters of professional liability of medical practitioners were examined by regional medical courts and the .
According to section 54 the members of the Medical Courts were, in their adjudicating capacity, independent and should follow the law and the Code of Medical Ethics. Section 7 provided that the term of office of all bodies of the medical chambers was four years.
Section 37 of the 1996 Medical Profession Act provides that in the event of any diagnostic or therapeutic doubts, a doctor may, on his or her own initiative or upon a patient’s request and if he or she finds it reasonable in the light of the requirements of medical science, obtain the opinion of a relevant specialist or arrange a consultation with other doctors.
The rights and obligations of employees are governed by the Labour Code. Pursuant to Article 52 paragraph 1 (1) 3 of that Code an employer can give notice on an employment contract with immediate effect in the case of a serious breach by an employee of his or her essential obligations.
On 23 April 2008 the Constitutional Court delivered a judgment (SK16/07) in which it found that Article 52 § 2 of the Code of Medical Ethics was unconstitutional in so far as it prohibited a truthful public assessment of a doctor’s activity by another doctor in the public interest. The relevant provision, examined in its new wording which came into force in 2003, was not quashed by the  as only its particular interpretation was considered to breach the constitutional norm securing the freedom of expression.