The case concerns the suspension of the applicant journalists’ accreditation to Parliament for having conducted interviews and video recordings with members of Parliament outside the designated areas. The applicants complain about a violation of Articles 6, 10, and 13 of the Convention.
The details of the applicants are set out in the appendix. The applicants were represented by Mr T. Hüttl, a lawyer practising in Budapest.
The Government were represented by their Agent at the Ministry of Justice, Mr Z. Tallódi.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
At the material time the applicants were journalists at different online news outlets, including index.hu, 24.hu, nol.hu and hvg.hu.
They received accreditation from the press office of Parliament to report on the plenary session of 25 April 2016. Their registration was confirmed via an email from the press office, which also included a notice of the rules governing the reporting of events within Parliament and a disclaimer stipulating that by entering the Parliament building, the applicants would automatically be deemed to have agreed to respect those rules. The rules were also available on the Parliament website.
On 25 April 2016 the applicants intended to conduct and record interviews with members of parliament (hereinafter “MPs”) from the governing coalition, including the Speaker of Parliament (hereinafter “the Speaker”) and the Prime Minister, on a current political issue, namely alleged illicit payments related to the Hungarian National Bank. The applicants addressed their questions to the MPs without prior notification and in the part of the Parliament building not designated for recording, the Cupola Hall and the Southern lounge. Many of the parliamentarians declined to answer. The applicants were warned by the Prime Minister’s press officer and staff members of the Offices of Parliament that they were not filming in a permitted manner or in the designated areas.
The recordings were subsequently published on the different online news outlets.
On 26 April 2016 the Speaker, pursuant to his powers under section 54(6) of the Parliament Act (see paragraph 12 below), suspended the applicants’ accreditation and informed the editors-in-chief of the relevant media outlets of this decision by letter. The letters stated:
“Despite repeated warnings from the press office [the journalist] continued the recordings and did not leave the Southern lounge and the Cupola Hall. As a result of recording without permission and the open and deliberate breach of the rules, the Speaker suspended the journalist’s right of entry as of 26 April 2016. In order to maintain the accreditation of your media outlet, I request that you respect the parliamentary press regulations.”
On 1 May 2016 the applicants requested that the Speaker grant them access to the session of 6 June 2016, when Parliament was due to discuss the sixth amendment of the Fundamental Law of Hungary (“the Fundamental Law”). The applicants did not receive a reply to their request.
On 12 September 2016 the Speaker withdrew his decision of 26 April 2016 and informed the applicants that they could enter the Parliament building.
The relevant provisions of the Fundamental Law read as follows:
Article T)
“(1) Generally binding rules of conduct may be laid down in the Fundamental Law or in laws, adopted by an organ having legislative competence and specified in the Fundamental Law, which are promulgated in the official gazette. A cardinal Act may lay down different rules for the promulgation of local government decrees and of laws adopted during a special legal order.
(2) Laws shall be Acts, government decrees, prime ministerial decrees, ministerial decrees, decrees of the Governor of the Hungarian National Bank, decrees of the heads of independent regulatory organs and local government decrees. In addition, decrees of the National Defence Council adopted during a state of national crisis and decrees of the President of the Republic adopted during a state of emergency shall also be laws.
...”
Freedom and responsibility
Article I
“...
(3) The rules for fundamental rights and obligations shall be laid down in an Act. A fundamental right may only be restricted to allow the effective use of another fundamental right or to protect a constitutional value, to the extent absolutely necessary, proportionate to the objective pursued and with full respect for the essential content of that fundamental right.
...”
The relevant parts of the Parliament Act no. XXXVI of 2012 (“the Parliament Act”) provided, as in force at the material time, as follows:
Section 54
“(1) Entry to the House of Parliament, the Offices of the National Assembly and the buildings housing the Offices of the National Assembly shall be authorised by the Speaker. The Speaker may delegate this authority to another person.
(2) The Speaker shall determine and publish on the website of the National Assembly the arrangements for entry and access to the buildings specified in subsection (1), detailed rules concerning the relevant tasks of the Parliamentary Guard Service, and rules governing delegation of the authority to authorise entry to another person. The Speaker shall not issue a Speaker’s Order that would exclude the publicity of sessions of the National Assembly or prevent the conditions for free dissemination of information necessary for the formation of democratic public opinion.
(3) Persons entering and accessing the buildings specified in subsection (1) shall, by entering, acknowledge the Speaker’s Order specified in subsection (2) and comply with it.
...
(6) If persons entering and accessing the buildings specified in subsection (1) fail to comply with their obligations under subsection (3), entry may be denied or they may be escorted out of the buildings. Based on the Speaker’s decision, the entry of such persons to the buildings specified in subsection (1) may be denied.
...
(8) The Speaker may, in the interests of performing his or her duties specified in section 2(2)(a) to (d) or – at the request of the Parliamentary Guard – for reasons of national security, decide on an ad hoc basis to derogate from the provisions governing the arrangements for entry specified in subsection (2).”
The relevant parts of Speaker’s Order No. 9/2013 on entry and access to the House of Parliament, the Offices of Parliament and the buildings housing the Offices of Parliament, and on detailed rules of the tasks of the Parliamentary Guard Service (hereinafter “the Speaker’s Order”) read, as in force at the material time, as follows:
Section 1
The scope of the Speaker’s Order
“The material scope of this Order covers certain rules governing entry, exit, access, movement and conduct in the House of Parliament (Kossuth Square underground garage), the Offices of the National Assembly and the buildings housing the Offices of the National Assembly ... as well as the entry control system. The personal scope covers persons who may enter the House of Parliament (Kossuth Square underground garage), the Offices [of the National Assembly] or the building on Balassi Street in possession of one of the documents specified in section 3 or who may enter under section 5 without a certificate or entry card.”
Section 3
Entry documents
“...
(7) Press pass
a) Permanent press pass
A card granted to special correspondents specified by the press office, regularly reporting on parliamentary events...
b) Daily press pass
A card allowing journalists accredited in Hungary or in a foreign country to enter the building following prior registration with the press office,
...”
Section 4
Requesting and issuing certificates and press passes allowing entry
“...
(7) The press pass specified in section 3(7)(a) may be issued to staff members of news agencies and editorial offices registered (accredited) by the press office. Passes shall be granted by the press office at the Administration Bureau.
(8) Requests for the daily press pass specified in section 3(7)(b) shall be decided by the press officer or a staff member of the press office assigned by [him or her]; requests (entitlements) shall be recorded in an electronic system by a person assigned this task by the press officer.
...”
Section 7
Accessing the Chamber Hall, the corridor surrounding the Chamber Hall, the balcony boxes and gallery, committee meetings, as well as parliamentary publicity
“...
(3) (a) Public service media reporters shall have access to box II of the first floor gallery of the Chamber Hall, whereas persons in possession of a press pass specified in section 3(7) shall have access to box X of the first floor gallery of the Chamber Hall.
...
(4) The Chamber Guard Service is entitled to check the right of access of persons in the boxes and gallery and shall ask persons without such permission to leave the premises. In the event of refusal to leave, the Chamber Guard Service shall notify the Parliamentary Guard Service.
...
(11) During plenary sessions in the corridor surrounding the Chamber Hall, only persons in possession of a certificate or press pass specified in section 3(1)-(7) and (9)-(10) shall have access, or those whose access is justified by the agenda of the session and who have been granted permission by the Speaker or the senior official of the office in charge of preparing the meeting.
(12) Where a closed session is held by the National Assembly, only participants and parliamentary officials attending the session shall have access to the boxes, gallery and corridor surrounding the Chamber Hall. All other persons shall leave the Chamber Hall, surrounding corridor and gallery.
(13) Where secret voting is held, only Members of Parliament and parliamentary officials in attendance shall have access to the Danube-side corridor of the Chamber Hall. The right of access shall be checked by the Chamber Guard Service.
...”
Section 8
Parliamentary reporting
“(1) Parliamentary reporting on National Assembly plenary sessions, related events and committee meetings.
(a) While reporting on plenary sessions:
- filming shall be prohibited in the Chamber Hall and the corridor surrounding the Chamber Hall, unless by an Office staff member assigned to this task;
- during sessions broadcasters may record or broadcast in the Northern lounge;
- recordings of the sessions via the Parliament television system shall be made available to the press in the press room.
(b) In public committee meetings, members of the press may make recordings in an area designated to them for this purpose.
(c) During National Assembly public events, members of the press shall be assisted by the press office.
(d) Recordings about the daily work of Parliament may be made in the following areas of the House of Parliament and Offices:
- the Northern lounge of Parliament;
- the press room;
- the corridor section in front of the press room from the swing doors of the Cupola Hall to the swing doors after lift no. VI of Parliament;
- the premises specified in point (b) and the corridor sections in front of the committee rooms;
- the premises as specified in an instruction by the press officer on a case-by-case basis;
- premises announced by the press office as the venue of an event.
...”
Section 12
Miscellaneous provisions
“(1) It is prohibited to disturb in any manner the order of the National Assembly, the House of Parliament and the Offices. The following activities in the National Assembly and the Offices shall be prohibited:
...
(f) behaving noisily, holding demonstrations or carrying out other activities disrupting the work of the National Assembly;
(h) taking photographs in the Cupola Hall of Parliament;
...
(4) Persons disturbing the order of the National Assembly, the House of Parliament and the Offices shall, unless otherwise provided by law, and with the exception of members of parliament and representatives in Hungary of the European Parliament, be escorted out of the House of Parliament and the Offices by the Parliamentary Guard Service, under section 54(6) and section 135(1) of the National Assembly Act.
...
(12) In the event of non-compliance with the rules of this provision, the Director General shall be entitled to restrict the right of official bodies and external organisations to request entry and the Speaker shall be entitled to restrict entry and the right of entry of such bodies and organisations.
...”
Speaker’s Order No. 5/2017 amended Speaker’s Order No. 9/2013, modifying the rules for suspending the accreditation of journalists. The amendment introduced, inter alia, a time-limit for suspension of accreditation, elements relevant to the assessment of a sanction and the possibility for sanctioned journalists to seek redress in respect of the Speaker’s decision. It entered into force on 30 July 2017. The relevant parts of the new provisions read as follows:
“...
12(a) If a person in possession of a press pass specified in section 3(7) (hereinafter “member of the press”) violates the provisions of sections 7 or 8, the press officer may, for a maximum of six months or until the close of the given parliamentary session, suspend the right of entry of the member of the press; where section 8(1) is repeatedly or knowingly violated by a member of the press, the press chief shall, for a maximum of six months or until the close of the given parliamentary session, suspend the right of entry of the member of the press. Where a violation of the provisions of sections 7 or 8 also entails a simultaneous violation of section 12(1), the press officer may at most suspend the right of entry of the member of the press until the end of the given parliamentary session.
12(b) In deciding whether to suspend entry under section 12(a), the underlying report, recording or conduct, the nature of the breach of the rules (whether it was knowingly or repeatedly committed), and the seriousness of the breach shall be taken into consideration. The press officer shall immediately, electronically, notify the member of the press and the editorial office having delegated [him or her] of the suspension.
12(c) The member of the press may, within fifteen days of receiving notification, file an appeal against the suspension made under section 12(a) addressed to the Speaker. Such an appeal shall be filed electronically with the press officer, who shall immediately forward it to the Speaker, together with all the documents of the case.
12(d) The Speaker shall decide the appeal within fifteen days, taking into consideration the aspects that were assessed when the suspension decision was taken, based on the report or recording and the appeal. The Speaker may terminate or uphold the decision or modify the duration of the suspension within the limits specified in section 12(a). The Speaker shall immediately, electronically, notify the member of the press and the editorial office having delegated the member of the press.”