The case concerns the wholesale blocking of three online media outlets on the grounds that some of their webpages featured allegedly unlawful content.
The applicants were represented by Mr D. Gaynutdinov and Ms S. Kuzevanova, lawyers practising in Moscow and Voronezh, respectively.
The Government were represented initially by Mr A. Fedorov, head of the office of the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative.
The facts of the cases, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants are owners of online media outlets. The first applicant, OOO Flavus, owns grani.ru, a news and opinion website that has existed since 2000 and has been registered as an electronic periodical since 2003. The second applicant, Mr Kasparov, is the founder of www.kasparov.ru, an independent web publication on social and political subjects and also a platform for independent bloggers. The third applicant, OOO Mediafokus, owns the online Daily Newspaper (“Ezhednevnyy Zhurnal”) at ej.ru, which since 2004 has been publishing research and analysis by political scientists, economists and journalists, many of whom have been critical of the Russian Government.
In December 2013, the Information Act was amended to empower the Prosecutor General to identify websites containing calls for mass disorder, extremist activities, or participation in unauthorised mass gatherings (see section 15.3 in paragraph 12 below). A court order was not required; the Prosecutor General could submit a blocking request directly to the telecoms regulator, Roskomnadzor, which in turn would notify the website’s web hosting service provider. The provider would then immediately block access to the webpage and notify its owner within twenty-four hours.
On 13 March 2014 the Prosecutor General sent Roskomnadzor a request to block the applicants’ online media websites. The request was worded as follows:
“An examination of the information published on the pages of the said websites revealed a uniform thematic trend towards the coverage of public events of an unlawful nature in Russian territory.
In particular, the Ezhednevniy Zhurnal website (www.ej.ru) includes a subsection on the ‘Bolotnaya case’ which posts and accumulates articles and publications about the protests held in the Russian territory in support of defendants in the criminal proceedings relating to the mass disorder in the Bolotnaya Square in Moscow [on 6] May 2012. It follows from the contents of the publications ... that illegal protests ... are an acceptable and necessary form of expression of one’s civic position and [such publications] are essentially a call for participation in such events.
Furthermore, an article entitled ‘Participants in a gathering in support of the Bolotnaya victims arrested [in the centre of Moscow]’ was found on the www.grani.ru website. The article describes the arrest of participants of an unauthorised public event ‘Strategy 6’, which involves public performances by a group of individuals on the sixth day of every month in support of the defendants in the criminal case concerning mass disorder in Moscow on 6 May 2012. Unlawful actions by the event participants are represented as being acceptable, with a view to attracting attention to the criminal case and calling for participation in similar actions.
The www.kasparov.ru website features an article entitled ‘Property of the [Ukrainian] State to be nationalised in the Crimea’, which shows a pamphlet with an image of an armed man, the title ‘Red Guerrilla Fighters’ and the text ‘Wake up, Crimea! The occupiers and their minions are brazenly stealing your money and disfiguring your towns. Do not stay silent! Do not surrender!’ Those calls are addressed to Crimean residents and incite them to commit unlawful actions.”
On 14 March 2014 Roskomnadzor blocked access to the applicants’ websites and requested the web hosting service providers to take down the offending material on the grounds that it contained “calls for extremist activities”. The notices listed the domain name of the targeted website in the field for the page URL. A copy of the Prosecutor General’s blocking request had not been enclosed.
The applicants applied for a judicial review of the blocking measure. They submitted that the indiscriminate blocking of access to the entire websites, without giving notice of the specific offending material, was in breach of the established procedure in so far as it prevented the applicants from restoring access to their websites by removing the offending material. The indiscriminate blocking measure had substantially restricted their right to impart information which had not been declared unlawful.
On 6 May and 29 August 2014 the Taganskiy District Court, and on 6 August 2014 the Khamovnicheskiy District Court in Moscow, rejected the applicants’ complaints. The courts held that a competent official of the Prosecutor General’s office had carried out an assessment of the websites and determined that they were unlawful. Roskomnadzor had lawfully implemented the Prosecutor General’s blocking request and the regulator’s notice had given adequate information about the offending webpages. The courts concluded that the blocking measure had had no incidence on the applicants’ rights or freedoms.
On 2 September and 28 October 2014 and 25 April 2015 the Moscow City Court dismissed appeals lodged by the applicants in a summary fashion, finding that the District Courts’ judgments were essentially correct.
Mr Kasparov’s website replaced a picture it presumed to be the offending one with a neutral image and repeated its request to Roskomnadzor to restore access to the website. It received no response.
Section 15.3 of the Information Act (Law no. 149-FZ of 27 July 2006) establishes the procedure for blocking access to content disseminated in breach of the law (for a translation of section 15.3, see Kablis v. Russia, nos. 48310/16 and 59663/17, § 36, 30 April 2019). Subsection (1) defines such illegal content as including calls for mass disorder, extremist activities, and taking part in unauthorised mass gatherings. Upon detecting such illegal content or receiving reports from State authorities or individuals, the Prosecutor General or his deputies request the telecoms regulator, Roskomnadzor, to restrict access to web resources disseminating the illegal content. Roskomnadzor requires Internet service providers (ISPs) to block access to the website and web hosting service providers to take down illegal content. Roskomnadzor’s notification must specify the website’s domain name, network address and the URL of the webpages permitting illegal content to be identified (subsection (2)). Within twenty-four hours of receiving the notification, the web hosting service provider must request the website owner to remove the illegal content (subsection (4)). After the website owner has notified Roskomnadzor that the content has been removed, Roskomnadzor verifies that the material has been removed and informs ISPs that access to the website may be restored (subsection (6)).
The Declaration on freedom of communication on the Internet, adopted by the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers on 28 May 2003, took note of the Member States’ commitment to abide by the following principles in the field of communication on the Internet:
Principle 3: Absence of prior state control
“Public authorities should not, through general blocking or filtering measures, deny access by the public to information and other communication on the Internet, regardless of frontiers. This does not prevent the installation of filters for the protection of minors, in particular in places accessible to them, such as schools or libraries.
Provided that the safeguards of Article 10, paragraph 2, of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms are respected, measures may be taken to enforce the removal of clearly identifiable Internet content or, alternatively, the blockage of access to it, if the competent national authorities have taken a provisional or final decision on its illegality.”
The 2011  (A/HRC/17/27) expressed concerns about the excessive scope of blocking measures:
“29.  Blocking refers to measures taken to prevent certain content from reaching an end user. This includes preventing users from accessing specific websites, Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, domain name extensions, the taking down of websites from the web server where they are hosted, or using filtering technologies to exclude pages containing keywords or other specific content from appearing ...
States’ use of blocking or filtering technologies is frequently in violation of their obligation to guarantee the right to freedom of expression ... Firstly, the specific conditions that justify blocking are not established in law, or are provided by law but in an overly broad and vague manner, which risks content being blocked arbitrarily and excessively. Secondly, blocking is not justified to pursue aims which are listed under article 19, paragraph 3, of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and blocking lists are generally kept secret, which makes it difficult to assess whether access to content is being restricted for a legitimate purpose. Thirdly, even where justification is provided, blocking measures constitute an unnecessary or disproportionate means to achieve the purported aim, as they are often not sufficiently targeted and render a wide range of content inaccessible beyond that which has been deemed illegal. Lastly, content is frequently blocked without the intervention of or possibility for review by a judicial or independent body ...”
The , adopted on 1 June 2011 by the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Representative on Freedom of the Media, the Organization of American States Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression, and the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information, provides in particular:
General Principles
“a. Freedom of expression applies to the Internet, as it does to all means of communication. Restrictions on freedom of expression on the Internet are only acceptable if they comply with established international standards, including that they are provided for by law, and that they are necessary to protect an interest which is recognised under international law (the ‘three-part’ test) ...”
Filtering and Blocking
“a. Mandatory blocking of entire websites, IP addresses, ports, network protocols or types of uses (such as social networking) is an extreme measure – analogous to banning a newspaper or broadcaster – which can only be justified in accordance with international standards, for example where necessary to protect children against sexual abuse.”
In  (CCPR/C/GC/34), adopted at its 102nd session (11-29 July 2011), the United Nations Human Rights Committee stated as follows:
“42.  The penalization of a media outlet, publishers or journalist solely for being critical of the government or the political social system espoused by the government can never be considered to be a necessary restriction of freedom of expression.
Any restrictions on the operation of websites, blogs or any other Internet-based, electronic or other such information-dissemination system, including systems to support such communication, such as Internet service providers or search engines, are only permissible to the extent that they are compatible with paragraph 3 [of Article 19]. Permissible restrictions generally should be content-specific; generic bans on the operation of certain sites and systems are not compatible with paragraph 3. It is also inconsistent with paragraph 3 to prohibit a site or an information dissemination system from publishing material solely on the basis that it may be critical of the government or the political social system espoused by the government.”
Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)5 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on Internet freedom, adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 13 April 2016, recommended that member States be guided by, and promote, specific Internet freedom indicators when participating in international dialogue and international policy making on Internet freedom. When adopting this recommendation, the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation indicated that, in accordance with Article 10.2c of the Rules of Procedure for the meetings of the Ministers’ Deputies, he reserved the right of his Government to comply or not with the recommendation, in so far as it referred to the methodology for its implementation at national level. Section 2.2 of the Internet freedom indicators, “Freedom of opinion and the right to receive and impart information”, reads:
“2.2.1.  Any measure taken by State authorities or private-sector actors to block or otherwise restrict access to an entire Internet platform (social media, social networks, blogs or any other website) or information and communication technologies (ICT) tools (instant messaging or other applications), or any request by State authorities to carry out such actions complies with the conditions of Article 10 of the Convention regarding the legality, legitimacy and proportionality of restrictions.
2.2.  Any measure taken by State authorities or private-sector actors to block, filter or remove Internet content, or any request by State authorities to carry out such actions complies with the conditions of Article 10 of the Convention regarding the legality, legitimacy and proportionality of restrictions.
2.3.  Internet service providers as a general rule treat Internet traffic equally and without discrimination on the basis of sender, receiver, content, application, service or device. Internet traffic management measures are transparent, necessary and proportionate to achieve overriding public interests in compliance with Article 10 of the ECHR.
2.4.  Internet users or other interested parties have access to a court in compliance with Article 6 of the Convention with regard to any action taken to restrict their access to the Internet or their ability to receive and impart content or information.
2.5.  The State provides information in a timely and appropriate manner to the public about restrictions it applies to the freedom to receive and impart information, such as indicating websites that have been blocked or from which information was removed, including details of the legal basis, necessity and justification for such restrictions, the court order authorising them and the right to appeal.”