The present case concerns deprivation of the applicant of her parental authority over her three children.
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in Moscow. She was represented by Mr M. Golichenko, a lawyer practising in Balashikha.
The Government were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Government before the European Court of Human Rights, and then by Mr M. Galperin, his successor in that office.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is the biological mother of I., born in 1999, A., born in 2011, and Al., born in 2012. At the material time, she was living with her three children and her mother, Ms P., in a two-room flat. She appears to have been taking opiate drugs from 2004 onwards, and suffered from an opiate addiction.
At 5.45 a.m. on 8 October 2013 the police arrested the applicant and Mr K., her partner and the biological father of A. and Al., at her home address, on suspicion of being involved in drug trafficking. The applicant’s three children were at home at the time. The police took the applicant to a police station, where she remained for at least four hours. She was then released, having given an undertaking not to leave a specified location. During that period the applicant’s children had been at home on their own, as the applicant’s mother had been visiting her relatives in another region.
On 8 October 2013 a police officer interviewed the applicant. She stated, in particular, that she had started taking drugs in 2004. Initially, she had taken two types of psychotropic medicine, which she had mixed together for injections. She had stopped taking drugs in 2010 before giving birth to her two youngest children. She had then relapsed and, for about the past month, had been taking heroin. She also stated that she had regularly let her acquaintances take drugs in her kitchen.
At 10 a.m. on the same date, when the applicant was at home, a police officer for juvenile affairs (инспектор по делам несовершеннолетних) arrived. He drew up a report stating that the applicant had committed an administrative offence as she had failed duly to fulfil her parental obligations in respect of her three minor children and had been taking drugs. He also drew up three more reports stating that the children had been left unattended. Later that day, I. was taken to a children’s home, and A. and Al. were taken to a children’s hospital.
On the same date the applicant underwent a medical examination, which confirmed that she was in a state of intoxication caused by morphine and codeine.
On the same date the police for juvenile affairs sent the abovementioned reports to the Khovrino district authority (Администрация муниципального округа Ховрино) with a request that proceedings to deprive the applicant of her parental authority in respect of I., A. and Al. be initiated.
On 18 October 2013 I. was taken to stay with Mr Is., his father.
By decisions of 23 October 2013 the Khovrino district authority ordered that A. and Al. be placed in public care, as children left without parental care. On 25 October 2013 A. and Al. were placed in a children’s home.
On 17 January 2014, as upheld on appeal on 14 April 2014, the domestic courts deprived the applicant of her parental authority in respect of her three children (see paragraphs 34-48 below).
On 28 April 2014 the Golovinskiy District Court of Moscow found the applicant guilty of drug trafficking and sentenced her to six years’ imprisonment. She was arrested in the court room after the judgment had been pronounced.
According to the Government, on 10 June 2014 A. and Al. were transferred to a foster family, where they have remained since that date.
In the applicant’s submission, prior to her conviction, she had regularly visited A. and Al. in the children’s home at least once a week.
According to the reports drawn up by staff at the children’s hospital and children’s home, A. and Al. missed their mother. In particular, Al. would wake up during the night, weeping and calling for her “mum”. A. would often ask where his mother was and when she would take him home.
It is unclear whether the applicant ever saw her eldest son I. following his removal.
On 11 October and 18 November 2013 the Khovrino district authorities inspected the living conditions at the applicant’s home address.
The report of 11 October 2013 stated that the flat had the necessary furniture and domestic appliances. It had two rooms: one measuring 10.4 sq. m, which was occupied by Ms P., the applicant’s mother, who had been visiting relatives in another region of Russia at that point in time, and another measuring 18.7 sq. m, which was shared by the applicant and her three children. Each of the children had a separate sleeping place. The room was stuffy, as it was not properly ventilated. It was equipped with chests of drawers, a dining table with a desktop computer on it, an office chair and a linen chest. There were empty plastic bottles, ashtrays with cigarette butts and a washing up bowl on the floor. Sufficient food supplies were found in the kitchen and in the refrigerator. The report mentioned that the applicant had been present during the inspection. She had remained lying on a sofa, crying and smoking, and blamed herself for the recent events, including the removal of her children. According to the report, the applicant stated that she had taken drugs between 2003 and 2011, and then from September until 8 October 2013; in the latter period she had taken heroin, which she had received from Mr K. (see paragraph 5 above). The applicant also stated that she had intended to contact the Khovrino district authorities to find out where her children had been taken, but had been unable to do so, as she had had to stay in bed because of withdrawal symptoms. She realised that she had a drug addiction and was ready to undergo medical treatment.
The report of 18 November 2013 stated that the flat had the necessary furniture and domestic appliances, and was tidy, cosy and well ventilated. Repair work had been carried out in the kitchen in the past month, and the furniture in the applicant’s room had been rearranged. The inspection was carried out in the presence of Ms P., who stated that the applicant had been admitted to hospital on 31 October 2013 and was currently undergoing inpatient medical treatment in connection with her addiction. Ms P. said that the applicant loved her children and cared about them. She also mentioned that she herself was currently taking the necessary administrative steps to gain custody of her grandchildren.
On 29 October 2013 the applicant sought assistance in connection with her drug addiction in a drug rehabilitation outpatient clinic (наркологический диспансер).
An extract from the applicant’s medical history file reveals that on 30 October 2013 she was admitted to a specialist clinic, where she was diagnosed with stage-two opiate addiction and withdrawal symptoms. She received treatment for her addiction until 21 November 2013, when she was discharged from the clinic. The file also states that she applied to the clinic for treatment on her own initiative, and that she had a positive attitude towards the treatment and intended to abstain from taking drugs and to lead a healthy life.
According to a certificate dated 5 December 2013, from December 2013 onwards, following a diagnosis of stage-two opiate addiction, the applicant was registered as an outpatient with a drug rehabilitation clinic for monitoring.
In the context of that monitoring, the applicant visited the drug rehabilitation clinic on 28 November 2013 and 9 January, 13 and 14 March and 10 April 2014.
According to the Government, the applicant received in-patient treatment for her addiction in a specialist clinic between 17 and 31 January 2014; she was discharged on the latter date as she had refused treatment. She was then readmitted to the clinic from 7 to 21 February 2014. In the applicant’s submission, she had left the specialist clinic on 31 January 2014 as she had had health issues which could not be addressed there. As soon as she had received treatment for those issues, she had returned to the drug rehabilitation clinic.
On 1 November 2013 the Khovrino district authority brought an action against the applicant, seeking the withdrawal of her parental authority in respect of her three children. In particular, they pointed out that since October 2013 the applicant had been monitored by the district commission for children’s affairs and the protection of minors’ rights as a mother who had been neglecting her parental duties by not providing her children with adequate care and financial support, and who had been taking drugs for a prolonged period of time. The authority also pointed out that the applicant was unemployed and that criminal proceedings against her were currently ongoing in relation to her suspected involvement in drug trafficking. The authority therefore insisted that leaving her children with her would put their lives and health at risk.
A transcript of two court hearings that took place on 5 and 24 December 2013 respectively reveals that the applicant and her representative attended those hearings and made oral submissions. The applicant stated, in particular, that she loved her children and was willing to take care of them. She also stated that she had never taken drugs in front of her children; she would go to the bathroom or toilet for that purpose. She also said that she was willing to undergo rehabilitation treatment for her addiction.
The applicant’s mother, Ms P., who participated in the proceedings as a third party, objected to the withdrawal of her daughter’s parental authority. She stated that the applicant loved her children and had taken care of them to the extent that the state of her health had allowed. She also stated that she knew that, previously, her daughter had taken psychotropic drugs, but had stopped taking them during her pregnancy. Ms P. further stated that, although she shared the flat with her daughter, she had not noticed that the latter had relapsed; nor did she know that she had started taking heroin.
A representative of the children’s home in which A. and Al. had been placed stated, in particular, that the children’s grandmother had started visiting them as soon as they had been placed in that institution, whereas their mother had come for the first time on 6 December 2013, as prior to that date she had been following inpatient treatment for her addiction. Both the children’s mother and grandmother had regularly visited the children and had brought them presents; the children were particularly attached to their grandmother.
A police officer for juvenile affairs, Ms I.P., stated that the children’s mother had been taking drugs since 2004. According to Ms I.P., in 2010 she had stopped taking drugs because of her pregnancy, but had relapsed after the birth and had started taking heroin on a regular basis. The officer further stated that the children’s mother had tried to stop taking drugs, but had been unable to stop for longer than a fortnight. In the context of the criminal proceedings relating to drug trafficking, a search of her flat had been carried out and packets of heroin had been found. She would allow her acquaintances to take drugs in her kitchen, in her children’s presence. According to Ms I.P., the elder son, I., had been monitored by the police; two criminal cases against him had been discontinued owing to his young age.
The court also heard I., the applicant’s elder son, who stated, in particular, that until the events of 8 October 2013, he had been living with his mother, her partner, his brother and sister and his grandmother. Their life had been “normal”, there had been no “inadequacy” in his mother’s behaviour; she had been taking care of the children. I. also stated that he liked living with his father and that he had good relations with his father’s new family. In fact, I. would like to live with both of his parents, he could not make a choice. He stressed that he did not want his mother to be deprived of her parental authority.
I.’s father, Mr Is., and his wife stated that they would like I. to live with their family.
A transcript of the court hearing of 17 January 2014 reveals that the applicant’s representative informed the court that as the applicant had been admitted to a specialist clinic for treatment for her drug addiction, she was unable to attend the hearing. She had applied to the first-instance court for an adjournment of the hearing, but her application had been rejected.
By a default judgment of 17 January 2014 the Golovinskiy District Court of Moscow (“the District Court”) examined and allowed the action against the applicant. It referred to Article 69 of the Russian Family Code (see paragraph 52 below).
The District Court examined the report on the applicant’s arrest on 8 October 2013 (see paragraphs 5-6 above), an administrative offence report of the same date (see paragraph 7 above), and a report on her medical examination on that date (see paragraph 8 above). The court also cited the report of 11 October 2013 on the inspection of the applicant’s living conditions (see paragraph 19 above), the certificate of 5 December 2013 (see paragraph 23 above), and the administrative decisions of 23 October 2013 to place A. and Al. in public care (see paragraph 11 above).
The court also relied on a letter from a teacher at I.’s school. The letter stated that I. had been going to that school since 1 September 2008, and that during the period when he had been going to that school he had demonstrated a lack of ability and motivation, and had missed classes for no valid reason. The letter also stated that although I.’s mother took care of I. and enquired about his behaviour and progress, she had not had any influence on him.
The court admitted Ms I.P.’s statements (see paragraph 30 above) as evidence, stating that they were consistent, coherent and corroborated by the written material in the case.
The court examined a report on the inspection of the living conditions in Mr Is.’s flat, which confirmed that they were good, and another letter from a teacher at I.’s school, which stated that since 18 October 2013 (the date on which I. had started living with his father) his behaviour had improved, he had stopped missing classes, and he had made progress in his studies.
With reference to the above-mentioned pieces of evidence and witness statements, the court noted that the applicant had been taking drugs for a prolonged period of time, was unemployed, and had failed to provide her children with adequate care or financial support. It concluded that leaving the children in her care would put their health and lives at risk, and that she should therefore be deprived of her parental authority in respect of I., A. and Al.
The court considered that the arguments put forward by the applicant’s representative and her mother that the applicant was currently undergoing medical treatment for her addiction and had positive references from her neighbours were irrelevant in the circumstances of the case, and should thus not be taken into account.
The court thus deprived the applicant of her parental authority in respect of her three children, and ordered that I. be placed in the care of Mr Is., his father, that A. and Al. be placed in public care, and that the applicant pay maintenance on a monthly basis to support her children financially.
The applicant disagreed with the first-instance judgment and lodged an appeal before the Moscow City Court. She complained that the District Court had taken an overly formalistic approach and had not assessed the particular circumstances of her case, but had merely applied Article 69 of the Russian Family Code (see paragraph 52 below). It had thus withdrawn her parental authority on the sole grounds that she was a drug addict. In the applicant’s view, that fact alone did not prove that she posed any danger to her children, and therefore was insufficient for the purposes of depriving her of her parental authority. The first-instance court had ignored the fact that she was undergoing rehabilitation, even though that fact was directly relevant to her case. Lastly, she complained that she had not been given an opportunity to participate in the proceedings before the District Court, as it had rejected her application to adjourn the hearing.
A transcript of 14 April 2014 reveals that the applicant and her representative attended the hearing before the appellate court and submitted their arguments. They requested that the appellate court include in the case file a number of pieces of evidence proving that the applicant had changed her attitude, had found a job and had a sufficient income, and had followed rehabilitation treatment. They also requested the appellate court to call and examine the doctor who had treated the applicant at the specialist clinic where she had undergone inpatient treatment for her addiction. The appellate court dismissed that request, stating that the evidence in question had been received after the first-instance court had rendered its judgment, and that the applicant could have sought, but had not, the examination of the witness in question before the first-instance court.
By a decision of 14 April 2014 the Moscow City Court upheld the judgment of 17 January 2014 on appeal. It considered that the first-instance judgment was well reasoned and based on an adequate assessment of all the relevant circumstances.
The appellate court disagreed with the applicant’s argument that her addiction to drugs had been the sole ground for depriving her of her parental authority. Her children had been taken away because she had neglected her parental duties in respect of A. and Al. and, for a prolonged period of time, had remained unemployed and had taken drugs. The appellate court referred to the applicant’s words in the report of 11 October 2013 to the effect that, because of her withdrawal symptoms, she had been unable to discover her children’s whereabouts (see paragraph 19 above), and to her interview of 8 October 2013 (see paragraph 6 above) which revealed that she had regularly let other people take drugs in her flat. It also referred to “other pieces of evidence which showed that [she] had taken and had dealt in drugs at her flat”, without indicating what those pieces of evidence were.
In the appellate court’s view, the foregoing considerations had been sufficient to enable the first-instance court to reach a well-founded conclusion that leaving the children in the applicant’s care would put their lives and health at risk.
The Moscow City Court further held that the fact that the applicant had undergone rehabilitation treatment could not, on its own, be the basis for rejecting the authorities’ action, as the first-instance court’s judgment had been based on an assessment of the available evidence and circumstances at the time the case was decided. Moreover, the applicant would have the opportunity to seek reinstatement of her parental authority once the reasons underlying the decision to deprive her of it were no longer valid.
Lastly, in so far as the applicant complained about the first-instance court’s refusal to adjourn the hearing to ensure her personal participation in the proceedings, the Moscow City Court noted that that did not constitute grounds for quashing the judgment, as the applicant had been represented before the first-instance court, and her representative had set out her position.
The applicant then lodged a cassation appeal before the Presidium of the Moscow City Court. The latter received the appeal on 10 October 2014. She argued that the lower courts had applied Article 69 of the Russian Family Code in a formalistic manner, and had based their decisions solely on the fact that she had been a drug addict, whilst failing to take into consideration the fact that she had been undergoing rehabilitation treatment. Moreover, the first-instance and appellate courts had disregarded her children’s right to live and be raised in their family, as guaranteed by Article 54 of the Russian Family Code (see paragraph 51 below). In particular, they had failed to demonstrate convincingly that the children’s forced separation from their mother and their placement in the care of the State had been in their best interests. The applicant further argued that the courts had failed to set out any facts showing that she had neglected her parental duties at any point, and that the courts’ conclusion to that end had been groundless. According to the applicant, the case material showed that, although she suffered from an opiate addiction, she was making efforts to overcome it; moreover, she had never lost interest in her children’s lives, their development and upbringing. She also argued that the impugned decisions had breached her right to respect for her private and family life, as guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention.
By a decision of 29 October 2014 the Presidium of the Moscow City Court upheld the judgment of 17 January 2014 and the decision of 14 April 2014, endorsing the reasoning of the lower courts.
Article 54 of the Russian Family Code (“the Code”) provides that every child, that is a person under the age of eighteen, has the right to live and be brought up in a family, in so far as this is possible. He or she has the right to know his or her parents, to be cared for, and to live with his or her parents, except where this is contrary to his or her interests. A child also has the right to be brought up by his or her parents, to the protection of his or her interests, to full development, and to respect for his or her human dignity.
Article 69 of the Code establishes that a parent may be deprived of parental authority if he or she avoids parental duties, such as the obligation to pay child maintenance; refuses to collect his or her child from a maternity hospital, or any other medical, educational, social or similar institution; abuses his or her parental authority; mistreats his or her child by resorting to physical or psychological violence or sexual abuse; suffers from chronic alcohol or drug abuse; or has committed a premeditated criminal offence against the life or health of his or her children or spouse.
By virtue of Article 71 of the Code, parents who have been deprived of their parental authority lose all rights based on their kinship with the child in respect of whom their parental authority has been withdrawn, as well as the right to receive child welfare benefits and allowances paid by the State.
Article 73 provides that a court may decide, in the interests of the child, to remove him or her from his or her parents (or one of them) without depriving them of their parental authority (restriction of parental authority). Parental authority is restricted when leaving the child with his or her parents (or one of them) is deemed dangerous for the child due to circumstances beyond the control of the parents (or one of them), such as mental illness or other chronic disease, or a combination of difficult circumstances. It is also possible to restrict parental authority in cases where leaving a child with his or her parents (or one of them) would be dangerous for the child on account of their behaviour, but sufficient grounds for depriving the parents (or one of them) of their parental authority have not been established. If the parents (or one of them) do not change their behaviour, the custody and guardianship authority is under an obligation to apply for the parents to be deprived of their parental authority within six months of the court decision restricting parental authority. Acting in the interests of the child, the authority may lodge the application before that deadline.
In its ruling no. 10 on courts’ application of legislation when resolving disputes concerning the upbringing of children, dated 27 May 1998, as amended on 6 February 2007, the Plenary of the Supreme Court of Russia stated, in particular:
“...
Only in the event of their guilty conduct may parents be deprived of their parental authority by a court on the grounds established in Article 69 of the [Russian Family Code].
Avoidance by parents of their parental duties in relation to their children’s upbringing may manifest itself in [such parents’] failure to take care of [the children’s] moral and physical development, education, [and] preparation for socially useful activities.
...
Chronic alcohol or drug abuse should be confirmed by a relevant medical report ...
... Persons who do not fulfil their parental obligations as a result of a combination of adverse circumstances or on other grounds beyond their control (for instance, [where the person has] a psychiatric or other chronic disease ...) cannot be deprived of their parental authority.
...
Courts should keep in mind that deprivation of parental authority is a measure of last resort. Exceptionally, where a parent’s guilty conduct has been proved, a court, with due regard to [that parent’s] conduct, personality and other specific circumstances, may reject an action for [him or her] to be deprived of his or her parental authority and urge [him or her] to alter [his or her] attitude towards bringing up [his or her] children, entrusting [a competent] custody and guardianship agency with monitoring whether [that parent] duly performs [his or her] parental duties.”