The case originated in an application (no. 38249/09) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Ms Betül Tanbay Tüten (“the applicant”), on 3 July 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms A. Becerik, lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the refusal by the domestic courts to allow her to bear only her maiden name unjustifiably interfered with her right to protection of her private life under Article 8 in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention.
On 22 October 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in .
On 30 October 1992 the applicant, who is a university professor, got married and took her husband’s surname pursuant to Article 153 of the Turkish Civil Code. As she was known by her maiden name in her academic and professional life, she continued using it. However, she could not use it in official documents.
Following the amendment made to Article 153 of the Civil Code on 14 May 1997 that entitled married women the right to put their maiden name in front of their husband’s surname, the applicant started to avail herself of this possibility in official documents.
Following the adoption of new Civil Code on 22 November 2001, Article 187 was worded identically to the former Article 153.
On 5 December 2007 the applicant brought proceedings before the Beyoğlu Court of First Instance for permission to use only her maiden name, “Tanbay”.
On 31 January 2008 the Beyoğlu Court of First Instance dismissed the applicant’s request on the ground that, under Article 187 of the Turkish Civil Code, married women had to bear their husband’s name throughout their marriage and were not entitled to use their maiden name alone.
The applicant appealed. On 14 July 2008 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment.
On 4 December 2008 the applicant’s rectification request was further rejected by the Court of Cassation on the ground that it failed to meet the requirements foreseen in the law and the applicant was fined the equivalent of EUR 80 (euros) as a result. The latter decision was delivered to the applicant on 9 January 2009.
The Constitution:
“All individuals shall be equal before the law without any distinction based on language, race, colour, sex, political opinion, philosophical belief, religion, membership of a religious sect or other similar grounds.
Women and men shall have equal rights. (...)
...”
“... International agreements duly put into effect bear the force of law. No appeal to the  shall be made with regard to these agreements, on the grounds that they are unconstitutional.
In the case of a conflict between international agreements in the area of fundamental rights and freedoms duly put into effect and the domestic laws due to differences in provisions on the same matter, the provisions of international agreements shall prevail.”
The Civil Code:
“Married women shall bear their husband’s name. ... .”
“Married women shall bear their husband’s name. However, they can make a written declaration to the Registrar of Births, Marriages and Deaths on signing the marriage deed, or at the Registry of Births, Marriages and Deaths after the marriage, if they wish to keep their maiden name in front of their surname ...”
Code of Civil Procedure:
“Rectification of a Court of Cassation decision may be requested for the following reasons, within fifteen days after the notification of the impugned decision:
If in the appeal proceedings, the Court of Cassation failed to respond to the parties’ appeal requests;
If the Court of Cassation decision contains contradictory paragraphs;
If it is established that some of the documents examined during the appeal proceedings were fraudulent or false;
If the Court of Cassation decision is against domestic procedure or domestic law.”
“If the request for rectification is not based on one of the conditions (set forth by Article 440 of this Code), it shall be rejected and a fine shall be imposed on the applicant.”
Following the enactment of Article 187 of the Civil Code, three Family Courts raised an objection with the Constitutional Court, arguing that the provision was unconstitutional. In a decision of 10 March 2011 (E. 2009/85, K. 2011/49), the Constitutional Court dismissed the objection.
The relevant international law are set out in the case Ünal Tekeli v. Turkey, no. 29865/96, §§ 17-31, ECHR 2004X (extracts).