The case originated in an application (no. 41152/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Samvel Georgovich Avanesyan (“the applicant”), on 13 August 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr N. Gasparyan, a lawyer practising in Stavropol Region. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained, in particular, about an unlawful interference with his right to respect for his home and the absence of an effective remedy for that grievance.
On 6 July 2007 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Stavropol Region.
On 22 March 2006, following an application by a police chief and without the applicant’s knowledge, a judge of the Georgievsk Town Court of Stavropol Region issued a decision authorising the taking of “operational-search measures”, which read in its entirety as follows:
“[The court], having examined a decision by the chief of the Georgievsk district police station on the taking of operational-search measures,
FOUND AS FOLLOWS:
It follows from the decision and a memorandum that ... Samvel Avanesyan, residing at ... probably has in his household certain objects and items prohibited from free circulation and [which have also been] criminally acquired.
With a view to finding and seizing them, it is necessary to take operational-search measures. On the basis of Article 25 of the Constitution and section 6(8) of the Operational-Search Activities Act, the court
HOLDS:
That the carrying-out of operational-search activities, that is, an inspection of the premises, buildings, constructions, vehicles and plots of land belonging to Samvel Avanesyan, residing at [the address], is authorised.”
On the same day two officers from the Georgievsk police station came to the applicant’s house at the Budennova Street and “inspected” (обследовали) the living quarters.
The applicant was away from home on that day. The police showed the authorisation to the applicant’s father. He had a heart attack and died before the ambulance arrived.
The “inspection record” (акт о результатах обследования) indicated that nothing had been found or seized.
On 29 March 2006 the applicant complained to the Georgievsk district prosecutor’s office, claiming that the police officers had carried out an unlawful search. On 10 April 2006 (or 8 May 2006, according to the Government) an investigator from the prosecutor’s office refused to institute criminal proceedings, finding that the officers had acted lawfully and that the death of the applicant’s father had been a coincidence. According to the applicant, the existence of the judicial authorisation of 22 March 2006 was for the first time revealed in the investigator’s reply.
The applicant unsuccessfully attempted to lodge a supervisory-review application against the judicial authorisation of 22 March 2006. He submitted that, contrary to the requirements of the Operational-Search Activities Act, the decision had not mentioned specific grounds for carrying out the “inspection” of his home or spelled out the information on which the suspicion had been founded. He had had no criminal record, no criminal charge had been levelled against him, and he had not been heard as a victim or witness. Furthermore, the scope of the decision had been too vague and imprecise; it had not mentioned what specific items were to be uncovered. The applicant relied on Article 8 of the Convention and the inviolability of his home under the Constitution.
On 20 June and 20 October 2006 two judges of the Stavropol Regional Court returned the supervisory-review applications to the applicant. Their covering letters stated that judicial decisions issued in the framework of the Operational-Search Activities Act were not amenable to supervisory review.
The applicant also complained to the Constitutional Court, seeking a declaration of unconstitutionality of section 5 of the Operational-Search Activities Act. On 18 September 2007 the Constitutional Court rejected his complaint, informing him as follows:
“In its Decision no. 86-O dated 14 July 1998 concerning the compatibility of certain provisions of the Operational-Search Activities Act with the Constitution, the Constitutional Court held that proceedings for judicial examination of the issue of whether an operational-search measure restricting the constitutional rights of an individual should be authorised, are not a trial hearing, not even a preliminary hearing: these proceedings are conducted ex parte. The individual concerned is not yet a party to the proceedings and need not be aware of the judicial authorisation. The proceedings are not transparent, public or adversarial; were it otherwise, the taking of covert operational-search measures would become impossible and operational-search activities pointless.
Nevertheless, the absence of the individual concerned from the court session in which the authorisation of operational-search measures restricting the constitutional rights and freedoms is being decided upon does not dispense the court from the obligation to undertake a comprehensive examination of the grounds and conditions for such a measure. The judicial decision must be reasoned and it must refer to specific facts that confirm the indications of a serious or particularly serious crime or act that is being planned or executed or that has been committed.
It follows from section 5 of the Operational-Search Activities Act that an individual who becomes aware that operational-search activities are being carried out against him on the basis of a judicial authorisation and who considers that his rights and lawful interests have been injured thereby may apply to a court for the protection of his rights in accordance with the established jurisdictional and procedural requirements.
These findings by the Constitutional Court have been applicable to date.
However, the Constitutional Court is not competent to verify the way in which the law-enforcement authorities interpreted and applied a specific legal act.”
The Operational-Search Activities Act provided as follows at the material time:
“An operational-search activity is a form of overt or covert activity carried out by operational divisions of State agencies authorised by this Act (hereinafter ‘agencies performing operational-search activities’) within the scope of their powers, with a view to protecting the life, health, rights and freedoms of individuals and citizens or property and protecting the public and the State against criminal offences.”
“The aims of operational-search activities are:
– to detect, prevent, intercept and investigate criminal offences as well as search for and identify those responsible for planning or committing them;
...”
“...
A person who considers that an agency conducting operational-search activities has acted in breach of his or her rights and freedoms may challenge the actions of that agency before a higher-ranking agency performing operational-search activities, a prosecutor’s office or a court.
...”
“In carrying out investigations the following measures may be taken:
...
inspection of premises, buildings, constructions, plots of land and vehicles ...”
“Operational-search activities involving interference with the constitutional right to ... privacy of the home, may be conducted, subject to a judicial authorisation, following the receipt of information concerning:
indications that a criminal offence is being planned, is being committed or has been committed, provided that a preliminary investigation is mandatory;
persons who are conspiring to commit, or are committing or have committed an offence, provided that a preliminary investigation is mandatory ...”
“The examination of requests for the taking of measures involving interference with the constitutional right to ... privacy of the home, shall fall within the competence of a court at the place where the requested measure is to be carried out or at the place where the requesting agency is located.
The request must be examined immediately by a single judge; the examination of the request may not be refused.
The judge shall decide to authorise the operational-search measures involving interference with the constitutional rights of individuals ... on the basis of a reasoned decision by the chief of an operational-search agency ...
...
Upon consideration of the materials, the judge shall decide either to authorise the operational-search measures ... or to refuse authorisation, and issue a reasoned decision to that effect. A seal shall be affixed to the decision, which is handed over to the requesting agency together with the supporting materials it provided to the judge.
If the judge refuses authorisation ... the requesting agency may raise the same request before a higher court ...”
“...
[3]  A judicial decision authorising operational-search activities and the materials that served as a basis for that decision must be held in the exclusive possession of the agency performing the operational-search activities ...”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Code read as follows:
“1.  Courts shall consider and decide upon:
...
(3)  claims arising out of public law, as listed in Article 245 of the Code ...”
“Courts shall consider public-law claims:
- on an application by individuals, organisations and prosecutors who challenge normative legal acts in their entirety or in part ...
- on an application concerning challenges to actions (or failures to act) of State and municipal authorities or their officials ...”
“The judge shall refuse to consider the application or discontinue the proceedings on a public-law claim if a judicial decision exists concerning the same matter that has come into legal force ...”
On 14 July 1998 the Constitutional Court, in its decision no. 86-O, declared inadmissible a request for a review of the constitutionality of certain provisions of the Operational-Search Activities Act. It held, in particular, that a judge was to authorise investigative measures involving an interference with constitutional rights only if he was persuaded that such measures were lawful, necessary and justified, that is, compatible with all the requirements of the Operational-Search Activities Act. The burden of proof was on the requesting State agency to show the necessity of the measures. Supporting materials were to be produced to the judge at his request. It further held as follows:
“The provisions of paragraph 3 of section 12, according to which a judicial decision authorising operational-search activities and the materials that served as a basis for that decision must be held in the exclusive possession of the agency performing the operational-search activities, does not violate the rights and freedoms of the claimant, including her right to judicial review and protection. The judicial authorisation is not amenable to an appeal at the stage by the individual affected because of the covert nature of operational-search measures. If a person has become aware of [such] measures [being taken against him], he has the right – in accordance with section 5 of the Act – to challenge the actions of the agency performing operational-search activities, the justification for opening an operative investigation file and the taking of operational-search measures, including those that require a judicial authorisation ...”
On 8 February 2007 the Constitutional Court, in its decision no. 1-O, declared inadmissible a request for a review of the constitutionality of section 9 of the Operational-Search Activities Act. The Court found that before giving authorisation to take operational-search measures the judge had an obligation to verify the grounds for that measure. The judicial decision authorising operational-search measures was to contain reasons and refer to specific grounds for suspecting that a criminal offence was being planned, was being committed or had been committed or that activities endangering national, military, economic or ecological security were being carried out, and that the person in respect of whom operational-search measures were requested was involved in those criminal or otherwise dangerous activities.