The case originated in an application (no. 5187/07) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Oleg Viktorovich Moroz (“the applicant”), on 16 January 2007.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained of the inappropriate conditions of his pretrial detention and the lack of medical assistance. He also alleged that he had not been allowed to have visits from his relatives and to correspond with them while in pre-trial detention. He further stated that his right to practice his religion had been breached during pre-trial detention.
On 12 December 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1967 and is currently serving his prison sentence.
At about 10 a.m. on 1 June 2005 O., the president of the Ukrainian Dental Association, was shot at his office with a rifle which the applicant had brought. The applicant was present at O.’s office at the time of the event. He asked for the police and an ambulance to be called and, once the police arrived, stated that an accident had happened. He explained that he and O. were interested in hunting and he had brought the shotgun to O. as a present. While he had been demonstrating the gun to O., the latter had wanted to see it closer and had pulled it towards himself; the gun had accidentally gone off. According to the applicant, once he had replied to the questions of the police, handcuffs were put on him; he was searched and samples were taken from him for forensic examination. His request for a lawyer was allegedly ignored.
On the same date the applicant’s arrest report was drawn up which stated that the applicant had been arrested for the murder of O. at 10 p.m. at the police station. He was subsequently questioned in the presence of K., his lawyer. He pleaded not guilty and repeated his statements made earlier. According to the applicant, his lawyer immediately indicated to the investigator that, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, the applicant had to be provided with the possibility to talk with him in private before the questioning, with a view to defining the legal defence strategy. Having heard that, the applicant insisted on such a meeting. The investigator, however, rejected that request on the ground that the applicant would be able to talk to his lawyer later.
On 2 June 2005 a reconstruction of the crime was carried out in the presence of the applicant’s lawyer.
.  On 3 June 2005 the applicant’s pre-trial detention was ordered by a court.
On 6 June 2005 L. was admitted to the proceedings as the applicant’s second lawyer.
On 9 June 2005 the applicant was charged with murder and questioned in the presence of his lawyers. He pleaded not guilty and repeated his previous statement that O. had been shot by accident.
On 11 August 2005 the applicant was questioned in the presence of K. The applicant repeated his previous statements.
On the same date the applicant and the lawyer K. became aware of the results of a number of forensic examinations in the case. They made no observations in this connection.
On 17 November 2005 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant for illegal production, possession and storage of firearms. On the same day the applicant was charged with the above offence and questioned in the presence of K. Those proceedings were subsequently joined to the murder case against the applicant.
.  On 16 January 2006 the case was referred to the Kyiv City Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) for trial. Throughout the trial the applicant denied the murder charge and consistently claimed that O. had been shot by accident.
.  On 19 May 2006 the Court of Appeal, acting as a first-instance court, found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to fifteen years’ imprisonment. The court found that on 27 May 2005 the coordinating council of the Ukrainian Dental Association had held its meeting in Kyiv and the applicant had run for the position of acting executive director of the Association. The victim, O., had proposed another candidate for the same position and that candidate had been elected. The applicant had therefore decided to take revenge and had come to the office of O. with a shotgun and fired twice at O.’s head. The applicant had also been found guilty of modifying the shotgun in question prior to the incident.
.  The Court of Appeal noted that although the applicant had never pleaded guilty and had claimed that the incident had been an accident, his guilt was proved by the testimonies of witnesses and the results of forensic examinations. In particular, O.’s wife had testified that she had been in the neighbouring office when the incident had taken place and when she had entered her husband’s office she had seen the applicant smiling with satisfaction. She had also maintained that her husband had not liked hunting and therefore would not have accepted a shotgun as a present. The negative attitude of O. to hunting had also been confirmed by his brother. O.’s secretary and one of his colleagues had also confirmed that the applicant had been smiling when they had entered the office after the incident.
.  Several witnesses had also confirmed that the applicant had shown dissatisfaction with the fact that he had not been elected to the position of the executive director of the Dental Association.
.  The forensic expert, questioned in the court hearings, had confirmed the conclusions of the examination that the shots had been fired from some distance and not from close range, as the applicant had suggested, given that traces of metals and gunpowder, typically found following close-range shots, had not been found on the victim. The court also noted that the outcome of the ballistic examination as to the distance, trajectory and angle of the entry wounds had not matched the applicant’s version of events.
.  The applicant appealed. He submitted, inter alia, that his defence rights had been violated as he had not been given an opportunity to talk to his lawyer in private before his questioning at the police station on 1 June 2005, with no further details given.
.  On 28 November 2006 the Supreme Court, in the presence of the applicant and his two lawyers, upheld the decision of the Court of Appeal, noting the aggregate of evidence against the applicant.
.  From 5 July 2005 to 25 January 2007 the applicant was detained at Kyiv pre-trial detention centre no. 13 (“the SIZO”).
.  According to the applicant, the facility was often overcrowded with the number of detainees exceeding the number of beds. It was infested with insects, cockroaches and mice. The quality and quantity of food was unsatisfactory. There was only one pair of scissors and one hair clippers for the whole SIZO and they were not disinfected prior to or after use. As a result, the applicant contracted Hepatitis B.
.  From 8 July until 8 November 2005 he was detained in cells nos. 18 and 116 in conditions which were detrimental to his health and incompatible with human dignity. In particular, those cells had no access to natural light as the windows were obscured by metal slats. The walls were permanently wet and covered with mould. The applicant had to share cell no. 116, which measured about 12 square metres, with three other detainees who were heavy smokers. The artificial lighting was not sufficiently powerful with the result that the cells were dim. Their clothes and linen were always wet and cold.
.  On 7 September, 7 and 21 November 2006 the applicant requested that the investigator allow visits from his family but to no avail; the investigator attempted to extort money from him for granting permission to see the relatives.
.  On 5 February and 4 July 2006 the applicant asked the Court of Appeal to allow him to correspond with his relatives but received no answer. He unsuccessfully complained of these matters to the prosecutor’s office on a number of occasions.
.  The applicant was not allowed to visit the SIZO church. His requests to the SIZO governor of 15 July and 1 August 2005 to meet with a priest also remained unanswered. On 6 and 7 September 2005 the applicant further complained to the SIZO administration that his religious literature and some items of a religious nature had been seized by the SIZO staff. On 23 September 2005 a “talk” was held with the applicant by one of the prison staff on account of his complaints during which it was explained to him that nothing untoward had happened. On 1 October 2006 the applicant complained to the Prosecutor General about the violation of his right to practise his religion but received no reply.
During his stay at the SIZO the applicant was held in twelve different cells (including cells nos. 18 and 116) and was moved fourteen times.
.  The Government could not provide any information about the number of inmates in the cells at the relevant time or regarding the conditions of the floor, walls and linen because the compulsory period for keeping the relevant documents had expired and the records had been destroyed.
They stated that the general detention conditions in the SIZO had been satisfactory and in compliance with the domestic standards: all the cells had had windows and had been equipped with sufficient artificial lighting; the applicant had been provided with adequate nutrition in accordance with the applicable standards. Scissors and other hairdressing implements had been disinfected after each use in accordance with the relevant regulations. That fact had been confirmed by the results of an investigation conducted by the Ministry of Health and the prosecutor’s office following the applicant’s complaints.
.  The Government submitted, having provided the relevant documents, that the applicant had requested family visits before the relevant authorities only on 10 and 20 October and 29 December 2005 and on 11 January and 5 February 2006 and had asked for permission to send correspondence to his relatives on 10 and 27 October 2005 and 5 February and 8 August 2006. All his requests were rejected for security reasons.
The applicant had been free to ask the investigator in his case or a court to allow him to meet with a priest but had failed to do so. He had also been entitled by law to possess religious literature and other items of a religious nature and never raised any complaint in this connection either before the SIZO governor or with the prosecutor responsible for observing compliance with the law in the detention facilities.
.  No medical aid was provided to the applicant in respect of his heart and teeth problems. On 3 June 2006 the applicant asked the SIZO governor to conduct a medical examination as he believed he had contracted hepatitis B because of the failure of the SIZO staff to respect hygiene rules. This request was rejected; so was another request for a special diet in view of his possible hepatitis infection. On 2 November 2006 the applicant asked the Minister of Health to order a medical examination in view of his possible hepatitis infection, to no avail. No copies of the mentioned requests have been provided by the applicant.
According to the Government, during his stay in the SIZO the applicant never went to the medical unit on account of his suffering from hepatitis B, heart pain or problems with his teeth and never lodged any complaints regarding a lack of medical assistance. His state of health did not necessitate a special diet.
Following a liver-related complaint that the applicant was suffering from, he was diagnosed with bile-duct dyskinesia (дискінезія сечовивідних шляхів) and from 20 October to 15 November 2006 he underwent inpatient treatment in the SIZO medical unit. A number of laboratory tests were carried out on the applicant, including a specialised blood test for hepatitis indicators. The latter revealed hBs antigens, which meant that the applicant had hepatitis B antibodies in his blood but not that he had been definitely suffering from the active form of the disease. The applicant was prescribed the relevant treatment (Carsil, Livolin, Alochol, Gastronorm, Ursohol), which he received in full, and at the end of his treatment he was deemed to be in good health.
On 1 July 2007 the applicant was transferred to prison no. 72 to serve his sentence. On 11 August 2007 he was diagnosed with hepatitis B. Thereafter he lodged a number of complaints with different State bodies alleging that he had contracted hepatitis in the SIZO owing to the failure to disinfect hairdressing implements, and demanding investigation of this matter. Following his allegations, investigations were conducted by the Health Ministry and the prosecutor’s office, which found no evidence to support the applicant’s allegations. The applicant was informed of the results of the investigation by a prosecutor’s letter of 27 July 2009.
Article 162 of the CCP provided, at the relevant time, that visits of relatives or other people to a detainee could be allowed by the responsible person or institution dealing with the case. The duration of the visit should be fixed at from one to two hours. Visits should be allowed, as a rule, not more than once a month.
.  The relevant provisions of the Act read as follows:
“Any person remanded in custody shall have the right:
...
to worship individually [and] use religious literature and devotional articles related to his or her religious faith made of low-value materials, provided that this does not violate the established order in the pre-trial detention facility or impair the rights of others; ...”
“Detainees shall be provided with living conditions corresponding to the requirements of sanitation and hygiene rules.
The area of the cell per detainee shall not be less than 2.5 square metres and for the pregnant women and women accompanied by a child, not less than 4.5 square metres.
...
Detainees shall be provided for free with food, personal sleeping space, bedding and other types of material and everyday goods under the unified rules adopted by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. In cases of necessity they can be also provided with standard clothes and shoes.
Medical services as well as preventive medical and anti-epidemic measures shall be organised and carried out in places of pre-trial detention in compliance with health legislation ...”
“Visits by relatives or other people can be allowed to individuals remanded in custody by the administration of a pre-trial detention facility only with the written permission of an investigator, the investigating authorities or the court examining the case, as a rule, once per a month. The duration of a visit is from one to four hours ...”
“Individuals remanded in custody shall have the right to correspond with their relatives and other people, enterprises, institutions, and organisations with the written consent of the person or authority in charge of the criminal case against the detainee concerned. After the judgment convicting a detainee becomes final, he or she can carry on correspondence in accordance with the law ...”
“An inspection of compliance with legislation at remand prisons shall be carried out by the General Prosecutor of Ukraine and prosecutors subordinate to him or her pursuant to the Public Prosecutor’s Office Act.
Rulings and resolutions issued by prosecutors as to the compliance with the procedure and conditions of detention established by legislation shall be subject to compulsory fulfilment by the detention centre’s administration.”
Article 12 of this Act provides that it shall not apply to complaints and applications subject to examination under criminal procedural legislation.