The case originated in an application (no. 43149/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Andrey Vasilyevich Smirnov (“the applicant”), on 17 July 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Stepanov, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his pre-trial detention had not been based on relevant and sufficient reasons and that the frequency and manner of visits from his parents had been excessively restricted.
On 12 June 2014 the complaints concerning the applicant’s pre-trial detention and parental visits were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1992 and lives in Tver.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 7 May 2009 the applicant and his classmate A. were arrested on suspicion of causing grievous bodily injuries to a boy from their school. They confessed to their deeds. The applicant was initially released under parental supervision, whilst A. was remanded in custody. The following day they retracted their confessions.
On 16 November 2009, after the investigator had reclassified their actions as a more serious offence, the Zavolzhskiy District Court in Tver ordered the applicant’s placement in custody, citing the gravity of the charges and the fact that he had recanted. The District Court interpreted the latter element as amounting to the risk of an obstruction of justice. On 11 December 2009 the Tver Regional Court upheld the detention order on appeal, finding as follows:
“[The fact that the defendant] has a permanent place of residence, lives with his family, is studying in high school and does not have a criminal record does not provide a basis for rejecting unconditionally the investigator’s application [for a detention order] in the light of the extreme gravity of the charges.”
On 12 January 2010 the District Court extended the authorised detention period, pointing out that the applicant “had changed his attitude to the committed offence from an outright acknowledgement to a downright denial”. In the court’s opinion, that implied that the applicant might interfere with justice if released. The District Court also added that the custodial measure was necessary “to secure the enforcement of the conviction”. On 3 February 2010 the Regional Court upheld the District Court’s assessment on appeal, in particular its finding that a non-custodial measure would not be sufficient to secure the enforcement of the conviction.
On 20 January 2010 the investigator in charge of the applicant’s case refused the parents’ request for leave to visit their son, reasoning as follows:
On 25 January 2010 the supervising prosecutor rejected a complaint from the applicant’s father about the investigator’s decision, recalling that the granting of leave to visit a detainee was at the investigator’s discretion rather than being a legal obligation and that the arguments for refusing leave were “persuasive and well-justified”.
On 3 February 2010 the District Court issued a further extension order, holding that the applicant had been charged with a particularly serious offence and that the circumstances warranting the application of a custodial measure still obtained. On 19 February 2010 the Regional Court upheld the order on appeal.
The final extension order of 11 March 2010 referred to the gravity of the charges against both co-defendants, without distinguishing between their individual situations.
By a judgment of 25 March 2010, the Regional Court found the applicant and his co-defendant guilty of attempted murder and sentenced each of them to five years’ imprisonment. On 9 June 2010 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation upheld the conviction.
Between November 2009 and July 2010 the applicant’s parents visited him in prison a total of sixteen times. All visits were carried out under the supervision of a warden while the applicant was separated from his parents by a glass partition.
Section 18 of the Pre-trial Detention Act (Federal Law no. 103-FZ of 15 July 1995) provides as follows:
“Subject to written authorisation from the official or authority in charge of the criminal case, suspects and defendants may have no more than two visits per month from their family members and other persons, each visit lasting for up to three hours.
Visits from family members and other persons shall be supervised by an officer of the custodial facility; should there be an attempt to pass prohibited objects, substances or food, or to communicate information capable of preventing the truth from being established in the criminal proceedings or contributing to the commission of an offence, the visit will be cut short.”
Section XVI of the Rules of Internal Order in Remand Prisons, as approved by the Ministry of Justice’s Order no. 189 of 14 October 2005, governs the arrangements for organising visits of family members and other persons. Rule 139 establishes the following limitations: no more than two visits per month; the written authorisation to be valid for one visit only; no more than two adult visitors each time. Rule 143 specifies that meetings should be held in purpose-built rooms equipped with a partition or separator that prevents any objects from being passed but does not obstruct oral or visual contact. Detainees may talk to visitors on an intercom system and their discussion may be listened to by prison guards.
The Constitutional Court has consistently derived the need for statutory regulation of family visits from the provisions of the Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, approved by the UN General Assembly on 9 December 1998, and in particular from its Principle 19 (see decisions no. 176-O of 13 June 2002, no. 351-O of 16 October 2003, and no. 807-O-O of 17 June 2010). In its view, limitations on the frequency, duration and conditions of prison visits were “inevitable consequences of the [custodial] measure of restraint”. It emphasised that any refusal of a visit should take the form of a reasoned decision which could be challenged before a supervising prosecutor or a court of general jurisdiction.
The United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty, adopted by General Assembly resolution 45/113 of 14 December 1990, provide:
“J. Contacts with the wider community
Every means should be provided to ensure that juveniles have adequate communication with the outside world, which is an integral part of the right to fair and humane treatment and is essential to the preparation of juveniles for their return to society. Juveniles should be allowed to communicate with their families, friends and other persons or representatives of reputable outside organizations, to leave detention facilities for a visit to their and family and to receive special permission to leave the detention facility for educational, vocational or other important reasons. Should the juvenile be serving a sentence, the time spent outside a detention facility should be counted as part of the period of sentence.
Every juvenile should have the right to receive regular and frequent visits, in principle once a week and not less than once a month, in circumstances that respect the need of the juvenile for privacy, contact and unrestricted communication with the family and the defence counsel.”
Recommendation CM/Rec(2008)11 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the European Rules for juvenile offenders subject to sanctions or measures, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 5 November 2008 at the 1040th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies, provides:
“E.11. Contact with the outside world
Juveniles shall be allowed to communicate through letters, without restriction as to their number and as often as possible by telephone or other forms of communication with their families, other persons and representatives of outside organisations and to receive regular visits from these persons.
Arrangements for visits shall be such as to allow juveniles to maintain and develop family relationships in as normal a manner as possible and have opportunities for social reintegration.
1. Institutional authorities shall assist juveniles in maintaining adequate contact with the outside world and provide them with the appropriate means to do so.
2. Communication and visits may be subject to restrictions and monitoring necessary for the requirements of continuing criminal investigations, maintenance of good order, safety and security, prevention of criminal offences and protection of victims of crime, but such restrictions, including specific restrictions ordered by a judicial authority, shall nevertheless allow an acceptable minimum level of contact.”