The case raises issues under Article 8 of the Convention as regards the proportionality of a measure taken against the applicant – namely the seizure of his tablet computer, which contained privileged information – on the basis of a search warrant issued by a judge in connection with criminal proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1966. He lives in Riga, where he also practises as a lawyer (advokāts). He is a member of the Latvian Bar Association (Latvijas Zvērinātu advokātu kolēģija).
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Līce.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 15 November 2011 the State Police Department for Combating Organised Crime (Valsts policijas Organizētās noziedzības apkarošanas pārvalde – “the organised crime department”) instituted criminal proceedings relating to trafficking in human beings.
On 30 January 2012 the applicant’s client, L.M., was arrested in connection with those proceedings; her home was searched and her portable computer was seized. She was placed in a short-term detention facility. On 1 February 2012 she was declared a suspect in those criminal proceedings. The following day, she was released on bail.
On 31 January 2012, from about 1 a.m. to 2 a.m., the applicant visited L.M. in the short-term detention facility.
On 31 January 2012, at about 4.15 a.m., an email account that had been used by L.M. was blocked and all of its content was deleted.
On 12 March 2012 a judge of the Riga City Ziemeļu District Court (Rīgas pilsētas Ziemeļu rajona tiesa) issued a search warrant in respect of the applicant’s home in order to find and seize a computer possibly containing information about the email account which could serve as evidence in criminal proceedings relating to trafficking in human beings (see paragraphs 5-8 above). There were indications that the email account had been blocked and its content deleted using an IP address which was registered at the address where the applicant resided. The judge referred to section 122(2) of the Criminal Procedure Law (Kriminālprocesa likums) and held that the seizure of a lawyer’s computer – if it had been used to conceal an especially serious crime – did not breach the lawyer’s procedural immunity (see paragraph 27 below).
On 13 March 2012 several police officers from the organised crime department and an IT expert arrived at the applicant’s home. Having read the search warrant, the applicant voluntarily surrendered his tablet computer. The police also seized another portable computer that belonged to the applicant’s adult daughter. That computer was returned as soon as it was established that it did not contain any relevant material. The seizure of the applicant’s daughter’s computer is not the subject matter of this application.
The applicant signed the search record, without making any remarks or comments in the relevant field. A copy of the search record was then issued to him.
According to the applicant, his tablet computer contained confidential notes and other information about civil proceedings, constitutional proceedings, proceedings before the European Court of Human Rights, and criminal proceedings against his clients, including L.M. According to the Government, the applicant did not inform the police officers that his tablet computer contained such information.
On 13 March and 17 April 2012 forensic IT examinations of the tablet computer were ordered and their results were subsequently made known.
On 5 April 2012 the organised crime department instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant for concealing an especially serious crime.
On 24 May 2012 the applicant was declared a suspect in those proceedings.
On 14 June 2012 a prosecutor brought the charges against the applicant.
On 30 November 2012 the case was sent for adjudication to a first-instance court. At the time of the exchange of the parties’ observations, the case against the applicant was pending before that court together with the case against L.M.
On 20 March 2012 the applicant complained to the President of the Riga City Ziemeļu District Court about the search warrant.
On 2 April 2012 the President confirmed the lawfulness of the search warrant and dismissed the applicant’s complaint. She held that the search warrant had been issued in accordance with the law and that there were no grounds for considering that the lawyer’s procedural immunity had been breached.
The applicant lodged several complaints about the actions of the police officers during the search and about the seizure of his tablet computer.
In particular, on 13 April 2012 the applicant complained to a supervising prosecutor. He requested that his tablet computer be returned, since it contained all his confidential notes and other information in civil proceedings, constitutional proceedings, proceedings before the European Court, and criminal proceedings against several clients, including L.M. Some of those proceedings concerned matters under investigation in the organised crime department. This meant that the police officers had access to his confidential notes about his clients’ defence positions, and details of the identity of witnesses for the defence and of confidential conversations with his clients. The applicant requested information about anyone who had had access to those notes.
On 22 May 2012 the prosecutor dismissed the applicant’s complaint. He considered that the seizure of the tablet computer had been lawful and justified. It had been admitted as evidence and had to be stored until such time as a court judgment became effective or until the expiry of the timelimit for lodging an appeal against the decision to terminate the criminal proceedings – unless any grounds for its return had been established (see paragraphs 2829 below). In response to the applicant’s argument that the tablet computer contained confidential information, the prosecutor noted that the relevant investigating authority was under an obligation to safeguard that information. The prosecutor saw no reason for concern that the information could become available to unauthorised persons. He noted that the seized computer was being stored as required by law, but did not provide more details in that regard. The prosecutor concluded that the search of the applicant’s home had been lawful and that the police officers’ actions had been lawful and justified.
On 2 July 2012 a superior prosecutor dismissed a complaint by the applicant. She did not consider that any further explanation about the lawfulness of the search was necessary.
On 30 July 2012 another superior prosecutor, by a final decision, dismissed a further complaint by the applicant. He reiterated that the search warrant had been issued in accordance with the law. The prosecutor was not persuaded by the applicant’s argument that he had voluntarily surrendered his tablet computer so that the IT expert could carry out all the necessary checks on site. There was no indication that the IT expert had received such instructions from the relevant investigating authority. The police officers had seized the objects lawfully. The search record had been drawn up in accordance with the law.
Article 96 of the Constitution (Satversme) guarantees the “inviolability of private life, the home and correspondence”.
Sections 179 to 185 of the Criminal Procedure Law set out the general terms governing searches of premises. The relevant parts have been summarised in Vinks and Ribicka v. Latvia (no. 28926/10, §§ 6265, 30 January 2020).
The principle of a lawyer’s procedural immunity is laid down in section 122 of the Criminal Procedure Law, which reads as follows:
“(1)  It shall be prohibited:
...
2)  to monitor, inspect or seize documents that a lawyer has prepared, or correspondence that he or she has received or sent while providing legal assistance, as well as to carry out a search in order to find and seize such correspondence and documents;
3)  to monitor information systems and means of communication used by a lawyer in providing legal assistance, obtain information from them and interfere with their operation.
(2)  Unlawful activity by a lawyer ... in the interests of the client in providing legal assistance of any form ... shall not be deemed to constitute legal assistance.”
The storage of physical evidence and documents are subject to the terms laid down in section 239(1) of the Criminal Procedure Law, which reads as follows:
“Physical evidence and documents shall be stored until a court judgment enters into effect or until the expiry of the time-limit set for an appeal against the decision to terminate criminal proceedings unless any grounds laid down in section 235(2) of this Law have been established”.
Section 235(2) of the Criminal Procedure Law provides as follows:
“Objects and documents obtained during the course of investigative activities shall be returned to the owner or lawful possessor ... if one of the following grounds is established:
1)  ... the relevant objects and documents do not hold any significance as evidence in criminal proceedings; or
2)  the necessary investigative activities with the relevant objects and documents have been carried out and their return ... does not impair subsequent criminal proceedings.”