The case originated in an application (no. 22765/12) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Sorin Apostu (“the applicant”), on 13 April 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr G. Mateuț, a lawyer practising in Cluj Napoca. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained, in particular, about the conditions of his detention in the Cluj police station detention facility, and in Gherla and Rahova Prisons. He also complained of inadequate conditions of transport from Gherla Prison to Rahova Prison on 12 January 2012. He further complained that he had been unable to confer in private with his lawyer in Gherla Prison, and that his private telephone conversations (not connected to the case) had been intercepted by the authorities and subsequently published in the press.
On 18 December 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The respondent Government filed written observations on the case. The applicant filed his observations and claims for just satisfaction outside the time-limit set by the Court.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Târgu Mureș.
The Anti-Corruption Department of the Prosecutor’s Office (“the DNA”) started a criminal investigation against the applicant, his wife and three businessmen on suspicion of repeated corruption offences committed in his capacity as mayor of Cluj Napoca.
The prosecutor sought authorisation for the interception of the applicant’s telephone calls. The transcripts of the intercepted telephone calls were admitted as evidence against the applicant.
On 9 November 2011 police officers belonging to the DNA carried out a search at the applicant’s home. They carried out another search at the applicant’s office at Cluj Napoca Town Hall.
The applicant was taken to the DNA’s Cluj headquarters on the basis of a summons to appear before the investigative body.
Newspaper and television crews were present and the events were given widespread media coverage.
At about 8.50 p.m. on the same day the prosecutor ordered the applicant’s remand in custody.
The applicant’s pre-trial detention was ordered by an interlocutory judgment delivered the next day by the Cluj Court of Appeal. The court reasoned that it was necessary to stop the criminal activity of the applicant, who was allegedly preparing to commit a new corruption offence. The court also referred to the seriousness and the continuous nature of the offences. It stressed that the applicant had acted in his capacity as mayor when he had allegedly committed the offences. It concluded that the public would be shocked if the applicant were to be released. In assessing the concrete danger to public order if the applicant were released from detention, the court stressed that the offences had allegedly been committed over a long period of time (starting in 2009, when he had been appointed mayor, until the time of his arrest), that they were repetitive and that the perpetrator was a mayor in charge of protecting legal order. The court pointed out that as the applicant’s wife was under investigation, the applicant having used her law firm to cash the money received as bribes, his release from prison would allow him to influence her position. It concluded that his release from detention would intimidate other persons in possession of information relevant for the investigation.
The applicant appealed. On 21 November 2011 the High Court of Cassation and Justice upheld the above judgment, holding that there were strong indications from the criminal investigation file that the accused had committed the crimes.
The applicant’s pre-trial detention was regularly extended by interlocutory judgments of the Cluj Court of Appeal.
The court reasoned that the extensions were justified on account of the nature and severity of the offences for which the applicant was under investigation, and the fact that he might obstruct the course of justice by intimidating possible witnesses and the persons who had lodged complaints against him.
The applicant lodged appeals against the interlocutory judgments; all the appeals were dismissed by final decisions of the High Court of Cassation and Justice.
The applicant lodged several applications for his release from prison under judicial supervision. He mainly emphasised that he had a stable family, two minor children and an unblemished reputation. He also pointed out that he had been accused of non-violent crimes and had no criminal record.
The Cluj Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s requests on the grounds that the evidence in the file pointed to a strong likelihood that he had committed the corruption-related offences. It held that such offences might attract a prison sentence longer than four years. It also held that releasing the applicant would give rise to a real danger to public order, given the circumstances in which the acts had been committed, and their consequences and social impact.
The applicant appealed, pointing out that his personal situation had changed, in that he was no longer the mayor of Cluj. The appeal court’s decisions were upheld by the High Court of Cassation and Justice.
On 30 November 2011 the investigation against the applicant was extended in connection with other offences allegedly committed by him, namely trading in influence, complicity in and incitement to money laundering, and complicity in and incitement to forgery.
On 22 December 2011 the prosecutor issued an indictment concerning five co-accused, including the applicant and his wife, and the case was registered with the Cluj Court of Appeal. The applicant was charged with passive corruption, and repeated complicity in and incitement to money laundering and forgery.
Following a request lodged by the applicant, the High Court of Cassation and Justice decided on 20 February 2012 to transfer the file to the Târgu Mureș Court of Appeal in order to avoid any possible partiality on the part of the judges.
According to the latest information, the criminal proceedings are still pending.
Excerpts from conversations between the applicant and other defendants or third parties, which had been obtained through telephone tapping during a criminal surveillance operation conducted prior to the criminal prosecution, were subsequently published in several newspapers before the applicant and his co-accused had been committed for trial.
Even the headlines of the articles published in the press during that period referred to the fact that they contained excerpts of the recorded conversations. Thus on 16 December 2011, the newspaper Evenimentul zilei published an article with the headline, “Exclusive: Shocking revelations in the Apostu file. The names of all the persons under investigation and new excerpts from the telephone conversations. Evidence that M. Apostu received clothes as a bribe” (Exclusiv: Dezvăluiri tari din Dosarul Apostu. Surprize mari: numele tuturor celor cercetați și interceptări noi. Dovada că M. Apostu lua șpagă în haine).
On 16 November 2011 the newspaper Cancan published an article with the headline, “Excerpts of intercepted phone conversations: Sorin Apostu, the mayor of Cluj, acknowledged that he had at home three telephones with pre-paid cards, in order not to be intercepted” (Stenograme: Sorin Apostu, primarul Clujului, recunoaște că avea în casă trei telefoane cu cartele preplătite, ca să nu poată fi interceptate).
On the same day another article containing excerpts of the applicant’s recorded telephone conversations was published on the website of the newspaper National. It started with the following statement: “Pure coincidence, the excerpts of the telephone conversations offered for publication in the investigation of mayor Sorin Apostu for corruptionrelated offences stops, with suspense, exactly when the Romanian Prime Minister enters the scene”.
The publication of excerpts from the applicant’s recorded telephone conversations continued after the applicant had been committed for trial.
Other pieces of evidence from the prosecution file were likewise published and commented on in the press. On 18 December 2011 the newspaper Ora de Cluj published an article with the headline, “Complete document. The reasoning of the interlocutory judgment ordering the pretrial detention of mayor Sorin Apostu and businessman C. S.” (Document integral. Motivarea sentinței de arestare a primarului Sorin Apostu și a omului de afaceri C. S.).
Several press articles contained excerpts of telephone conversations between the applicant and persons not involved in the criminal proceedings. On 5 February 2012 Ora de Cluj published an article with the headline, “Interception. Three-way conversation: businessman S. D., mayor Sorin Apostu and driver J.”
Many of the press articles referred to aspects of the applicant’s private life without any connection to the criminal proceedings instituted against him. They were based on information found in his criminal file. On 6 February 2012 the newspaper Cancan published an article with the headline, “Juicy details from the private life of mayor Sorin Apostu! The mayor of Cluj, romance with a subordinate”. Only a few days later, on 10 February 2012, the daily newspaper Evenimentul zilei published an article about a search carried out at the home of the mayor’s subordinate with the headline, “Bombshell in the ‘Apostu’ file: five-hour search at home of his supposed sweetheart”.
The applicant was detained in the detention facility of Cluj police station between 9 November 2011 and 6 January 2012, except for two short periods (from 8 to 9 December and from 28 to 29 December 2011) when he was detained in the Bucharest central remand facility on account of his presence before the High Court of Cassation and Justice.
The applicant claimed that he had been detained in a small cell measuring approximately five sq m with four tiers of bunk beds. Access to a toilet was very difficult as the toilets were in the corridor. The cell lacked natural light and ventilation and the smells from the sewage system were noxious.
The applicant was held in cell no. 2, which measured 6.97 sq m, and in cell no. 3, which measured 11.31 sq m. The first cell had two metal beds, foam mattresses, bedrolls, two metallic nightstands, a table and two chairs. The second cell had three metal beds and was similarly furnished. The applicant was detained alone in both cells. Moreover, he was allowed to keep a television set in the cell.
The cells had natural and artificial light, and the applicant was allowed to use an extra lamp to improve the lighting. The cells were ventilated through windows covered with wire netting.
The sanitary facilities and the showers were in the corridor. The applicant had permanent access to the sanitary facilities and to the showers during daylight hours, whenever he requested it.
The time spent outside the cells was one hour per day.
On 6 January 2012 the applicant was transferred to Gherla Prison. He was detained there for the following periods:
between 6 and 12 January 2012;
between 17 and 30 January 2012;
between 16 February and 22 March 2012.
The applicant complained of overcrowding. However, he did not mention the number of detainees in the cell or the size of the cell. He merely claimed that there were eighteen beds in the cell. He also claimed that the temperature had been very low and the conditions of hygiene poor. He had been allowed to take only two showers per week.
On 9 January 2012 the applicant applied for protection as a vulnerable person under Article 7 § 5 of the Rules of Application of Law no. 275/2006. Subsequently, he carried out all activities separately from the other detainees.
The applicant was detained in four different cells:
- on 6 January 2012 he was detained in cell EG 5.3 in the hospital wing, which measured 15.26 sq m, contained three beds and which he shared with only one detainee;
- between 6 and 10 January 2012 he was detained in cell EG 1.7 in the quarantine wing, which measured 43.25 sq m, contained twenty-one beds and which he shared with two other detainees;
- between 10 and 12 January and 17 and 27 January 2012 he was detained in cell EG 1.4 in the quarantine wing, which measured 16.24 sq m, contained four beds and which he shared with two other detainees;
- between 27 and 30 January and 15 February and 22 March 2012 he was detained in cell EG 3.20, which measured 16.24 sq m, contained nine beds and which he shared with three other detainees.
The prison’s central heating system was in good working order and ensured an appropriate temperature inside the prison. There were no registered complaints by the detainees in this respect.
The prisoners were entitled to two showers per week and the hygiene conditions were adequate.
The applicant spent two hours per day outside the cell.
On 12 January 2012 the applicant was transported to Rahova Prison in order to attend a hearing of the High Court of Cassation and Justice in the appeal on points of law lodged by him against an interlocutory judgment. He spent five days in that prison.
The applicant complained of overcrowding and very low temperatures in the cell. He claimed that the cell had had no heating and that he had had nothing to eat for about three days because food had been thrown into the cell by other detainees, who had made death threats against him.
On 12 January 2012 the applicant was detained in cell no. 538, reserved for vulnerable persons, which measured 19.58 sq m and which he shared with seven other detainees.
Between 13 and 16 January 2012 the applicant was detained in cell no. 219, which measured 19.3 sq m and which he shared with only one other detainee.
The cells and sanitary facilities were ventilated through double windows. The heating of the cells was ensured by radiators connected to the prison’s thermal station.
Food was served in the cells as the prison had no dining hall designed for persons under pre-trial detention. Food distribution was supervised by the prison staff and coordinated by the section head. The Government underlined that by placing the applicant in a cell for vulnerable detainees (persons who had held official functions), the prison authorities had complied with their obligation to take proper measures to ensure the safety of those persons.
All daily activities concerning the vulnerable detainees, as well as their transfer to the court, were carried out separately from other categories of detainee. Additional security measures were taken in respect of those persons.
The Government contended that the applicant had not lodged any complaint with the delegated judge against the prison staff or in connection with conflicts with other detainees during his detention in Rahova Prison.
Between 30 January and 16 February 2012 the applicant was admitted to the hospital wing of Dej Prison.
On 22 March 2012 the applicant was transferred to Târgu Mureș Prison. He did not complain about the conditions of his detention in Târgu Mureș Prison.
On 12 January 2012 the applicant was transported from Gherla Prison to Rahova Prison.
The applicant complained of the inappropriate conditions in which he had been transported in a prison van for about seventeen hours on 12 January 2012. He claimed that the prison van had been overcrowded and that the natural ventilation of the van through the hatches had been insufficient. He also complained that the van had not been heated and had had no windows or internal lighting, and that he had had no opportunity to use the toilet during the journey.
The applicant also alleged that he had been deprived of food and water during transportation.
The applicant lodged a complaint with the prison authorities regarding the conditions in which he had been transported from Gherla Prison to Rahova Prison. In a letter of 22 February 2012 the National Administration of Prisons acknowledged that he had been transported in a small-capacity van belonging to Gherla Prison, as the prison did not have at its disposal another van.
According to the Government, a special journey was for the applicant and a co-defendant in order to ensure their attendance at the hearing scheduled by the High Court and Cassation for the following day. The vehicle left Gherla Prison at 5 p.m. on 12 January 2012 and arrived at Rahova Prison at 1.30 a.m. on 13 January 2012. The vehicle was fully equipped and adapted for detainees. On 12 January 2012 the applicant and his co-defendant were the sole detainees transported.
The vehicle disposed of a heating system. The applicant benefitted from space, light and an adequate temperature. He was provided with water and food in conformity with the applicable regulation and had been allowed to carry three pieces of personal luggage and an object of value.
Smoking was forbidden during the transportation.
On 26 January 2012 the applicant lodged a request with the Gherla Prison authorities, asking them to ensure that he had appropriate conditions for preparing his defence in the presence of his lawyer. He alleged that under the current conditions he had been unable to consult the file and have direct contact with his lawyer. In a letter submitted to the prison authorities the following day he asked for direct contact with his lawyer, since at that time he had been separated from his lawyer by a glass partition and had had to speak through a microphone. He lodged another similar request on 20 March 2012.
The prison authorities justified the applicant’s separation from his lawyer by a glass partition by citing the existing legal provisions.
Excerpts from the relevant international and domestic reports concerning the situation in Romanian prisons are given in Iacov Stanciu v. Romania (no. 35972/05, §§ 125-129, 4 July 2012).
There is no CPT report concerning Cluj police station detention facility. However, the Romanian Helsinki Committee visited that establishment on 25 September 2013. The report prepared following its visit indicated that the detention facility was located in the basement of the building. Therefore there was no natural light and ventilation. As the sewage system was too old often the entire basement was flooded making the smell in the cells unbreathable. The cells did not have toilets and the detainees had to ask the police officers to accompany them to the toilets during the day and to use a bucket in the presence of the other detainees during the night. It also noted the lack of running water.
The rules of application of Law no. 275/2006 (Regulament de aplicare a Legii nr. 275/2006 privind executarea pedepselor şi a măsurilor dispuse de organele judiciare în cursul procesului penal), applicable primarily to the detention of convicted persons, were published in the Official Bulletin on 16 January 2007. They were amended by Government Ordinance HG 1113/2010, published on 14 December 2010. The relevant provisions of the above rules concerning the protection of vulnerable detainees state as follows:
Under Article 2 § 2 persons detained pending trial may receive visits in a partitioned room. Article 2 § 4 provides that visits in a room without a partition may exceptionally be allowed, with the approval of the director of the detention facility, under the conditions set out in Article 38 § 4.
Article 5 § 1 provides that detainees may be visited by their defence lawyer at any time. Article 5 § 4 stipulates that meetings with defence lawyers must be confidential and be performed under supervision in special areas with partitions that limit physical contact but allow for the transmission of documents. Supervision must be only visual, as listening to conversations carried out in those areas is prohibited.
Under Article 250 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the material time, an accused person may not familiarise him or herself with the prosecution file until the end of the criminal prosecution. It follows from the Articles regulating criminal investigation and prosecution that before that date, the content of the criminal file is not public.
The Superior Council of the Magistracy (Consiliul Superior al Magistraturii – “the SCM”) has adopted best practice guidelines for the cooperation of courts and prosecutors’ offices with the media. The document was published on the SCM’s website and was communicated to all courts and prosecutors’ offices.
Recommendation no. 5 § 4 of those guidelines reads as follows:
On the question of access to the file, recommendation no. 9 of the guidelines provides:
“(1) Journalists may not study the files during the criminal prosecution stage [în faza de urmărire penală], unless the law or the internal regulations allow for it.
(2) During court proceedings the files and the records concerning the court’s activities are public and may be consulted by any person who can justify a legitimate interest, and by journalists ... Exempted from this rule are ... files concerning ... proceedings for the confirmation and authorisation of telephone interceptions and the recordings thereof; [these files] may only be consulted by the prosecutor, the parties, and experts and interpreters appointed in the cases concerned.”
The internal regulations of the courts were adopted by the SCM on 22 September 2005 and first published in Official Bulletin no. 958 of 28 October 2005. The relevant provisions on the publicity of case files applicable at the time of the facts of the present case state as follows:
“(2) Files and records concerning a court’s activities are public and may be consulted by any person who can justify a legitimate interest ... requests made by journalists will be examined by the spokesperson ...
(6) Files concerning ... proceedings for the confirmation and authorisation of telephone interceptions and recordings may only be consulted by counsel, the parties, and experts and interpreters appointed in the relevant cases in accordance with the applicable regulations ...”
“(1) The clerk of the court will be present in the hearing room half an hour before the beginning of the court hearing, to enable the files to be consulted ...”	
The Recommendation, insofar as relevant, reads as follows:
“23.1 All prisoners are entitled to legal advice, and the prison authorities shall provide them with reasonable facilities for gaining access to such advice. ...
4 Consultations and other communications including correspondence about legal matters between prisoners and their legal advisers shall be confidential. ...
6 Prisoners shall have access to, or be allowed to keep in their possession, documents relating to their legal proceedings.”