The case originated in an application against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Lajos Erményi (“the applicant”), on 20 June 2012. The application had initially been brought, by the applicant and several other Hungarian judges, in respect of both the reduction of their mandatory retirement age and the applicant’s dismissal from his position of Vice-President of the Supreme Court. On 19 March 2014 the Court disjoined from the initial application the applicant’s complaint concerning the termination of his mandate as Vice-President and registered it as a separate application (no. 22254/14). The present case concerns the latter complaint only.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Cech, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant died on 6 January 2015. On 6 February 2015 his heirs, Ms Éva Koczka (the applicant’s widow) and Ms Kinga Erményi and Mr Csaba Erményi (the applicant’s children) applied to pursue the application before the Court in his stead and retained the same lawyer to represent them.
The applicant complained of the premature termination of his mandate as Vice-President of the Supreme Court (hereinafter “Vice-President”), in breach of his Convention rights.
On 21 May 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lived in Budapest.
Having been a judge since 1 January 1978 and a member of the Supreme Court since 1 March 1994, on 15 November 2009 he was appointed Vice-President for a six-year term by the President of the Republic, after being proposed for the post by the President of the Supreme Court.
The mandate of the President of the Supreme Court was prematurely terminated, upon the entry into force of the Fundamental Law on 1 January 2012, in reaction to his criticisms and publicly expressed views regarding proposed judicial reforms (see Baka v. Hungary [GC], no. 20261/12, § 151, 23 June 2016).
In connection with these events, a proposal for the termination of the applicant’s mandate as Vice-President was submitted to Parliament on 23 November 2011, and was adopted on 28 November 2011 in the form of section 185 of Act no. CLXI of 2011 on the Organisation and Administration of the Courts (“the AOAC”) (see Baka, cited above, § 30). Accordingly, as of 1 January 2012, the applicant was removed from his position as Vice-President, three years and ten months before the scheduled expiry of his mandate. He remained in office as president of one of the Civil Law division benches of the Kúria (the historical appellation by which the Supreme Court was renamed in 2012).
On 7 February 2012 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court challenging the termination of his position. In its judgment no. 3076/2013. (III. 27.) AB, adopted by eight votes to seven, the Constitutional Court rejected the constitutional complaint. It held that the premature termination of the applicant’s term of office as Vice-President had not violated the Fundamental Law, since it had been sufficiently justified by the full-scale reorganisation of the judicial system and important changes made in respect of the tasks and competences of the President of the Kúria. It noted that the Kúria’s tasks and competences had been broadened, in particular with regard to the supervision of the legality of municipal council regulations (for the relevant parts of the Constitutional Court’s judgment see Baka, cited above, § 55).
Seven judges dissented and considered that the changes concerning the judicial system, the new Kúria and the person of its president had not fundamentally affected the status of the Vice-President. The position of the Vice-President within the organisation of the supreme judicial instance had not changed. Under the Act LXVI of 1997 on the Organisation and Administration of the Courts, the Vice-President was already entitled to act in the stead of the President of the Supreme Court only with regard to managerial tasks at the Supreme Court, but not with regard to his or her functions as President of the National Council of Justice (see Baka, cited above, § 56). The dissenting judges concluded that the premature termination of the applicant’s term of office had not been sufficiently justified by the reorganisation of the judicial system; and that it had weakened the guarantees in respect of the separation of powers, had been contrary to the prohibition on retroactive legislation, and had breached the principle of the rule of law and the right to a remedy.
On 6 July 2012, as a consequence of the lowering of the judges’ mandatory retirement age pursuant to section 90 (ha) of Act no. CLXII of 2011 on the Legal Status and Remuneration of Judges (“the ALSRJ”) (see Baka, cited above, § 52), the President of the Republic released the applicant from his duties as a judge with effect from 31 December 2012.
In its judgment no. 33/2012. (VII. 17) AB of 16 July 2012, the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional and consequently annulled the provisions on the compulsory retirement age of judges (see Baka, cited above, § 53). On the basis of that judgment, the Budapest Labour Court found, in a first-instance judgment of 21 March 2013, that the termination of the applicant’s judicial service had been unlawful and reinstated him – without, however, ordering his reinstatement in his previous position as president of one of the Civil Law division benches of the Kúria.
Following the Constitutional Court’s judgment of 16 July 2012, Parliament adopted a modified scheme governing the reduction of judges’ compulsory retirement age and provided different options for those who had already been affected by the unconstitutional legislation (see Act no. XX of 2013 referred to in Baka, cited above, § 54). The applicant opted not to be reinstated and received lump-sum compensation for the termination of post as a judge.
The relevant domestic law and international and Council of Europe materials on the independence of the judiciary and on restrictions on the removal of judges are outlined in paragraphs 38, 41, 50, 51 and 72 to 87 of the judgment in Baka (cited above).
Section 135 of the ALSRJ, which was not cited in the Baka case, contains generally applicable rules governing the liability of judges’ employers. It provides, as relevant:
“(1)  The employer is fully liable, regardless of its degree of culpability, for any damage caused to a judge in connection with his or her judicial service ...
(2)  The employer is exempted from such liability if it succeeds in proving that the damage ... in question resulted from an unavoidable cause falling outside its scope of activity ...”
Citing that provision, the Kúria held, in a judgment of 16 April 2014, that the employer of a dismissed and later reinstated judge was liable for the damage resulting from such a dismissal – even if that dismissal had been compulsory under the stringent new rules concerning the lowering of judges’ mandatory retirement age.
The underlying reason was that, on the strength of the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. 33/2012. (VII. 17) AB of 16 July 2012 (see paragraph 12 above), any release from his duties as a judge on the basis of the unconstitutional and overturned section 90 (ha) of the ALSRJ was to be considered unlawful within the meaning of section 135 of the same Act (see paragraph 15 above). The Kúria was of the view that although the stringent legislation rendered the unlawful dismissal unpreventable by the employer, the termination of the employment relationship nevertheless fell within its scope of activity and this fact excluded the application of the exemption rule contained in section 135 (2) of the ALSRJ. Considering that a person’s work or professional activity was a manifestation of utmost importance of his or her personality, the Kúria took the stance that a judge’s unlawful dismissal also violated his or her human dignity and personality rights, as protected by section 75 of the Civil Code. On the basis of that reasoning, it confirmed a judgment under which the employer was to pay 1 million Hungarian forints (approximately 3,300 euros (EUR)) to the judge concerned in non-pecuniary damages.