The case concerns a search of the applicant’s home which was ordered by a prosecutor in proceedings concerning a petty offence.
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in Dąbrowa Tarnowska. The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms M. Pecyna, a lawyer practising in Cracow.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska, and subsequently by Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 3 April 2011 leaflets containing information about the salary of the mayor of Dąbrowa Tarnowska and his photograph were distributed. The leaflets were anonymous and were left in public places in three towns close to Dąbrowa Tarnowska.
Subsequently the police started investigating the incident. On 5 April 2011 the police were informed that the applicant might be in possession of more leaflets and that he had the technical means for printing on a large scale. The Government submitted that the police had been warned by their source that the applicant might proceed to destroy the leaflets.
The Dąbrowa Tarnowska District Prosecutor opened an investigation into a petty offence of unlawful advertising (nielegalne ogłoszenie), proscribed by Article 63 a of the Petty Offences Code (Kodeks wykroczeń).
On 6 April 2011 the Dąbrowa Tarnowska District Prosecutor decided to conduct a search of the premises belonging to the applicant. The decision stated as follows:
“In the course of the investigation, it was established that [the applicant] might be in possession of items which could become evidence in the instant case, in particular leaflets with information about the salary of the mayor and his photograph.
Given the above, in order to verify the information and to secure any possible pieces of evidence the decision should be as stated in the operative part.”
On 11 April 2011 at 6.20 a.m., the police entered the applicant’s home and conducted a search. The search lasted until 7 a.m. No leaflets or other evidence were found. The Government submitted that the search had been conducted by three police officers and in the presence of the applicant.
On 18 April 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal against the search order. He argued that the decision had not been sufficiently reasoned and that there had been no justification for a breach of his right to respect for his private life and home.
The Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights in Warsaw joined the proceedings as amicus curiae. The foundation prepared pleadings in which it raised doubts as to the necessity and proportionality of the measure that had been applied by the authorities. It submitted that the decision of the prosecutor had not been sufficiently reasoned. The leaflets which had been under investigation contained a photograph of a public person, T.K., the mayor of Dąbrowa Tarnowska, and information about his salary, which had already been in the public domain. Such action had fallen within the scope of freedom of expression and should not be seen as a petty offence.
On 20 June 2011 the Dąbrowa Tarnowska District Court upheld the search order and dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The court established that the search had been lawful and justified. The police had received information that the applicant had had in his possession the leaflets which had been distributed in some towns in the municipality. The only way to verify this information had been to conduct a search of the applicant’s house.
Article 63 a (1) of the Petty Offences Code states as follows:
“Whoever places in a public place which is not meant for this purpose an advertisement, poster, announcement, leaflet, inscription or drawing or publicly shows it in another place without the agreement of the appropriate manager shall be liable to a penalty of restriction of liberty or a fine.”
Article 44 of the Petty Offences Code of Procedure (Kodeks Postępowania w sprawach o wykroczenia) states in its relevant parts as follows:
“1.  In order to find and detain objects which are subject to inspection or which may constitute material evidence, the police, and also any other authorities conducting exploratory activities, may search premises and other places if there are reasonable grounds to believe that such objects or evidence are present there ...
Searches may be carried out by order of the public prosecutor or court.
In urgent situations where a search warrant could not be issued beforehand, a search may be conducted without a warrant. However, the authority shall promptly seek the subsequent approval of the search by a prosecutor. A decision in writing authorising the search shall, upon his or her request, be sent to the person whose premises were searched. A copy of the decision shall be delivered within fourteen days ...
Paragraphs 217, 221234 and 236 of the Code of Criminal Procedure shall apply to searches and seizures.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Kodeks Postępowania Karnego) read as follows.
Article 217
“1.  Objects which may serve as evidence, or which may be subject to seizure in order to secure penalties regarding property, penal measures involving property or claims to redress damage, should be surrendered when so required by the court, the State prosecutor and, in cases not amenable to delay, by the police or another authorised agency.
A person holding objects that are to be surrendered shall be called upon to release them voluntarily.
In the event of a seizure of objects, the provisions of Article 228 shall apply accordingly. A record need not be in writing if the object is appended to the files of the case.
If the surrender is demanded by the police or any other authorised agency acting within its sphere of competence, the person surrendering the objects has the right to submit an application without delay for the drawing-up and serving on him of an order of the court or of the State prosecutor authorising the action. The person surrendering the objects shall be informed of this right. The person shall be served, within 14 days of the seizure of the objects, with an order of the court or the State prosecutor authorising the action.
In the event of refusal to surrender objects voluntarily, a seizure may be effected. The provisions of Article 220 § 3 and Article 229 shall apply accordingly.”
Article 224
“1.  A person on whose premises the search is to be conducted shall be notified before the commencement of the search of its objective and summoned to surrender the objects sought.
The person referred to in paragraph 1 above has the right to be present during the search, in addition to a person designated for that purpose by the person conducting the search. Furthermore, the search may be attended by a person designated by the occupant of the premises to be searched, provided that this will not seriously obstruct the search, or render it impossible.
In the event that the search is made in the absence of the owner of the premises, at least one adult member of the household or a neighbour shall be called in to attend the search.”
Article 227
“Searches or seizures of objects shall be conducted in accordance with the objective of the action, with moderation and respect for the dignity of the persons to whom the action relates, and without unnecessary damage or inconvenience.”
Article 236
“Orders regarding searches and seizures in connection with material evidence and other actions shall be subject to an interlocutory appeal by persons whose rights have been violated; an interlocutory appeal against an order issued or an action performed in the preparatory proceedings shall be examined by the district court where the proceedings are pending.”