.  The case originated in an application (no. 71776/12) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ms N.Ts., acting initially on her own behalf and on that of her nephews, N.B., S.B. and L.B. (“the applicants”), on 2 November 2012. The Chamber decided of its own motion to grant the applicants anonymity pursuant to Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court.
.  The applicants were represented by Ms N. Jomarjidze, Ms T. Abazadze, Ms K. Shubashvili and Ms T. Dekanosidze, lawyers of the Georgian Young Lawyers Association (GYLA). The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Meskhoradze, of the Ministry of Justice.
.  The applicants alleged that their right to respect for private and family life under Article 8 of the Convention had been breached on account of the domestic courts’ decision ordering the return of the children to their father.
.  On 26 March 2014 the application was communicated to the Government. On 2 June 2015, the parties were invited to submit additional observations.
.  Ms N.Ts., is a Georgian national who was born in 1976 and lives in Tbilisi. Her three nephews ‒ N.B., and twin boys, S.B. and L.B. – were born in 2002 and 2006 respectively. The facts of the case, as submitted by the applicants, may be summarised as follows.
.  Ms N.Ts.’s sister started a relationship with G.B. in 2000 and the couple moved in together. They had three children, N.B., S.B. and L.B.
.  In 2006 G.B. was convicted of drug abuse and given a five-year suspended sentence. In 2008 he was diagnosed with psychiatric and behavioural disorders. The same year he started methadone substitution treatment (as part of a specialised drug treatment programme). In 2009 G.B. was fined under the Code of Administrative offences for two additional incidents of drug abuse.
.  On 26 November 2009, the mother of the boys died in unrelated circumstances. The boys started living with their aunts and their maternal grandparents. At the end of December 2009 G.B. requested the return of the boys but the maternal family refused his request.
.  According to his medical file, in February 2010 G.B.’s addiction went into remission; no signs of disintegration of personality were observed and he was considered to be reacting appropriately vis-à-vis his surroundings. On 10 February 2010 he was diagnosed with an early remission stage. According to the medical report, he did not pose any threat either to himself or to the people surrounding him and was motivated to start a healthy life. According to another medical certificate dated 26 February 2010, G.B.’s central nervous system was not damaged and he was not suffering from any psychiatric pathology.
.  On 5 January 2010 G.B. asked the Tbilisi City Court under Article 1204 of the Civil Code to order the return of his sons. On 12 January 2010 the first instance court judge decided to involve the Social Service Agency (“the SSA”) in the proceedings. The court ordered that the case file be forwarded to the SSA, that the latter appoint a representative to protect the boys’ interests, and that the SSA conduct an assessment of the social environment and living conditions of the father and the maternal family.
.  The assessment was conducted by the Vake-Saburtalo regional branch of the SSA. Their representative visited the places of residence of G.B. and the maternal family and conducted conversations with G.B., the paternal grandparents, several of their neighbours, the maternal family and also a former babysitter of the boys. The social worker concerned concluded that the living conditions were satisfactory at both locations. As for the boys themselves, she noted the following:
.  In parallel, the SSA’s Vake-Saburtalo regional branch arranged for a psychological examination of the boys. The psychologist involved managed to see only the twins in the presence of their father and a family friend. She concluded that they both had a twofold attitude towards their father, with warm feelings and love on the one hand and fear on the other hand. She further observed that certain emotional and behavioural problems of the boys were predetermined by their subconscious protest against the lack of a healthy relationship with both families and the incomprehensible situation in which they were living. In conclusion, the psychologist noted that the boys’ stressful situation was being further aggravated through having a negative image of their father imposed on them, which could in itself pose a threat to their psychological health and life (“the psychological report of 3 March 2010”).
.  In the interim, the Tbilisi City Court issued an interlocutory order allowing G.B. to see his children in the presence of two family friends. It is apparent from the case file that after just a few meetings, the third persons refused to participate in further meetings.
.  On 23 April 2010 the boys were taken to a paediatric hospital where, following psychological examination, all three were diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. It was noted that all three children had a negative attitude towards their father and a range of fears with respect to him. According to the medical report, they also displayed severe anxiety as a result of the death of their mother. It was recommended that no change be made to their living environment in order to avoid causing further stress to them.
.  In addition, on 26 April 2010 specialists from an Institute of Psychology concluded, on the basis of the material in the case file, that ‒ in view of the emotional stress the boys had suffered as a result of the death of their mother and the fact that their habitual place of residence was that of their maternal grandparents and aunts ‒ it was not advisable for them to return to their father. The questions put to the specialists had been prepared by the lawyer acting on behalf of the maternal family. The specialists also examined the older boy in person and observed the following:
.  On 30 April 2010 the SSA scheduled another psychological examination of the boys. But it turned out to be impossible to conduct as the father had only agreed to their check-up on condition that it would be conducted in his presence and in a neutral place. However, according to the maternal family, the boys refused to see him.
.  On 18 May 2010 the Tbilisi City Court ordered that the three boys be returned to their father. Taking into account G.B.’s latest medical record, the court concluded that he was fit to resume his parental responsibilities. At the same time, the competent judge dismissed the medical report on the children’s mental state as unreliable; she concluded that the experts’ conclusions contradicted the factual circumstances and were based on facts which had not been derived from the case file. She further observed that from a psychological point of view the twin boys were ready to be reunited with their father; they were traumatised as a result of the death of their mother and were in need of a relationship with their father. As for the older boy, the judge observed − referring to the psychologists’ reports ‒ that he had had pre-prepared answers.
.  In conclusion the court noted:
.  According to the case file, representatives from the SSA were not involved in the above proceedings.
.  The maternal family filed an appeal. They claimed inter alia that the court of first instance had assessed the available psychological evidence in a one-sided manner; in particular, it had relied on the SSA’s conclusion ‒ which was unreliable ‒ while rejecting the other medical reports in an unsubstantiated manner. They also criticised the fact that the court had put the father’s rights at the centre of its decision instead of being guided by the best interests of the children.
.  On 24 February 2011 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal quashed the first-instance court’s decision and ruled that the children should stay with their maternal family. The appeal court referred to the psychological reports, according to which the boys were in need of a stable and safe environment and any forceful change in this respect could aggravate their already stressful situation. The panel of three judges concluded as follows:
“... At this stage, the return of the children to G.B. before some more time has passed and his recovery is officially confirmed by specialists, ... thereby putting the children at risk, is considered inappropriate by the chamber [from the point of view of the children’s] own safety. The chamber considers that not only should G.B. demonstrate that he has recovered but should, at the same time, prepare the children psychologically for a change in [their] situation, in order to facilitate their subsequent adjustment.”
.  The panel further noted that they shared the views of the specialists, according to which the process of the boys’ adjustment to their father should happen naturally. Given that for various objective and subjective reasons the boys remained stressed in their relationship with their biological father, their removal from their habitual environment could, in the view of the judges, have adverse effects on them.
.  According to the court record, the representatives of the SSA and their district branch were involved in the appeal proceedings with the status of an “interested party”.
.  On 11 October 2011 the Supreme Court of Georgia remitted the case to the appeal court for re-examination. The court noted the following gaps in the decision of the Tbilisi Court of Appeal:
.  Lastly, the court noted ‒ along the same line of reasoning as the appeal court ‒ the importance of the psychological preparation of the children for a change in their situation. It observed, however, that despite the interlocutory measure ordered by the first-instance court, no meetings between the children and their father were being organised, since the family friends had refused to take part in those meetings. In such circumstances, it was unclear how a natural adjustment process with the father could be expected.
.  In November 2011 the proceedings recommenced at the Tbilisi Court of Appeal. The maternal family members alleged that G.B. was not interested in seeing his boys and re-establishing contact and a relationship with them. They claimed that the last time he had seen the boys had been in April 2010. They also criticised the fact that G.B. had spoken openly about the contentious situation concerning the boys on a TV show, following which the children had allegedly been further traumatised. The older one was ashamed of going to school because everyone knew his family situation and, according to the maternal family, would ask him questions about his “drug-addicted” father. The maternal family members also claimed that the SSA had shown absolutely no interest in the children, not checking on them for more than a year. The father, for his part, stated that he would not want his children to go with him unless they changed their mind.
On 24 November 2011, acting at the request of G.B., the court issued an interlocutory measure under which the latter was allowed to see his children in the presence of a representative of the SSA. The appeal court also asked the SSA to report on the progress of those meetings.
.  On 11 and 18 December 2012 three social workers went to see the boys at their maternal family’s apartment. According to the report drawn up thereafter (“the report of 4 January 2012”), during both of the visits the members of the maternal family reacted negatively. The boys refused to stay and talk to the social workers alone on 11 December 2012, and at the second meeting only the older boy spoke with the social workers. The social workers concluded that the psycho-emotional condition of the children had deteriorated. Furthermore, according to the report, N. explicitly expressed a negative attitude towards his father and the social workers. In this regard the social workers observed:
The report concluded the following:
.  In January 2012 the older boy was taken for psychological examination to a paediatric hospital, where he was diagnosed with anxiety phobia disorders. It was recommended that he undergo a psychotherapy course and live in a stable, calm and safe environment.
.  By a decision of 2 February 2012 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal reversed its decision of 24 February 2011, concluding that the children should live with their father. The court referred to the report of 4 January 2012 concluding that the children had been negatively influenced by their maternal family and that their attitude towards their father had been shaped accordingly. In particular, the court stated:
“The chamber notes that since 2009 the attitude of the children towards their father has worsened and that this has happened despite the fact that the father has not in fact been given an opportunity to communicate with his children. Accordingly, the father could not have negatively influenced his children.
The chamber considers that the children’s negative attitude towards [their father] is a result of powerful, unhealthy psychological influence and inappropriate educational methods [used] by the persons providing for their upbringing”.
And,
Relying on Article 3 of the Convention on the Rights of the Chid, and Articles 1197-1199 and Article 1204 of the Civil Code, the Tbilisi Court of Appeal concluded that there was no legal basis for the boys to stay with their maternal grandparents and aunts, and that it was in their best interests to be reunited with their father.
The aunts and the maternal grandparents filed an appeal on points of law, which was rejected by the Supreme Court of Georgia on 3 May 2012.
.  On 4 June 2012 the Tbilisi City Court issued an execution order for enforcement of the decision concerning the return of the boys to the father. The handover which was due to take place on 25 June 2012 in the presence of a social worker failed, however, since the boys refused to go with their father. A psychologist who was there at the invitation of the maternal family noted in the subsequent report that the boys had been afraid of being taken by force by their father; they had cried as they had not want to go with him. She concluded that G.B. should look for other ways of regaining their trust and re-establishing a relationship with his children. On 14 September 2012 a further attempt to enforce the court decision was likewise unsuccessful. According to the report drawn up thereafter, the children had refused to move in with their father.
According to the case file, the domestic courts’ decision has not been enforced to date. Neither the SSA nor the father has taken any additional measures for that purpose. The boys are currently living with their maternal grandparents and aunts.
.  The Civil Code of Georgia contains a special chapter regulating the relationship between parents and children. Article 1199 states that the rights of parents shall not be exercised in such a way that would harm the interests of their children. The relevant Articles of the Civil Code further state:
Article 1200 – Upbringing of children with the mutual agreement of parents
“... 2. If parents fail to agree, the disputed issue shall be decided by a court with their participation. In such a case, the right of a parent to represent his or her child in connection with the court dispute shall be suspended. The custody and guardianship body shall appoint a representative who will represent the interests of a child in the court proceedings.”
Article 1204 – Right to request the return of a child who is a minor
“1. Parents have the right to request a court order for the return of a child from a person who has taken the child into his or her care without any legal grounds or corresponding court decision.
The court may refuse such a request if it is not in the child’s interests.”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code of Procedure of Georgia read as follows:
Article 81 – Civil procedural legal personality
“3. The rights of minors between seven and eighteen years of age ... and their legal interests shall be protected in court by their parents, foster parents or guardians. At the same time, the court is under an obligation to involve those minors in the relevant proceedings.”
Article 162 – Court order for a forensic examination
Article 354 of the above Code provides that when examining family disputes the courts may, on their own initiative, request additional evidence.
.  The Social Service Agency (“the SSA”) is a public law entity which was created by and functions under the Ministry of Health, Labour and Social Affairs. The SSA is responsible, inter alia, for overseeing and implementing state programs concerning social rehabilitation and the protection of children. Article 2 § 2 (f1) of its Rules states that the Agency shall provide and coordinate the adoption, custody and care of orphans and children left without parental care.
.  The relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (“the CRC”), which entered into force for Georgia in 1994, read as follows:
.  In General Comment no. 14 on the right of the child to have his or her best interests taken as a primary consideration, published on 29 May 2013 (CRC/C/GC/14), the Committee on the Rights of the Child stated, inter alia, the following:
.  The relevant parts of General Comment no. 12 on the right of the child to be heard, published on 20 July 2009 (CRC/C/GC/12) by the Committee on the Rights of the Child read as follows:
.  The relevant parts of the Guidelines of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on Child-Friendly Justice, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 17 November 2010 at the 1098th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies, provide:
On 25 January 1996 the Council of Europe adopted the Convention on the Exercise of Children’s Rights, which entered into force on 1 July 2000. To date, the Convention has been signed by twenty-eight Council of Europe Member States and ratified by twenty. Georgia is not a party to the Convention. The relevant parts of the Convention read as follows: