The case concerns non-enforcement of the applicant’s visiting rights in respect of his minor daughter.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Psary. The applicant was represented by Ms A. Przedpełska, a lawyer practising in Częstochowa.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska and subsequently by Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In October 1999 the applicant filed for divorce and made a request to the court to regulate his contact rights with his daughter, K., who had been born on 21 June 1998.
It appears that on 11 December 2000 the Częstochowa District Court issued the first decision concerning contact.
On 23 November 2001 the Częstochowa Regional Court dissolved the applicant’s marriage and granted him contact rights, allowing him to see his child every other Saturday for four hours in the presence of her mother and a guardian (kurator sądowy).
The applicant submitted that most of the visits had not taken place or had been disturbed by the hostile attitude of the mother. The Government stated that the visits had taken place until May 2003.
On 14 May 2001 the guardian prepared a report on the manner in which the meetings had been carried out; she noted that out of seventeen planned meetings, five had not taken place. The expert considered that the child had been manipulated by her mother. According to the expert some of the situations had amounted to emotional ill-treatment of K. by her mother as the latter had been using the child to hurt the applicant. In consequence the child was negatively disposed towards the applicant, whom she associated with unpleasant situations. The guardian suggested changing the contact order by moving the venue away from the mother’s house. Moreover, she noted that the visits had usually taken place in the presence of several other third persons – members of the mother’s family – which made it ever more difficult for the applicant to play and talk with a toddler. The guardian suggested that the number of other persons present during the applicant’s visits should therefore be limited.
On 6 November 2001 the Gliwice Regional Court rejected for formal reasons applications by the applicant to enforce his contact rights and to impose a fine on his wife.
On 9 July 2002 the applicant applied for enforcement of the court order of 23 November 2001 and requested imposition of a fine on his former wife for hindering his contact with his daughter.
He also requested the appointment of a new guardian who could assist him in the enforcement of his contact rights, as the former one had refused to continue acting in the applicant’s case. In September 2002 the applicant urged the court to deal with his application faster as the visits with his child were not taking place.
On 9 September 2003 the Bytom District Court ordered the applicant’s former wife to comply with the order of 23 November 2001.
On 1 June 2004 the court decided to impose a fine of 300 Polish zlotys (PLN) on the applicant’s former wife. It ordered her to comply with the contact arrangements set by the court on 23 November 2001 on pain of a further fine of PLN 600.
On 2 June 2003 the applicant applied to change the contact arrangement and to obtain custody of his daughter. He pointed to the mother’s negative influence on the girl and her refusal to respect the contact orders.
The court commissioned an expert opinion; it was submitted to the court over one year later, on 21 September 2004. The opinion established that the emotional ties between the applicant and the child had been broken. However their re-establishment was possible and necessary for the long-term development of the girl. The experts suggested that the parties should undergo therapy with a view to ease the conflict between them.
On 15 October 2004 the court gave an interim order instructing the applicant’s former wife and her daughter to undergo therapy. They did not show at a meeting with the therapist.
On 14 December 2004 the Tarnowskie Góry District Court dismissed the applicant’s application to change the custody arrangement.
On 26 April 2005 the Gliwice Regional Court dismissed an appeal by the applicant but amended the contact arrangement. It ordered that the applicant had the right to have contact with his daughter every other Saturday for six hours on his own in a place away from her domicile.
The order of 26 April 2005 became enforceable on 1 June 2005 and six days later the applicant applied for imposition of a fine on his former wife for her failure to comply with it.
The application was examined on 3 February 2006 and the Tarnowskie Góry District Court fined the applicant’s former wife PLN 1,000. Following an appeal by her, the Gliwice Regional Court on 29 September 2006 reduced the fine to PLN 600. The court noted that visits had not been taking place, but the parties differed as to the reasons why. At least one visit had not taken place because the child had been sick.
On 23 October 2006 the applicant lodged another application to fine his former wife. On 29 June 2007 the Tarnowskie Góry District Court dismissed the request. It established that the meetings between the applicant and the child had not been taking place as ordered and that on some occasions the police had had to intervene. The child had been hysterical and had refused to go with the applicant. On other dates the meetings had not taken place as since March 2006 the applicant had stopped coming to them.
On 17 October 2007 the Gliwice Regional Court dismissed an appeal lodged by the applicant.
On 20 July 2005 the applicant initiated proceedings in which he sought to ensure his former wife attended therapy sessions, as suggested by the experts in their report of 21 September 2004 (see paragraph 16 above). In reply, the applicant’s former wife sought total suspension of his contact rights for two years, arguing that the applicant was incapable of communicating with his daughter. During the proceedings it was established that the last meetings had taken place in 2001 and that later the applicant had on many occasions come to their place without being able to see the girl.
On 3 July 2007 the Tarnowskie Góry District Court dismissed the applicant’s request but the decision was quashed for formal reasons on 22 November 2007.
On 9 September 2008 an expert report was prepared. The experts noted that the relationship between the applicant and the child could not have been bolstered as for many years K. had not had any contact with her father. The experts suggested resuming contact in a limited scope and carrying out the meetings on neutral ground – for example her school – in the presence of a school psychologist. On 18 March 2009 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s application. That decision was upheld on 9 April 2009.
On 7 May 2009 the applicant initiated another set of proceedings in which he sought to amend the contact arrangements, proposing that the meetings take place in a neutral environment for the child and in the presence of a psychologist.
On 10 December 2009 the Tarnowskie Góry District Court dismissed his application. The court established that the applicant had stopped coming to the scheduled meetings with his daughter since March 2006. Moreover, the court considered that holding the meetings at her school would not be in the best interest of the child. The existing contact arrangements allowed the applicant to take the child to any place outside of her domicile but the applicant had himself taken the decision not to come to see his daughter. The court found no instances of the mother hindering contact with the child in the period under consideration.
On 19 August 2010 the Gliwice Regional Court quashed the above decision and remitted the case to the lower court. The court pointed to the fact that the negative attitude of the child towards the applicant had clearly been influenced by her mother, who in reality had been opposed to any meetings with her father. The girl was twelve years old and did not know her father. In such circumstances the District Court had concluded too early that the meetings had not been taking place because of the applicant’s own decision to stop coming to them.
In his application of 19 January 2011 the applicant reiterated his previous request that therapy sessions be ordered for his daughter, pointing out that this solution had been proposed by experts. The applicant requested that the court specify the exact place where the therapy was to take place. In another application the applicant requested that the court examine the validity of various medical certificates which had been used by his former wife to justify her absences from the hearings. The applicant suggested that his former wife had been working normally and had been avoiding attending court in order to prolong the proceedings.
On 27 April 2011 the Gliwice Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint under section 5 of the Law of 17 June 2004 on complaints about a breach of the right to an investigation conducted or supervised by a prosecutor and to a trial within a reasonable time (Ustawa o skardze na naruszenie prawa strony do rozpoznania sprawy w postępowaniu przygotowawczym prowadzonym lub nadzorowanym przez prokuratora i postępowaniu sądowym bez nieuzasadnionej zwłoki).
The hearings scheduled for January and May 2011 were adjourned because of the applicant’s former wife’s absence; she presented doctor’s certificates. Following a request by the court, the doctor who had issued the certificates explained that the applicant’s former wife should avoid stressful situations. Thus she could not give evidence even in proceedings at her own home. Afterwards the applicant’s former wife did not pick up notifications of the scheduled hearings. In October 2011 she presented a medical certificate confirming the impossibility for K. to attend hearings for the following seven months. As a result the court decided to refrain from examining K.
On 18 May 2012 the Tarnowskie Góry District Court, after reconsidering the case, ordered the applicant and his former wife to undergo therapy. The court established that the applicant had seen his daughter twice since February 2006, in June 2009 when he came to her school and in May 2010. In both instances, however, the applicant had been unable to engage in any conversation with her. The therapy ordered by the court could ameliorate the relation between the parents and help to rebuild the fatherdaughter relationship. The court reiterated that, taking into account the best interest of the child, the meetings should not take place at her school.
On 17 April 2013 the Gliwice Regional Court partly amended the decision. It decided that for the duration of the therapy, but for a maximum of eight months, the applicant’s contact with his daughter should be limited to phone calls only.
The applicant applied for a writ of enforcement and on 20 December 2013 the Tanowskie Góry District Court allowed his application. However, on 14 May 2014 the Gliwice Regional Court overturned the writ of enforcement ruling, finding that the final order to undergo therapy of 17 April 2013 did not lend itself to forcible enforcement by the State.
Overall only two therapeutic sessions took place, on 26 September and 24 October 2013. In the meantime, the applicant asked the court to impose a fine on his former wife for not attending the sessions with a psychologist. In November 2013 the parties stopped coming for the therapy. On 12 March 2014 the court heard the parties. It also enquired with the psychologist who had conducted the therapy about a possibility of resuming it. However, the therapist informed the court that she had resigned in view of the conflict between the parties. On 11 June 2104 the applicant withdrew his motion to fine his former wife. In consequence the court discontinued this set of proceedings.
On 22 November 2013 the applicant’s former wife applied to the court to amend the order of 14 April 2013 by changing the psychologist with whom she had been ordered to undergo therapy with since she considered her incompetent.
The applicant’s former wife was present at the hearing on 15 April 2015. Afterwards, for the following year, she sent to the court various medical certificates proving her inability to appear before it. On 7 May 2015 the court requested an expert opinion on the applicant’s former wife’s medical condition.
On 18 July 2015 the court obtained an expert opinion which concluded that the illnesses cited by the applicant’s former wife had not been serious enough to warrant such a long-term inability to appear before a court.
On 20 January 2016 the Tarnowskie Góry District Court ordered the parties to undergo therapy, but left the choice of therapist to them. The court took also into account a letter of 24 March 2014 from the then psychologist, who confirmed that that therapy had no prospect of success.
On 6 October 2016 the Gliwice Regional Court examined an appeal lodged against the above decision and discontinued the case as the applicant’s daughter had turned eighteen and was no longer subject to parental authority.
Between 2001 and 2016 the applicant wrote numerous complaints to the Minister of Justice, the Ombudsman, the presidents of the courts dealing with his cases, the head of the Medical Board, and the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights. He received replies in particular from the presidents of the courts, who on each occasion expressed the view that the courts had dealt with his cases diligently and speedily. The Ombudsman also intervened on his behalf on several occasions.
The relevant domestic law concerning the enforcement of a parent’s contact rights in force prior to 13 August 2011 is set out in the Court’s judgment in P.P. v. Poland (no. 8677/03, §§ 69-74, 8 January 2008).
Before 13 August 2011, the general provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure (“the CCP”) on the enforcement of nonpecuniary obligations were applicable to the enforcement of court decisions on parental rights or access rights. If a court obliged a parent exercising custody rights to ensure the other parent’s access to a child, Article 1050 of the CCP was applicable. That article provided:
“1. If the debtor is obliged to take measures which cannot be taken by any other person, the court in whose district the enforcement proceedings were instituted, following an application by a creditor and after hearing the parties, shall fix the timelimit within which the debtor shall comply with his obligation, on pain of a fine ...
If the debtor fails to comply with this obligation, further time limits may be fixed and further fines may be imposed by the court.”
The Amendment of the Code of Civil Procedure Act of 26 May 2011 introduced provisions dealing specifically with the enforcement of judgments granting contact rights in respect of children (Articles 59815 to 59821). As of 13 August 2011, those provisions provide that a court decision on access arrangements serves as an enforceable title for an application to a court to impose a penalty payment (oznaczona suma pieniężna) on a party refusing to comply with those arrangements in respect of each and every failure to do so, to be paid to the person to whom contact rights have been granted.