The present case concerns the applicant’s removal from Russia with a subsequent ban on re-entry for five years, for a violation of immigration regulations.
The applicant was born in 1977 and lives in Pereyaslovskaya. The applicant was represented by Mr A. Korzhov, a lawyer practising in Krasnodar.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
According to the applicant, in 2007 he arrived in Russia and in 2008 he started cohabiting with Ms A.P. in the Krasnodar Region. It is unclear on what basis he resided in the country. From the documents submitted, it appears that he regularly left and re-entered Russia. According to the Government, the applicant arrived in Russia in 2011 and on 17 February 2012 he registered his temporary stay in Russia with the immigration authorities in a settlement in the Krasnodar Region.
In November 2008 Ms A.P. had a daughter, M.P. According to the applicant, the child was his, even though another person, Mr A.P., was indicated as the father on the birth certificate. The applicant stated that he fully participated in the upbringing of his daughter. According to the Government, given that a different person was indicated as the father on the birth certificate, the applicant was not the father of M.P. and there was no proof to the contrary.
According to the applicant, on an unspecified date in January 2014 he officially registered his stay in Russia in Pereyaslovskaya, in the Brukhovetskiy district of the Krasnodar Region. The applicant’s stay in the country was registered and duly authorised by the Brukhovetskiy district department of the Federal Migration Service (“the FMS”). The documents submitted show that the immigration authorities were fully aware of the applicant’s continued presence in Russia. They officially registered his stay in Pereyaslovskaya as lasting from 14 March to 9 June 2014, from 9 June to 27 August 2014, from 27 August to 21 November 2014, and from 21 November to 9 December 2014 – a consecutive period of 255 days, that is, eight months and twenty-six days.
On 15 January 2014 the applicant officially started working as an electrician for the Blago-Stroy company. The duration of his employment contract was until 26 December 2014.
On 24 October 2014 the applicant officially registered his marriage to Ms A.P.
On 9 December 2014 the applicant, his wife and her parents went to the FMS to apply for a temporary residence permit for the applicant. According to the applicant, he went to the FMS with a number of documents, including a copy of his marriage certificate and a copy of his employment contract. However, the FMS officials Mr S. and Ms P. refused to take those documents and called the police, who detained the applicant for a violation of Article 18.8 § 1 of the Russian Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”), that is, overstaying the time-limit for residence in Russia of ninety days within a period of 180 days. A record of his administrative detention was drawn up and he was then taken to the Brukhovetskiy District Court (see paragraph 12 below). According to the Government’s submissions, the applicant indicated in the detention record that he had a wife in Russia, whom he had married in October 2014, but he did not state either that he was employed in Russia or that he had any children living in that country.
On 27 December 2014 the applicant was subjected to removal from Russia and was banned from re-entry for five years.
On 9 December 2014 the applicant was taken to the Brukhovetskiy District Court, which found him guilty of a violation of Article 18.8 § 1 of the CAO for overstaying the ninety-day time-limit for residence in Russia. The court fined him 2,000 Russian roubles (approximately 40 euros) and ordered his administrative removal for residing in the country without proper authorisation. The text of the decision did not contain any references to or information about the applicant’s family situation. The decision ordered the applicant’s detention pending removal in a special detention centre for foreigners and stateless persons in Sochi, in the Krasnodar Region. After his removal from Russia, the applicant would be banned from re-entering the country for five years.
The applicant appealed against the removal decision to the Krasnodar Regional Court (“the Regional Court”). With his application for the appeal he enclosed, among other documents, a certificate of employment in the Blago-Stroy company showing that he had been employed there between 15 January and 26 December 2014.
On 25 December 2014 the Regional Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the decision to remove the applicant. In its ruling, the court confirmed that the applicant’s residence in Russia from 14 March to 9 December 2014 had been officially registered by the FMS; however, it did not comment on the authorities’ tolerance for the applicant’s stay in the country in violation of the authorised period of up to ninety out of 180 days. The court did not examine the applicant’s complaint concerning the adverse effect of the removal on his family life.
On 27 December 2014, the applicant was subjected to administrative removal from Russia (see paragraph 11 above).
The applicant’s lawyer lodged a cassation appeal against the removal with the Regional Court. On 30 January 2015 the Regional Court upheld the removal order. The court did not examine the applicant’s complaint under Article 8 of the Convention concerning the effect of the removal on his family life.
The applicant’s lawyer appealed against the above-mentioned decision to the Administrative Cases Chamber of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation (“the Supreme Court”).
On 23 June 2015 the Supreme Court examined the appeal, overruled the removal order, and remitted the case to the Regional Court for fresh examination. The Supreme Court stated, in particular, that the applicant had officially been employed in Russia between 15 January and 26 December 2014. In accordance with Article 97 § 5 of the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union, the period of the stay of a foreign national was defined by the length of his or her employment contract. On 10 October 2014 Armenia had signed the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union. In accordance with Article 1.7 § 2 of the CAO, any regulations mitigating or terminating administrative punishment had retrospective effect. Therefore, given that the applicant had been officially employed and that the lower courts had disregarded that fact, and given the retrospective effect of the relevant regulations, the applicant’s case should be examined afresh. The Supreme Court did not examine the applicant’s complaint concerning the adverse effect of the removal on his family life.
On 22 July 2015 the Regional Court examined the applicant’s case anew and upheld the initial removal order. In particular, the court in its decision stated that the applicant had not provided documents confirming his employment in Russia. As for his complaint concerning the adverse effect of the removal on his family life, the court stated:
“... the material in the case file does not contain information [showing] that A. Sargsyan lives with his wife and adopted daughter and plays a part in her upbringing and financial support, or any other information that shows presence of a family and close family ties ...
While the record of the administrative violation [of 9 December 2014] was being drawn up, and then during the examination of his case by the first-instance and appellate courts, A. Sargsyan did not claim that he was officially employed. According to record no. 629112 of the administrative violation [of 9 December 2014] and Mr Sargsyan’s explanation, he was neither employed nor had any children.”
On 20 October 2015 the applicant appealed against the abovementioned decision to the Supreme Court. In his appeal he stated that, prior to the examination of his case on 22 July 2015, he had furnished the Regional Court with the necessary duly certified documents confirming his employment, immigration status and family life. In particular, he stressed that the Regional Court had ignored a copy of his marriage certificate, as well as a document showing that he had a daughter, and the certificate of employment in the Blago-Stroy company showing that he had been employed there between 1 March and 30 December 2014. The applicant stressed that on 9 December 2014 he had gone to the FMS voluntarily, as he had wanted to apply for a residence permit. At that point, he had been detained, taken to court, and his removal had been ordered without any regard for his family life in Russia.
On 15 February 2016 the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the removal order. The Supreme Court stated, in particular, that in the absence of any other corroborating documents, the applicant’s certificate of employment for the period between 1 March and 30 December 2014 was not valid evidence, as previously he had submitted a certificate to the courts indicating different dates for his employment (see paragraph 13 above). As for the applicant’s complaint concerning the adverse effect of the removal on his family life, the court stated that the record drawn up at the time of his detention on 9 December 2014 did not contain any information about his having children (see paragraph 10 above), and that he had failed to provide evidence proving that he “actually resided with his wife and child, that they ran a household together, and that he exercised parental responsibilities”.
For a summary of the relevant domestic regulations, see Guliyev and Sheina v. Russia, no. 29790/14, §§ 25-34, 17 April 2018.