The applicant worked as a secondary school teacher in Eastern Slavonia and was dismissed for failing to use the standard Croatian language when teaching. The authorities held that the applicant could not be expected to learn Croatian, given that he was fifty-five years old at the time. The applicant complains that his dismissal was arbitrary and that he was discriminated against on the basis of his age and his Serbian ethnic origin.
The applicant was born in 1944 and lived in Darda. He was initially represented by Ms B. Paprić and subsequently by Mr H. Krivić, both lawyers practising in Osijek. On 11 December 2019 the applicant’s legal representative informed the Court that the applicant had died on 2 June 2019 and that his widow, Ms Ljubica Novaković, and their two children, Ms Biljana Vuković and Mr Dejan Novaković, had stated that they would like the applicant’s case to proceed.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant was of Serbian ethnic origin and studied in Serbia. He worked as a teacher in Croatia from 1971 onwards.
From 1 July 1998 onwards the applicant was employed on the basis of a contract of indefinite duration as a teacher at the Second Secondary School in the Darda Region (“the School”). The Darda Region is an area in Eastern Slavonia which was peacefully reintegrated after the war into Croatian territory by 15 January 1998.
The applicant taught classes attended by students of various ethnic origins, including Croatian and Serbian, some of whom had returned to Darda after they had had to flee in 1991.
In the school year 1997/98, while the peaceful reintegration process was still ongoing, the applicant taught at the School in the Serbian language. The following school year, according to the Government, the School began to apply section 4 of the Secondary Education Act (Zakon o srednjem školstvu, see paragraph 24 below), which provided that all classes in the Republic of Croatia were to be held in the Croatian language. It appears that some other larger schools in the region continued to provide separate classes in minority languages, including Serbian.
On 19 November 1998, on the basis of an anonymous complaint by students of Croatian origin alleging that the applicant and three other teachers of Serbian origin were not using the standard Croatian language when teaching, an education inspector attended their classes. No teacher of Croatian origin was subject to inspection at that occasion.
In a report dated 4 December 1998 the education inspector held that the applicant and another teacher had not been using the standard Croatian language in their classes, whereas two other teachers had been complying with that requirement. The inspector recommended that the applicant be prohibited from teaching classes which were to be provided in the Croatian language.
On the basis of those findings, on 7 December 1998 a senior education inspector from the Ministry of Education and Sports (Ministarstvo prosvjete i športa, hereinafter “the Ministry”) prohibited the applicant from teaching in classes which were to be provided in the Croatian language. That decision was challenged in administrative proceedings, with the Administrative Court (Upravni sud Republike Hrvatske) ultimately setting it aside in 2006, on the grounds that the question of which language the classes at the School were meant to be taught in at the material time had not been conclusively established.
By a letter addressed to the Ministry dated 17 December 1998, the principal of the School replied to the findings of the inspector and her conclusions dated 4 December 1998 (see paragraph 10 above), explaining that classes at the School had not been formed according to the ethnic origin of pupils, but that the pupils agreed to have classes together. Twenty-four pupils were of Serbian origin and ten were of Croatian origin; similarly, some teachers were of Serbian origin and some were of Croatian origin. At the end of October 1998 the School had received an oral directive from the competent authority to hold classes only in Croatian, and the inspection had taken place less than a month after that instruction had been received. The principal also requested an instruction as to the deadline by which the teachers should master the standard Croatian language necessary for teaching their classes.
Subsequently, relying on the findings of the education inspector and the decision that the applicant should be prohibited from teaching (see paragraphs 10 and 11 above), on 29 March 1999 the School dismissed the applicant from his teaching position owing to personal reasons (“osobno uvjetovani otkaz”). That decision, in so far as relevant, read as follows:
“The employer cannot transfer [the applicant] to another post in the school, because there are no such posts – there is no class which follows lessons in the Serbian language in which [the applicant] could work, bearing in mind his profession.
The school cannot provide [the applicant] with [further] education or training, because given his age (55) and years of service (29), it is not justified to expect [the applicant] to be able to change [his] permanent characteristics and capabilities and learn how to teach in the standard Croatian language.”
On 6 May 1999 the applicant lodged a civil action with the Beli Manastir Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Belom Manastiru), challenging the decision on his dismissal.
On 10 March 2008 the Beli Manastir Municipal Court dismissed the applicant’s civil action, upholding the reasons for his dismissal relied upon by the school. It held as follows:
“Given that classes in [the School] were given exclusively in the Croatian language and that it has been shown that the applicant did not teach in Croatian, the court [has] concluded that, when dismissing [the applicant], the defendant had not formed a class in which [the applicant] would have been able to teach in the Serbian language, which justifies [his] dismissal for personal reasons; the fact that [the applicant] had taught in Serbian for 28 years is a circumstance which arguably leads to the conclusion that it was not justified to expect [the School] to provide [the applicant] with additional education and training in the Croatian language, bearing in mind that he was 55 years of age ...”
The applicant lodged an appeal with the Osijek County Court (Županijski sud u Osijeku), which was dismissed on 29 January 2009.
The applicant then lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske), which on 13 July 2010 dismissed his appeal on points of law as unfounded.
On 31 January 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), complaining that he had been arbitrarily dismissed for discriminatory reasons on the basis of his Serbian ethnic origin, and that his right to work had been violated, as had his right to equality as a member of a national minority and in the performance of public service.
On 6 June 2014 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint, on the grounds that there was no doubt that the applicant, like any other teacher in Croatia, was required to teach courses in the standard Croatian language, and that his inability to do so had led to his lawful dismissal. The Constitutional Court therefore did not see any arbitrariness or discrimination in the decision to dismiss the applicant.
The decision of the Constitutional Court was served on the applicant’s representative on 3 July 2014.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 56/90 with subsequent amendments) read as follows:
Article 14
“All persons in the Republic of Croatia shall enjoy rights and freedoms, regardless of race, colour, gender, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth, education, social status or other status.”
Article 15
“1.  Equal rights for the members of all national minorities in the Republic of Croatia shall be guaranteed.
Equality and protection of the rights of national minorities shall be regulated by a constitutional Act to be enacted under the procedure provided for organic laws.”
Article 29 § 1
“Everyone shall be entitled to have his or her rights and obligations, or [a] suspicion or accusation [against him or her in respect] of a criminal offence, decided upon fairly and within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
Article 54
“1.  Everyone shall have the right to work and [the right] to freedom of work.
Everyone shall be free to choose his or her vocation and occupation, and shall have access to every workplace and post under equal conditions.”
The relevant provisions of the Labour Act (Zakon o radu, Official Gazette no. 38/95 with subsequent amendments), as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Section 106
“(1)  If there is a justified reason, an employer may give notice to terminate an employment contract, subject to the statutory or agreed notice period (‘regular dismissal’), in the following cases:
...
-  if the employee is not capable of fulfilling his or her employment-related duties because of a permanent characteristic or [lack of] ability (‘dismissal for personal reasons’);
...
(2)  Dismissal for professional or personal reasons is allowed only if the employer cannot employ the employee in another post [‘reclassement’].
(3)  When deciding on a dismissal for professional or personal reasons, the employer must take into account the employee’s age, years of service and maintenance obligations.
(4)  Dismissal for professional or personal reasons is allowed only if the employer cannot educate or train the employee to work on other tasks, or if there are circumstances which make it unreasonable to expect to the employer educate or train the employee to work on other tasks ...”
Section 112
“1.  If the employer is terminating an employment contract in [a] case where this Act provides for the existence of a justified reason, [the burden] is on the employer to prove the existence of such a justified reason for terminating [the contract].”
The relevant provisions of the Constitutional Act on the Rights on National Minorities (Ustavni zakon o pravima nacionalnih manjina, Official Gazette no. 155/02 with subsequent amendments) provide as follows:
Article 10
“Members of national minorities have the right to freely use their language and script in private as well as in public... in accordance with the [relevant] law.”
Article 11
“1.  Members of national minorities have the right to be educated in their language and script.
Care and education of members of national minorities is provided for in preschool institutions, elementary and secondary schools... with classes in the language and script which they use, under the conditions and in the manner prescribed by law on care and education in language and script of national minorities...”
The relevant provisions of the Secondary Education Act (Zakon o srednjem školstvu, Official Gazette no. 19/92 with subsequent amendments) read as follows:
Section 4
“1.  Secondary school classes shall be held in the Croatian language and using Latin script.”
Section 5
“Secondary education of children belonging to national minorities shall be realised in accordance with the provisions of the Act on care and education in the language and script of national minorities, the provisions of this Act and other legal texts.”
The Act on care and education in the language and script of national minorities (Zakon o odgoju i obrazovanju na jeziku i pismu nacionalnih manjina, Official Gazette no. 51/00 with subsequent amendments) provides for the right of members of national minorities to be provided education in their own languages, either by forming special schools or special classes. In the school year 2018/2019 there were 44 schools in Croatia providing education fully in the language of national minorities, 4 schools performing bilingual curriculum and 180 schools which provided special classes of language and culture of national minorities.
Section 17 of the Act on Educational Inspection (Zakon o prosvjetnoj inspekciji, Official Gazette nos. 50/95 and 73/97), in force at the material time, read as follows:
“2.  Based on the findings of a professional pedagogical supervisor or another person ..., the inspector may:
-  order the teacher ... to [correct] established failures, mistakes or errors in his or her work,
-  prohibit the teacher ... from performing educational activities.”
In judgment Gž-1518/2005-2, the Bjelovar County Court (Županijski sud u Bjelovaru) held as follows:
“... the plaintiff was employed as a bartender in a hospitality establishment [bar] owned by the defendant at the bus station in B. ... the defendant decided to cease the operation of the [bar] at the bus station in B. ..., rented that [bar to somebody else] and terminated the employment contracts of all employees ... The court cannot accept the plaintiff’s argument: that the defendant failed to take into account his family and personal circumstances despite [the defendant’s] obligation to do so because, had [the defendant] done that, [the defendant] would have realised that he [the plaintiff] would be left without any means of subsistence and that, at the age of 52, he would have no further possibilities of finding new employment. ... section 106(3) of the Labour Act provides that when deciding to terminate an employment contract for professional reasons, the employer must take into account the length of employment, age and maintenance obligations of the employee; however, the employer must also take into account [those factors] when, owing to organisational reasons, the need for all employees to perform a certain type of task has ceased, in other words, when the number of persons performing certain tasks is reduced. In the present case, the defendant ceased operating secondary hospitality services [the bar] and the need for all employees to perform all tasks in that regard ceased, in which case the employer had an obligation to consider the possibility of training the employees for another post, as provided for in section 106(4) of the Labour Act, which the defendant, as the employer, did, but there were no available posts in which the plaintiff could be employed; the only possibility was to train him to be a [bus] driver, which, taking into account the fact that the plaintiff is 52 years old and that, in addition to a category D driving licence, the post also required a certain number of years of work experience, it was indeed not justified to expect the defendant to train the plaintiff to work in such a post ...”
The Council of Europe’s Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, which entered into force in respect of Croatia on 1 February 1998, provides as follows:
Article 5
“1. The Parties undertake to promote the conditions necessary for persons belonging to national minorities to maintain and develop their culture, and to preserve the essential elements of their identity, namely their religion, language, traditions and cultural heritage.”
In its First Report on Croatia CRI (49) 98, adopted on 9 November 1999, the European Commission Against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) stated as follows:
“H.  School Education
...
ECRI notes with interest the reintegration of the education system in Eastern Slavonia into the Croatian school system and the collaboration between the Croatian authorities and the representatives of the Serb community. This allowed the adoption of a curriculum for Serb majority schools in time for the 1997-1998 school year and the conclusion of agreements, notably as concerns the appointment of Serbian teachers and school directors, the supply of bilingual textbooks and the use of the Serbian language. Some problems in the implementation of these agreements have been noted. ECRI considers that continued joint efforts to find solutions to cultural and educational problems, particularly in this region, will enhance the establishment of a harmonious cohabitation between the Croatian and Serbian communities.
Employment
The catastrophic economic situation in Western Slavonia and the Knin region makes life very difficult for all inhabitants, whether they be Serbian or Croatian. However, Serbs and other minorities are reported to be disproportionately affected by unemployment as well as by layoffs and dismissals, and the few jobs that become available are reported to be more likely to be offered to Croats than to Serbs. ECRI feels that firm measures are needed to address these problems and that all possible efforts should be made to ensure that the existing anti-discrimination employment legislation is efficiently implemented in practice.
ECRI underlines the importance of a diverse ethnic composition of the body of civil servants. Recruitment among members of minority groups should therefore be encouraged. In this respect, ECRI expresses concern at reports of dismissal of nonCroatian civil servants, notably judicial officers, allegedly based on ethnicity, and urges the authorities to investigate these cases and provide effective mechanism of redress where appropriate.”
In its Second Report on Croatia CRI (2001) 34, adopted on 15 December 1999, the European Commission Against Racism and Intolerance stated as follows:
“I.  Employment
As ECRI noted in its first report, the catastrophic economic situation and high levels of unemployment in Western and Eastern Slavonia and the Knin region make life very difficult for all inhabitants, no matter what their ethnic background. However, members of minority groups continue to be disproportionately affected by such unemployment. Furthermore, a very large percentage of the Roma/Gypsy community in the Republic of Croatia is unable to find employment. ECRI believes that indirect and direct discrimination frequently play a large part in explaining this phenomenon. ECRI reiterates its belief that firm measures are needed to address these problems and that all possible efforts should be made to ensure that the existing antidiscrimination legislation in this field is efficiently implemented in practice.
Members of minority groups continue to be significantly under-represented within the public sector at national and local level, including such areas as public administration, the judiciary, the police force, medical practice and national education. This situation reflects not only difficulties in obtaining employment, but also the dismissal of members of minority groups from the public sector over the last decade. ECRI reiterates its belief that recruitment among members of minority groups should be encouraged. Furthermore ECRI urges the authorities to investigate past cases of dismissal from the public service and to provide effective mechanisms of redress.15 A public service more reflective of the diverse ethnic composition of the country is, ECRI feels, important for the process of confidence-building and reconciliation in the Republic of Croatia.”