The case originated in an application (no. 6878/14) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Nataliya Olegivna Lazoriva (“the applicant”), on 16 December 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr B. Fokiy, a lawyer practising in Chernivtsi. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained, in the main, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that she had had no access to the proceedings concerning the adoption of her nephew, and that the impugned adoption had violated her Article 8 rights.
On 14 October 2015 the application was communicated to the Government. The Government and the applicant each filed observations on the application.
Written submissions were also received from the Government of the Russian Federation, which made use of their right to intervene in the proceedings as a third party under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in Chernivtsi in Ukraine in 1966. In 1984 she moved to Magadan in Russia (which is about 12,000 kilometres away from Chernivtsi), where she obtained a teaching degree and has been working as a school teacher for over twenty years.
Her sister, K.T.O., a Russian national, also lived in Magadan for a certain period of time. In February 1993 K.T.O. gave birth to a girl, K.L.S., who is also a Russian national. In December 1993 K.T.O. together with K.L.S. moved to Chernivtsi, where her parents (the grandparents of K.L.S.) lived. Subsequently, the grandparents raised K.L.S. for about ten years.
In 2004 the applicant’s parents and K.L.S. moved to Ludinovo, the Kaluga Region in Russia (which is about 1,100 km away from Chernivtsi and about 11,000 km away from Magadan). In August 2007 K.L.S. moved to Magadan and, since that time, has lived together with the applicant in her flat.
By a decision of 29 December 2007, the mayor of Magadan appointed the applicant as the guardian of K.L.S., on the grounds that the child’s parents did not take care of her.
On 20 February 2009 the Magadan Town Court allowed a claim by the applicant and deprived the parents of K.L.S. of their parental rights in respect of the child, on the grounds that they had failed to take care of her for over fifteen years. No appeal was lodged and on 11 March 2009 the judgment entered into force. No information was submitted to the Court as to whether the parents of K.L.S. had been informed of that judgment.
In March 2007 K.T.O. gave birth to a boy, K.O.S., whose nationality was disputed by the parties. According to the material submitted by the applicant, K.T.O., who was raising the child alone, failed to take care of him. For that reason, in November 2008 the Shevchenkivskyy District Court (hereafter “the Shevchenkivskyy Court”) in Chernivtsi ordered his placement in care (an orphanage). In March 2010 the same court ordered the child’s return to his mother. Subsequently, K.O.S. was taken to an orphanage on four other occasions.
The applicant claims that she and her parents visited K.O.S. in Chernivtsi on several occasions and maintained “a close family link” with him. In particular, she referred to her parents’ visits in April 2010 and May 2012 and her visit in August 2010. According to a copy of an undated letter from K.T.O., the applicant visited her and K.O.S. in Chernivtsi between 2010 and 2012 (no specific dates being indicated), and sent them parcels with food and clothes.
In March 2012 K.O.S. was taken into care as his mother had left him alone in her flat for over twenty-four hours.
On 5 July 2012 the Shevchenkivskyy Court deprived K.T.O. of her parental rights in respect of K.O.S., holding that she had not cared for him and had not played a part in his upbringing. No appeal was lodged and on 15 July 2012 the judgment entered into force. No information was submitted to the Court as to whether the parents of K.O.S. had been informed of that judgment.
On 27 July 2012 K.O.S. was put on the list of children deprived of parental care who could be adopted. On 14 August 2012 the Executive Committee of the Chernivtsi Town Council gave K.O.S. the formal status of a child deprived of parental care.
In the meantime, on an unspecified date in July 2012 K.L.S. had visited Chernivsti to meet K.O.S. She discovered that he had been placed in an orphanage and informed the applicant accordingly. The applicant decided to become her nephew’s legal tutor (a guardian for children under fourteen). She informed the Tutelage and Guardianship Service of Magadan of her wish to become a tutor, and started collecting documents and certificates to make a formal application. In particular, on 22 August 2012 her flat was inspected by representatives of the Magadan Public Health Service, who found that the flat had adequate hygienic and sanitary conditions for the applicant’s family to accommodate K.O.S.
In August and September 2012 the applicant made a number of telephone calls to the Childcare Service of Chernivtsi and to the orphanage, asking them to take into account that she wished to become K.O.S.’s legal tutor, and that she was preparing the necessary documents to make a formal application.
At the applicant’s request, the Tutelage and Guardianship Service of Magadan sent a letter to the Childcare Service of Chernivtsi informing them that she wished to become K.O.S.’s legal tutor and that she had fulfilled her obligations as K.L.S.’s tutor. The Tutelage and Guardianship Service of Magadan also asked the Childcare Service of Chernivtsi not to consider other candidates for the role of K.O.S.’s tutor.
By a letter of 17 September 2012, the Childcare Service of Chernivtsi informed the Tutelage and Guardianship Service of Magadan that they had received the information about the applicant’s wish to become K.O.S.’s legal tutor on 4 September 2012. The Childcare Service of Chernivtsi further informed the Tutelage and Guardianship Service of Magadan: that a couple wishing to adopt K.O.S. had been given permission to establish contact with him prior to that date and had already submitted all the necessary documents for his adoption (see paragraphs 22-23 below); that an opinion in favour of that adoption would be issued; and that, on the basis of such an opinion, the couple would submit an adoption application to the Pershotravnevyy District Court in Chernivtsi (hereafter “the Pershotravnevyy Court”). Lastly, the Childcare Service of Chernivtsi noted that the applicant had the right to lodge a tutelage application with the same court, and advised her to do so “as soon as possible”.
On 10 October 2012 the Tutelage and Guardianship Service of Magadan issued an opinion stating that, given her personal situation and qualities, the applicant could become a legal tutor or guardian.
On 22 October 2012 the applicant went to Chernivtsi, mainly to initiate procedures with a view to becoming K.O.S.’s tutor and to meet him there. Ultimately, this was not possible, as he had been adopted by S.S.V. and S.O.V. prior to her arrival in Ukraine (see paragraph 26 below) and the Ukrainian authorities refused to help her to meet K.O.S.
On 30 August 2012 a married couple, S.S.V. and S.O.V., who were on the list of persons wishing to adopt a child, were allowed to meet with K.O.S. at the orphanage.
On 6 September 2012 they informed the Childcare Service of Chernivtsi that they wished to adopt K.O.S. and asked it to issue an opinion in favour of the adoption.
On 19 September 2012 the Executive Committee of Chernivtsi, acting in the exercise of its childcare related functions, issued an opinion in favour of the requested adoption. According to the committee, S.S.V. and S.O.V. were physically fit and had sufficient funds and facilities to accommodate and take care of K.O.S. They had established contact and a good relationship with the child and, according to the orphanage’s psychologist, the child wished to live in their family, although he could not give written consent as “he didn’t understand what adoption was because of his age”. It was also noted: that the child had a half-sister and an aunt who lived in Magadan; that in August and September 2012 the applicant and the Magadan authorities, respectively, had informed the Childcare Service of Chernivtsi of her wish to become the child’s legal tutor; that the applicant had been informed in reply that she could lodge an application for tutelage with a district court; and that no such application had been lodged. Lastly, the opinion read that, generally, adoption was “the preferred form of [a child’s] placement”, and that, in the present case, the adoption would be appropriate and in the interests of the child.
On 24 September 2012 S.S.V. and S.O.V. lodged an adoption application in respect of K.O.S. with the Pershotravnevyy Court.
On 2 October 2012 the Pershotravnevyy Court, having examined the case at a closed hearing with the participation of S.S.V. and S.O.V. and representatives from the Childcare Service and the orphanage, delivered a judgment granting the adoption. It also ordered that K.O.S.’s surname be changed to that of the adoptive parents and that S.S.V. and S.O.V. be registered respectively as his father and mother instead of his biological parents.
The court essentially relied on the information contained in the opinion of the Executive Committee of Chernivtsi. The court held that the requested adoption was in the interests of the child in being raised in “stable life conditions and in [an atmosphere of] harmony”.
The applicant was informed of the judgment of 2 October 2012 following a delay, though she did not specify how long the delay had been.
On 1 February 2013 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Chernivtsi Court of Appeal against that judgment, stating that it had violated her right to become her close relative’s legal tutor and her right to submit arguments against the adoption. In particular, the applicant argued: (i) that the Pershotravnevyy Court had failed to take into account the fact that K.O.S. had close relatives, his half-sister and aunt, who had not been informed of the proceedings and had not taken part in them; (ii) that the Pershotravnevyy Court had not checked K.O.S.’s nationality; (iii) that K.O.S. was a Russian national, as his biological mother had been a Russian national at the time when he had been born in 2007; (iv) that the procedure provided for in Ukraine’s relevant international treaties in relation to the adoption of foreign nationals had not been followed; and (v) that the Pershotravnevyy Court had disregarded the fact that she had informed the Ukrainian Childcare Service of her wish to become K.O.S.’s legal tutor and the fact that she had been preparing the necessary documents for this.
On 18 March 2013 K.L.S. sent a letter to the Court of Appeal stating that she and the rest of her family (notably her grandparents and the applicant) had a close connection with K.O.S. and that he wished to live with them.
On 4 April 2013 the Court of Appeal refused to examine the applicant’s appeal on the grounds that the judgment did not concern her right or interest in becoming the child’s legal tutor, or any obligations in that regard which in principle could be the subject matter of a separate claim.
The applicant appealed in cassation, mainly arguing that the Court of Appeal had failed to examine her arguments and that she had been deprived of access to a court, in violation of the procedural rules.
On 10 July 2013 the Higher Specialised Court for Civil and Criminal Matters rejected the applicant’s cassation appeal on the basis that it had not been demonstrated that the contested decision of the Court of Appeal was unlawful.
According to the applicant’s submissions of 29 March 2016, on an unspecified date K.T.O. left Ukraine for Russia and she currently resides with her parents (the grandparents of K.O.S.) in Ludinovo.
In December 2015 the Government submitted a copy of a verbatim record of an interview with K.O.S. which had been carried out by the childcare service in the locality where he had lived with S.S.V. and S.O.V. on 19 February 2013. According to that record, the child, inter alia, expressed the wish to continue living with his adoptive parents, who were present during the interview, and said that he had no aunt or uncle. The applicant contended that this information could not be accepted, as it had not been checked with her participation and contradicted other material in the case file.
In so far as relevant, Article 167 of the Family Code of 2002 provides that, where a parent with custody of a child has been deprived of parental rights and the child cannot be transferred to the other parent, the child’s grandparents, siblings who have reached the age of majority and other relatives should be given preference as regards their wish to take care of the child. Where this is not possible, the child should be placed in care. In accordance with sections 16 and 24 of the Act on International Private Law of 23 June 2005, the establishment and cancellation of tutelage and guardianship involving a foreign element (for instance, where a party to the relationship is a foreign national) are governed by Ukrainian laws where the child concerned is a Ukrainian national or a national of Ukraine and another State(s) and resides in Ukraine.
Pursuant to Article 243 of the Family Code, a legal tutor should be appointed for children aged up to fourteen, and a guardian should be appointed for children who are between fourteen and eighteen years old. Article 60 of the Civil Code of 2003 provides for a specific situation in which such an appointment can be made by the courts – where they decide to deprive parents of their parental rights; in other situations, it is for the tutelage authorities to appoint a tutor or guardian. Under Article 63 of the Civil Code, such an appointment may only be made upon a written application from the person wishing to become that tutor or guardian. Preference should be given to members of the child’s family, having regard to their personal relationship with the child and their ability to fulfil the duties of a tutor or guardian. The child’s opinion concerning the appointment should be taken into account.
Under Article 247 of the Family Code and Article 62 of the Civil Code, a child under a person’s tutelage should live with the legal tutor, either at the tutor’s home or at the child’s place of residence. The tutor determines the child’s upbringing (Article 249 of the Family Code). The tutor’s consent is required for, inter alia, the child’s adoption, unless the tutelage authority gives such consent or the court decides that adoption would be in the child’s interests (Article 221 of the Family Code).
In accordance with the Regulations on Tutelage and Guardianship, enacted by the Cabinet of Ministers on 26 May 1999 (no. 34/166/131/88) and the Regulations on Actions to be taken by the Tutelage and Guardianship Authority on the Protection of Children’s Rights, enacted by the Cabinet of Ministers on 24 September 2008 (no. 866), persons wishing to become a legal tutor or guardian should submit a number of specific documents demonstrating their financial situation, state of health, living conditions, capability to become a tutor or guardian, and so on. The majority of those documents should be issued by public authorities. No time-limit is set for the submission of such documents by those wishing to be become a legal tutor or guardian.
Under Article 207 of the Family Code, an adoption must serve the child’s best interests and ensure that he or she is raised in stable life conditions and in an atmosphere of harmony. Its effect is that the adopted child attains the legal status of a child of the adoptive parents. The legal relationship of the child to his or her former relatives and the respective personal and economic rights and obligations arising out of that relationship are thereby extinguished (Article 232 of the Family Code).
The child should be informed of the legal consequences of adoption; his or her consent to the adoption is required, unless the child does not understand “what adoption is” (Article 218 of the Family Code).
The adoption may be annulled or invalidated by a court upon an application by the child if he or she has turned fourteen, his or her parents, adoptive parents, a legal tutor, a guardian, a tutelage authority, or a prosecutor (Article 240 of the Family Code). This list is exhaustive.
Section 7 § 4 of the Law of Ukraine on Ukrainian citizenship of 18 January 2001 provides that a child, who was born on the territory of Ukraine to foreigners lawfully residing therein, shall be a Ukrainian national if the child did not acquire one or both parents’ citizenship. According to Section 12 § 3, a child, who is a foreigner or a stateless person and is permanently residing in an orphanage in Ukraine because his or her parents were deprived of parental rights, shall become a Ukrainian national from the moment of his or her placement in care.
The relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989, which entered into force in respect of Ukraine on 27 September 1991, read:
“1.  In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.
States Parties undertake to ensure the child such protection and care as is necessary for his or her well-being, taking into account the rights and duties of his or her parents, legal guardians, or other individuals legally responsible for him or her, and, to this end, shall take all appropriate legislative and administrative measures.
...”
“States Parties shall respect the responsibilities, rights and duties of parents or, where applicable, the members of the extended family or community as provided for by local custom, legal guardians or other persons legally responsible for the child, to provide, in a manner consistent with the evolving capacities of the child, appropriate direction and guidance in the exercise by the child of the rights recognized in the present Convention.”
“1.  A child temporarily or permanently deprived of his or her family environment, or in whose own best interests cannot be allowed to remain in that environment, shall be entitled to special protection and assistance provided by the State.
States Parties shall in accordance with their national laws ensure alternative care for such a child.
Such care could include, inter alia, foster placement, kafalah of Islamic law, adoption or if necessary placement in suitable institutions for the care of children. When considering solutions, due regard shall be paid to the desirability of continuity in a child’s upbringing and to the child’s ethnic, religious, cultural and linguistic background.”
“States Parties that recognize and/or permit the system of adoption shall ensure that the best interests of the child shall be the paramount consideration and they shall:
(a)  Ensure that the adoption of a child is authorized only by competent authorities who determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures and on the basis of all pertinent and reliable information, that the adoption is permissible in view of the child’s status concerning parents, relatives and legal guardians and that, if required, the persons concerned have given their informed consent to the adoption on the basis of such counselling as may be necessary;
...”
The Convention on Legal Assistance and Legal Relations in Civil, Family and Criminal Matters of 1993 is a multilateral treaty concluded between the States members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (signed in Minsk on 22 January 1993 and amended on 28 March 1997) which entered into force in respect of the Russian Federation on 10 December 1994 and in respect of Ukraine on 14 April 1995. It regulates a wide range of legal matters in the context of cooperation between the Contracting States in the fields of civil, family and criminal law. It also includes provisions concerning tutelage, guardianship and the adoption of children, which read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1.  Guardianship or tutelage as regards a person shall be established and cancelled in accordance with the laws of the Contracting Party of which that person is a national.
The legal relationship between the legal guardian or tutor and the person under guardianship or tutelage shall be governed by the laws of the Contracting Party whose body appointed the legal guardian or tutor.
The duty to accept guardianship or tutelage shall be set out by the laws of the Contracting Party of which the person to be appointed as legal guardian or tutor is a national.
A national of the Contracting Party may be appointed as the legal guardian or tutor of a national of another Contracting Party if [the former] resides in the territory of the Contracting Party where the guardianship or tutelage will take place.”
“Guardianship or tutelage as regards a person shall be established and cancelled by the bodies of the Contracting Party of which that person is a national, if the present Convention does not provide otherwise...”
“1.  Where guardianship or tutelage is considered to be established as regards a nonnational residing, permanently or temporarily ... on the territory of another Contracting Party, the latter’s body shall inform, without delay, the body as provided for in Article 34 [of this Convention]...”
“1.  Adoption or its annulment shall be governed by the laws of the Contracting Party of which the adoptive parent is a national...
If the child is a national of another Contracting Party, the adoption or its annulment shall be subject to consent of the child’s legal representative and of the relevant authority [of that Contracting Party], and also the child’s consent where the law of the Contracting Party of which the child is a national so requires.
...”