The case concerns the applicants’ eviction from tied accommodation.
The applicants are two married couples. They live in the Murmansk Region.
Sergey Alekseyevich Lushkin was born in 1962.
Svetlana Nikolayevna Lushkina was born in 1962.
Aleksandr Vladimirovich Nagulov was born in 1950.
Olga Kuzminichna Nagulova was born in 1955.
The applicants were represented by Ms Y.K. Berezhnaya, a lawyer practising in Murmansk. The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Since the end of the 1980s the applicants have been living in tied accommodation in a closed town (a settlement where travel or residency restrictions apply) in the Murmansk Region, where Mr Lushkin and Mr Nagulov served in the military. At the end of the 1990s, Mr Lushkin and Mr Nagulov retired and were no longer entitled to live in the closed town.
In 2006 the applicants were included in a government programme for resettling inhabitants of closed administrative entities to other regions. The government undertook to finance the construction of accommodation, ownership of which would be transferred to participants in the government programme. The implementation of the programme was carried out by the municipalities of closed towns.
In July 2006 M., the then head of the municipality of the closed town, entered into an agreement with a private company for the construction of a block of flats in the Leningrad Region. The municipality undertook to finance the construction of twelve flats in the block and the company undertook to construct and put into service those flats by the second quarter of 2007 and transfer them to the municipality by 30 September 2007.
In March 2007 M. was dismissed from his position.
In June 2007 the applicants signed a cession of claims agreement with the municipality. Under the agreement, the municipality assigned to the applicants the right, vis-à-vis the construction company, to have ownership of the flats in the block of flats in the Leningrad Region (“new flats”) under the 2006 agreement transferred to them. In exchange the applicants undertook to vacate their flats in the closed town (“old flats”) by 31 December 2007.
In 2008 the first and second applicants and in 2009 the third and fourth applicants accepted new flats from the company and signed documents acknowledging receipt of delivery. However, the State registration authorities refused to register the applicants’ ownership rights over the new flats on the grounds that the block of flats had been an unauthorised construction.
In 2009 and 2011 the Gatchinskiy Town Court of the Leningrad Region allowed the applicants’ claims for recognition of their ownership rights to the new flats, having found that the block was not an unauthorised construction and was fit for habitation.
On 26 August 2011 the Gadzhievskiy Town Court of the Murmansk Region found M. guilty of abuse of office. In particular, it established that M. had signed the agreement with the construction company without organising a call for tenders despite being aware that the company had not obtained any building permission, nor had it been eligible for the tender. As a result of his unlawful actions, the rights of victims, including the applicants – and in particular, their right to respect for their home – had been violated, since it was not possible for them to vacate their old flats and move into their new flats. According to the applicants, they were allowed to familiarise themselves with the material of the criminal case in February 2014.
In April 2013 the municipality brought two separate sets of court proceedings against the first and second applicants and against the third and fourth applicants, seeking their eviction from the tied accommodation. The municipality claimed that the applicants had become owners of the new flats and therefore were under an obligation to vacate their old flats.
The first and second applicants disagreed on the following grounds:
–  the old flat was their only dwelling since the block of flats in the Leningrad Region had not been finished and was not fit for habitation; and
–  the municipality had not honoured its obligations to provide them with new accommodation; upon the criminal conviction of the head of the municipality, it had been confirmed that he had been aware that the construction company had not received any building permission.
The third and fourth applicants brought counterclaims against the municipality. They submitted that the municipality had provided them with accommodation which had been unfit for habitation and that their old flat was their only home.
All four of the applicants asked the court to allow them to continue living in the old flats until the construction work on the new block of flats was complete.
On 2 July 2013 the Polyarnyy District Court of the Murmansk Region (“the District Court”) held that the first and second applicants were under an obligation to vacate their old flat within six months after the entry into force of its judgment.
The District Court established, with reference to the judgment of the Gatchinskiy Town Court of the Leningrad Region adopted in 2009 (see paragraph 15 above), that the new block of flats was fit for habitation, the first and second applicants had received certificates of ownership for their new flat and that they were therefore under a contractual obligation to vacate their old flat. The District Court further noted that the municipal authorities of the Gatchinskiy District of the Leningrad Region had confirmed that the block of flats had not been operational or connected to the gas supply network. However, those circumstances had no impact on the subject matter of the claim. The District Court decided that it was not necessary to examine the remainder of the applicants’ arguments.
In an appeal against the judgment of 2 July 2013, the first and second applicants submitted that the District Court had not examined their arguments against their eviction and had not taken into account the facts established in the judgment of 26 August 2011 of the Gadzhievskiy Town Court of the Murmansk Region.
On 16 October 2013 the Murmansk Regional Court upheld the District Court’s judgment, finding that that court had duly examined the arguments submitted by the first and second applicants and that the judgment of 26 August 2011 had no legal bearing on the resolution of the case.
On 28 February 2014 a judge of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation refused to refer a cassation appeal by the first and second applicants to the Supreme Court.
On 7 April 2014 the District Court postponed the execution of its judgment of 2 July 2013 until 16 October 2014. The court established that the block of flats in the Leningrad Region was not operational and that execution of the eviction order would have adverse consequences for the first and second applicants.
On 19 November 2014 the District Court refused to further postpone the execution of its judgment of 2 July 2013.
On 11 July 2013 the District Court held that the third and fourth applicants were under an obligation to vacate their old flat within six months after the entry into force of its judgment, referring to the same reasons as in its judgment of 2 July 2013 in respect of the first and second applicants. The District Court dismissed the counterclaim of the third and fourth applicants.
On 25 September 2013 the Murmansk Regional Court upheld that judgment.
On 28 February 2014 a judge of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation refused to refer a cassation appeal by the third and fourth applicants.
On 7 April 2014 the District Court postponed the execution of the judgment of 11 July 2013 until 16 October 2014. It established that the block of flats in the Leningrad Region was not operational and that execution of the eviction order would result in negative consequences for the third and fourth applicants.
On 29 October 2014 the District Court refused to further postpone the execution of the judgment of 11 July 2013.
According to the Government, the block of flats in the Leningrad Region has not yet been put into service in accordance with procedures provided for by law and is not fit for habitation. The applicants continue to live in their old flats.