The case originated in an application (no. 46401/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Konstantinovich Blyudik (“the applicant”), on 26 June 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Kadiyev, a lawyer practising in Makhachkala. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant complained of the unlawful placement of his daughter in a closed educational facility for minors and a violation of his and his daughter’s right to respect for their family life and correspondence resulting from that placement.
On 26 September 2013 the application was communicated to the Government under Article 5 §§ 1 and 5 and Article 8 of the Convention.
On 7 March 2018 the applicant’s daughter, who had reached the age of majority on 13 July 2010, confirmed her interest in the application and issued a power of attorney to Mr R. Kadiyev.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Makhachkala, Republic of Dagestan.
In 1990 the applicant started living with Ms T.K.
In 1991 and 1992 they had two daughters, Kr. (born on 1 July 1991) and K. (born on 13 July 1992). The applicant did not register his paternity.
In 2002 the applicant and T.K. separated. Both girls continued living with the applicant.
In 2004 T.K. married Yu.K.
In May 2004 Yu.K. registered his paternity in respect of Kr. and K. However, the girls still remained living with the applicant.
In July 2007 K. stopped attending school, frequently ran away from home and exhibited delinquent behaviour. She allegedly stole her mother’s jewellery.
In December 2007, following an application by T.K., K. was placed in a temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders.
On 18 February 2008 the Kirovskiy District Court of Makhachkala (“the District Court”), sitting in a single-judge formation composed of Judge I., granted an application lodged by the administration of the Kirovskiy District of Makhachkala to place K. in a closed educational institution for minors for two years and five months. In taking this decision the District Court relied on the following circumstances: K.’s not attending school, running away from home, vagabonding and leading an anti-social and immoral lifestyle, as well as unsuccessful attempts to discipline K. and her being detained in the temporary detention centre for juvenile offenders.
On an unspecified date shortly afterwards K. was placed in a closed educational institution for minors in the town of Pokrov, Vladimir Region, some 2,500 km from her home town of Makhachkala. According to the applicant, his daughter’s correspondence with him was subjected to censorship by the facility’s administration.
In the meantime, the applicant brought proceedings seeking the establishment of his paternity vis-à-vis Kr. and K.
On 9 April 2008 the District Court established the applicant’s paternity in respect of Kr. and K. and annuled the registration of Yu.K. as the girls’ father.
At the applicant’s request, the Prosecutor of the Republic of Dagestan applied to the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Dagestan for a supervisory review of the decision of 18 February 2008.
The present application was already pending before the European Court of Human Rights when, on 7 August 2008, the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Dagestan, by way of a supervisory review, quashed the decision of 18 February 2008 as unlawful and unjustified, and discontinued the proceedings. The court held, in particular, that in violation of the procedure established by the Federal Law on Basic Measures for Preventing Child Neglect and Delinquency of Minors, no. 120-FZ of 24 June 1999 (“the Minors Act”), the District Court had decided to place K. in a closed educational institution for minors in the absence of a decision refusing to institute criminal proceedings or a decision to discontinue the criminal proceedings against the latter, and without her having undergone a prior medical examination.
On 30 September 2008 K. was released from the closed educational institution for minors and returned home.
Article 46 of the Constitution provides, among other things, that everyone should be guaranteed judicial protection of his or her rights and freedoms and that decisions, actions or inaction of State bodies, local authorities, public associations and officials may be challenged before a court.
Civil rights may be protected in many ways, in particular, by awards of compensation for non-pecuniary damage (Article 12).
A court may hold the tortfeasor liable for non-pecuniary damage incurred by an individual through actions impairing his or her personal nonproperty rights, such as the right to personal integrity and the right to liberty of movement. The amount of compensation is determined by reference to the gravity of the tortfeasor’s fault and other significant circumstances. The court also takes into account the extent of physical or mental suffering in relation to the victim’s individual characteristics (Articles 150 and 151 of the Civil Code).
Damage inflicted on the person or on the property of an individual must be compensated in full by the tortfeasor. The tortfeasor is not liable for damage if he proves that the damage has been caused through no fault of his own (Article 1064 §§ 1 and 2).
State and municipal bodies and officials are liable for damage caused to an individual by their unlawful actions or omissions (Article 1069).
Irrespective of any fault on the part of State officials, the State or regional treasury are liable for damage sustained by an individual on account of (i) an unlawful criminal conviction or prosecution; (ii) the unlawful application of a preventive measure; and (iii) an unlawful administrative penalty (Article 1070 § 1).
Damage sustained by an individual in the framework of the administration of justice shall be compensated for provided that the judge’s guilt has been established in a final criminal conviction (Article 1070 § 2).
Non-pecuniary damage must be compensated for irrespective of the tortfeasor’s fault in the event of an unlawful conviction or prosecution, or the unlawful application of a preventive measure in the form of placement in custody or an undertaking not to leave one’s place of residence, or an unlawful administrative penalty in the form of administrative arrest or community work (Article 1100 § 2).
Individuals who have reached the age of eighteen years have the full capacity to exercise their procedural rights through their own actions, comply with procedural obligations and assign a representative to argue their case before a court (Article 37 § 1).
The rights and interests of minors aged fourteen to eighteen years must be defended by their legal representatives. The court has, however, an obligation to invite such minors to participate in the proceedings. In certain cases provided for by federal law, minors aged fourteen to eighteen years are entitled themselves to defend their rights and interests stemming from civil, family, labour and other relations. In such cases the court is, however, entitled to involve the minor’s legal representatives in the proceedings (Article 37 §§ 3 and 4).
The rights and interests of minors under the age of fourteen years must be defended by their legal representatives – parents, adoptive parents, guardians and other persons who have been granted such a right under federal law (Article 37 § 5).
The Code defines a child as a person under the age of eighteen years (age of majority) (Article 54 § 1).
Parents act on behalf of their child and defend the child’s rights and interests in any relations with other persons or legal entities. They act ex officio as the child’s legal representative in court proceedings (Article 64 § 1).
The Federal Law on Basic Measures for Preventing Child Neglect and Delinquency of Minors, no. 120-FZ of 24 June 1999 (“the Minors Act”) defines a minor as a person under the age of eighteen years (section 1).
A minor over the age of eleven with special educational needs may be placed in a “closed educational institution” until he or she reaches the age of eighteen, but for no longer than three years, if he or she (i) has committed a delinquent act before reaching the statutory age of criminal responsibility; (ii) has reached the statutory age of criminal responsibility but is exempted from criminal liability due to delays in mental development not connected to mental illness, which have prevented him or her from fully understanding the factual nature and social dangerousness of his or her actions (or failure to act) or to control them; or (iii) has been convicted for having committed a crime of medium or high gravity and is exempted from punishment (section 15(4)).
Closed educational institutions must put in place special conditions for the holding of minors. These include protection of the grounds of the institution in question, ensuring the personal safety of minors and shielding them from negative influences; restriction of free access to the grounds of the institution by third persons; isolation of minors, ensuring that they are unable to leave the grounds of the institution at their own free will; roundthe-clock monitoring of and control over minors, including at nighttime; personal inspection of minors, inspection of their belongings and of incoming and outgoing correspondence; and restriction of the use of mobile communication, including access to the Internet, without however leading to restriction or deprivation of minors’ contact with their parents or other legal representatives (section 15(9)(1)).
For examination of the issue whether to place a minor in a closed educational institution, an official from the department of the interior or a prosecutor must submit to the court at the place of the minor’s residence the file pertaining to a terminated criminal case against him or her, or the relevant documentation on the refusal to institute criminal proceedings against him or her (section 27(1)(1)).
Bodies and institutions operating in the field of prevention of child neglect and delinquency of minors, as well as minors, their parents or other legal representatives, are entitled to bring court proceedings seeking compensation for pecuniary damage caused to the minor’s health, his or her property and/or for non-pecuniary damage, in accordance with the procedure provided for by federal law (section 9(1)).
The Federal Law on the Basic Guarantees of the Rights of the Child in the Russian Federation, no. 124-FZ of 24 July 1998 (“the Children’s Rights Act”), provides that parents (or persons replacing them), as well as pedagogical and medical staff, social workers, psychologists and other specialists engaged in the upbringing, education, healthcare, social protection, care, adaptation and rehabilitation of children are entitled to bring court proceedings for compensation in respect of pecuniary damage caused to a child’s health and property, as well as non-pecuniary damage, in accordance with the procedure provided for by federal law (section 23(1)).
Section 1 of the Plenary Supreme Court’s Practice Direction no. 10 of 20 December 1994 deals with “certain issues arising out of the application of provisions on compensation for non-pecuniary damage”. It provides that, given that the issues relating to compensation for nonpecuniary damage are governed by a number of legislative instruments which entered into force at different times, in order to ensure that disputes are resolved in a proper and timely manner, the courts should ascertain in each case the nature of the legal relationship between the parties and the legal provisions regulating them. They should also ascertain whether the law provides for the possibility of awarding compensation for nonpecuniary damage in cases with such a legal relationship. Where such responsibility is established, they should determine when the legislation providing for the conditions and procedure for compensation in such cases entered into force, as well as when the acts resulting in the non-pecuniary damage had been committed.