The case originated in an application (no. 13072/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Finnish national, Ms Mirja Anneli Röman (“the applicant”), on 6 April 2005.
The applicant was represented by Ms Marja Toivio-Kaasinen, a lawyer practising in . The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Arto Kosonen of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, under Articles 8 and 14 that she had been unable to have her biological father’s paternity legally established due to the five-year time-limit set in national legislation for children born before the entry into force of the Paternity Act in 1976.
On 28 April 2008 the President of the Fourth Section decided to communicate the complaint concerning the impossibility to establish paternity and the discrimination complaint to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in .
The applicant was born out of wedlock and bore her mother’s maiden name. Her mother and her biological father concluded a child support agreement the same year. The agreement was verified by the social services.
In 1956 the mother married another man and in 1961 the applicant’s name was changed to that of her mother’s husband. The spouses agreed that the applicant’s biological father was never to be mentioned. The applicant had two siblings from that marriage.
On 1 October 1976 the Paternity Act (isyyslaki, lagen om faderskap) came into force. The transitional provisions in the Implementing Act of the Paternity Act (laki isyyslain toimeenpanosta, lagen angående införande av lagen om faderskap) state that paternity proceedings with regard to a child born before the entry into force of the law had to be initiated within five years, that is, before 1 October 1981. Moreover, no claim could be examined after the death of the father. No such restrictions exist for children born after the entry into force of the Paternity Act.
At some point the applicant started wondering about her biological background. In 2001 she discovered that in the church registry, which until 1993 was the only official population registry, her mother’s husband was listed as her stepfather. The State population registry, with which the church records were merged in 1993, stated that the mother’s husband was her father. She also located a copy of the child support agreement in the archives of the social services which made it possible for her to locate her biological father.
On 25 September 2002 the information in the State population register was corrected.
On 6 February 2003 the applicant initiated paternity proceedings against her biological father in the Vantaa District Court (käräjäoikeus, tingsrätten). She claimed that she had only learned in December 2001 that the mother’s husband, who had been registered as her father, was not her biological father.
On 18 June 2003 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s claim. It found that during the five-year time-limit, the applicant had been an adult and could have initiated paternity proceedings. She could also have questioned her mother or could have verified the information on the church register, which had been correct all the time. The application of the five-year time-limit was not in contradiction to the Constitution or the Convention. Her claim was thus time-barred.
On 17 July 2003 the applicant appealed to the Helsinki Court of Appeal (hovioikeus, hovrätten), claiming that she had not known that her mother’s husband was not her biological father. Her mother had testified in the District Court that she had never told her daughter about her origins and that this issue was never discussed in the family. During the five-year period the applicant would not have had any interest in initiating proceedings as she was not yet aware of her legal status.
On 15 March 2004 the Court of Appeal upheld the District Court’s decision on the same grounds as the latter.
On 13 May 2004 the applicant appealed to the Supreme Court (korkein oikeus, högsta domstolen), reiterating the grounds of appeal already presented before the Court of Appeal.
On 12 October 2004 the Supreme Court refused the applicant leave to appeal.
In January 2005 the applicant filed a petition with the Parliamentary Ombudsman (eduskunnan oikeusasiamies, riksdagens justitieombudsman). On 16 February 2005 the Deputy Parliamentary Ombudsman considered that the national courts had acted within their margin of appreciation, and that he could not examine a case unless the margin of appreciation had been exceeded or misused.
In 2007 the applicant had a DNA test performed privately on her biological father, which proved with 99.99% certainty that he was her biological father.
On 3 July 2008 the applicant’s biological father died.
The Constitution of  (perustuslaki, grundlagen, Act no. 731/1999), Article 6, paragraphs 1 and 2, guarantees to everyone equality before the law and forbids discrimination of any kind:
“Everyone is equal before the law.
No one shall, without an acceptable reason, be treated differently from other persons on grounds of sex, age, origin, language, religion, conviction, opinion, health, disability or other reason that concerns his or her person. ...”
Article 10 of the Constitution guarantees the right to privacy:
“Everyone’s private life, honour and the sanctity of the home are guaranteed. More detailed provisions on the protection of personal data are laid down by an Act.”
Article 21, paragraph 1, of the Constitution guarantees to everyone the right to have one’s case dealt with by a court of law:
“Everyone has the right to have his or her case dealt with appropriately and without undue delay by a legally competent court of law or other authority ...”
Article 106 of the Constitution gives a court of law the right to give primacy to the Constitution when the application of an Act would conflict with the Constitution:
“If, in a matter being tried by a court of law, the application of an Act would be in evident conflict with the Constitution, the court shall give primacy to the provision in the Constitution.”
According to Chapter 12, section 1, subsection 2, of the Code of Judicial Procedure (oikeudenkäymiskaari, rättegångsbalken; Act no. 444/1999):
“A minor who has attained fifteen years of age shall have an independent right of action and right to be heard in a matter concerning his or her person, parallel to that of the person responsible for his or her care and custody or his or her other legal representative.”
According to section 20 of the Act on Children Born out of Wedlock (laki avioliiton ulkopuolella syntyneistä lapsista, lagen om barn utom äktenskap, Act no. 173/1922), a child born out of wedlock had a father, if a man acknowledged paternity, but paternity could not be established against a man’s will. According to section 24 of the same Act, such defendant was deemed to be the person liable to provide child support to the child if he had had sexual intercourse with the child’s mother at the time when the child was possibly conceived. However, such an action was to be dismissed if it was manifestly improbable that the child was conceived as a result of that sexual intercourse.
As children born out of wedlock were put in a substantially worse position than children born in wedlock, there was a need to guarantee equal treatment of all children before the law (see government proposal HE 90/1974). This became the main aim of the new Paternity Act of 1975 (isyyslaki, lagen om faderskap, Act no. 700/1975) which repealed the Act of 1922.
Section 3 of the Paternity Act provides that paternity is established either by acknowledgement or by a court decision. According to section 22, subsection 1, the child has a right to institute proceedings with a view to having paternity established.
Section 4 of the Implementing Act of the Paternity Act (laki isyyslain toimeenpanosta, lagen angående införande av lagen om faderskap, Act no. 701/1975) provides that the provisions of the Paternity Act shall also apply if the child was born before the entry into force of the Act, unless otherwise provided. Section 5 provides that if a man, pursuant to the Act on Children Born out of Wedlock, enacted before the entry into force of the Paternity Act, has committed or been obliged by a final judgment to pay child support to a child born out of wedlock who has not the status of an acknowledged child, the provisions in sections 6 and 7 of this Act shall apply to the investigation of paternity, actions for the establishment of paternity and the exercise of the child’s right to be heard.
Sections 6 and 7 of the Implementing Act of the Paternity Act provide as follows:
“The child welfare supervisor shall attend to the investigation of paternity as provided in the Paternity Act, if a child born before the entry into force of this Act has not reached fifteen years of age and the mother or the legal guardian of the child has expressed a wish that the child welfare supervisor attend to the investigation of paternity. After a man has acknowledged his paternity, the provisions in section 5, subsection 2; section 20, subsection 1; and section 21 of the Paternity Act shall apply to the obligation of the child welfare supervisor to attend to the investigation of paternity, and to the enforcement of acknowledgement.”
“A child or his or her legal guardian shall have the right of action for the establishment of paternity as provided in the Paternity Act. The child welfare supervisor shall not be entitled to exercise the child’s right to be heard without a separate authorisation. Proceedings for the establishment of paternity must be initiated within five years from the entry into force of the Paternity Act. However, no proceedings may be instituted if the man is deceased.”
It appears from the drafting history of the Paternity Act (see Report of the Legal Affairs Committee LaVM 5/1975 vp, p. 10) that considerations of legal certainty underlie the decision to restrict the right of action. The entry into force of the Act opened up an opportunity to initiate proceedings that did not exist at the time when the children in question were conceived. The legislator considered that putative fathers’ legal security required rapid elimination of uncertainty about possible claims being brought against them on the basis of the Paternity Act. The restriction stating that a man’s death prevented the initiation of proceedings was justified by the argument that, in such cases, it was usually no longer possible to obtain sufficient evidence of the man’s paternity.
The Supreme Court has held on several occasions that the five-year time-limit in question is to be strictly applied. An exception has been made in a case where the paternity of the mother’s husband had to be annulled first and, as a result of that, the child would have become fatherless if the time-limit had been strictly respected (see KKO 1993:58).
In its precedent case KKO 1982-II-165 the Supreme Court considered that the five-year time-limit in section 7, subsection 2, of the Implementing Act of the Paternity Act was not such a time-limit that could be restored by seeking extraordinary remedies (menetetyn määräajan palauttaminen, återställandet av försutten fatalietid).
In its most recent precedent case KKO 2012:11 the Supreme Court found, in plenum composition, the following:
“27.  As described above in points 11 and 12, according to the interpretation of the European Court of Human Rights an application of restrictions of right to institute paternity proceedings may lead to a violation of the right to respect for private life protected by Article 8 if such restrictions in practice prevent the fact of clarifying of a person’s biological father and the confirmation of the paternity. This may have been the case in situations in which a person has not had a real opportunity, due to reasons beyond his or her control, to clarify the identity of his or her biological father and to have the paternity confirmed by a court within the time-limit.
According to the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights the assessment whether reasons favouring the granting of the right of appeal weigh heavier than the reasons speaking against it, must be made in casu and with an intent to reach a fair balance between the competing interests. The case-law does not give a direct guidance on what issues the assessment needs to be based from the point of view of the putative father’s and his family’s interests and general legal certainty. The scope of the domestic margin of appreciation, as it appears from the current case-law of the Court, remains in practice narrow. The Supreme Court considers that the in casu assessment applied by the European Court of Human Rights means that the aims of legal security and the protection of the prevailing circumstances, which normally relate to the restricting of the time allowed to institute an action, remain to a large extent unattained.
A paternity can currently be clarified with the help of DNA tests with considerable certainty and without significance being given to the passage of time in gathering evidence on the paternity. This ground, which led to the imposition of the time-limit in section 7, subsection 2, of the Implementing Act [of the Paternity Act], has thus lost its significance. Knowing one’s biological origin and its judicial confirmation and pronouncement are, according to the current knowledge, important parts of a person’s identity and therefore fall to the core areas of protection of private life, guaranteed by Article 10 of the Constitution and Article 8 of the Convention. The passage of time does not mean either that a child’s need to know his or her both parents and to have the paternity confirmed would disappear but it may even grow. Legal security and the long prevailed legal state of affairs, which has not been the result of a child’s conscious and free choice, are not as such sufficient grounds to support that a child should not be able to institute paternity proceedings after the time-limit has expired. In such situation the non-confirmation of the paternity requires that in that particular case there are very strong factual counter reasons relating to the putative father’s or to other persons’ rights.
On the above grounds the Supreme Court considers that a principle emerges from the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights that a child has, except in special circumstances, a right to know who his or her biological father is and to have a case concerning confirmation of a such legal status examined by a court, at least once. Such principle cannot currently be regarded as unclear or subject to interpretation. At the same time these rights concerning a person’s origin and identity clearly fall within the scope of protection of private life guaranteed by Article 10 of the Constitution.
The Supreme Court considers that the application of the time-limit in section 7, subsection 2, of the Implementing Act in cases in which legal or factual reasons have prevented the institution of paternity proceedings in due time, can therefore lead to an evident conflict with the Constitution. In such situation a court must, in accordance with Article 106 of the Constitution, give primacy to the constitutional provision.
In  a legal relationship to a father can be confirmed only, according to the Paternity Act, by acknowledgement or by a court decision. Any legal effects which are based on other legislation cannot be restricted in the context of the confirmation of the paternity but they are to be decided, if need be, separately. Nor is imposing restrictions justified in the present case as the expressly mentioned main aim of the Paternity Act is the realisation of the legal equality of children. One has to take into account also the principles of Article 6 of the Constitution, according to which everyone is equal before the law and no one shall, without an acceptable reason, be treated differently from other persons on grounds of origin or other reason that concerns his or her person.”
In the case at hand the provision concerning the five-year time-limit was therefore left inapplicable on the strength of Article 106 of the Constitution and paternity was confirmed.