The case originated in an application (no. 14793/08) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Y.Y. (“the applicant”), on 6 March 2008. Y.Y. is a transgender person who at the time the application was lodged was recognised in civil law as female. However, the Court will use the masculine form in referring to the applicant, to reflect his preferred gender identity.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Bozlu, a lawyer practising in Mersin. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged a violation of his right to respect for his private life (Article 8 of the Convention), in particular because the courts had refused his request for authorisation to undergo gender reassignment surgery. He also complained of the fact that the Court of Cassation had not considered his case on the merits and had not given reasons for its decisions concerning him (Article 6 of the Convention).
On 24 March 2010 the Government were given notice of the application. The acting Section President at that time also decided that the applicant’s identity should not be disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1981.
The applicant is a transgender person whose gender is recorded in the civil-status register as female. He stated that he had become aware, even as a child, of feeling that he was male, a feeling that was at variance with his anatomical sex.
On 30 September 2005 the applicant applied to the Mersin District Court (“the District Court”) under Article 40 of the Civil Code seeking authorisation to undergo gender reassignment surgery. In the application instituting the proceedings the applicant’s lawyer gave the following reasons for his client’s request. His client had, since he was a child, regarded himself as male rather than female and for that reason had been receiving psychological counselling since childhood; at the age of nineteen or twenty he had contemplated suicide; his current biological identity was at odds with the gender to which he felt he belonged; and gender reassignment was necessary in order for him to achieve harmony between his private perception of himself and his physical make-up. The lawyer stated that several doctors whom his client had consulted since childhood had recommended gender reassignment. The applicant, who was twenty-four years old, was living as a man, had been in a relationship with a woman for four years and was accepted as a man by his family and friends. The lawyer added that his client had been receiving treatment for the past year in the psychiatric department of İnönü University Hospital with a view to undergoing the gender reassignment surgery that he sought. Lastly, the lawyer requested that the proceedings remain confidential in view of his client’s psychological state.
On 16 December 2005 the District Court granted the request concerning the confidentiality of the proceedings.
On 6 February 2006 the court heard evidence from the applicant’s family. The applicant’s mother stated that as a child her daughter had played mainly with boys and as an adolescent had told her mother that she felt more like a boy and wanted to be one. The applicant’s mother had therefore consulted psychologists, who had expressed the view that her daughter would be happier if she could live as a man, a view which the applicant’s mother shared. The applicant’s older brother also said that his sister had played with boys when she was a child, had started to behave like a boy during adolescence and had had girlfriends, and that she had been determined to undergo gender reassignment by means of surgery. She had made several suicide attempts and was still in therapy. As far as the applicant’s brother was aware, the doctors had decided to go ahead with the operation.
On conclusion of the hearing the District Court sent a request for information to the medical director of the hospital where the applicant was being treated, seeking to ascertain whether the applicant was transgender, whether gender reassignment was necessary to ensure his mental health and whether he was permanently unable to procreate.
On 23 February 2006 a medical committee of İnönü University Medical Centre drew up a psychiatric report which found that the applicant was transgender. The report further found that, from a psychological viewpoint, the applicant should henceforth live with a male identity.
On 28 February 2006 a medical committee of the gynaecology and obstetrics unit of the same medical centre drew up a report which found that Y.Y. had a female phenotype and was transgender.
On 7 April 2006 the District Court examined the two medical reports from İnönü University’s medical faculty. The court observed that the authors of the report of 23 February 2006 had diagnosed the applicant as transgender and had found that, from a psychological viewpoint, he should live henceforth with a male identity, but that the authors of the report of 28 February 2006 had found Y.Y.’s phenotype to be female. However, the court considered that these reports had not answered the questions it had asked, namely whether gender reassignment was necessary in order to ensure the claimant’s mental health and whether the claimant was permanently unable to procreate. The court therefore reiterated its request for information.
On 20 April 2006 the head of the gynaecology and obstetrics unit attached to the surgical department of İnönü University’s medical faculty wrote to the head doctor of the medical centre informing him that the applicant had been examined following a request for a consultation with a plastic surgeon with a view to gender reassignment. She said that an examination had established that Y.Y. had female external and internal genitalia and was not permanently unable to procreate.
On 21 April 2006 a medical committee of the psychiatric department of İnönü University’s medical faculty wrote to the head doctor of the medical centre informing him that the applicant had been examined on 20 April 2006. Following that examination the medical team had concluded that, in the interests of his mental health, the applicant should be allowed to live henceforth with a male identity.
At the District Court hearing of 5 May 2006 the applicant’s lawyer challenged the report of 20 April 2006 on the grounds that it had not been adopted by a collegiate body. The District Court accordingly requested a fresh expert report on the applicant’s ability to procreate. The task of preparing the report was entrusted to a medical committee of Çukurova University’s faculty of medicine.
On 11 May 2006 two doctors from the gynaecology and obstetrics department of Çukurova University’s faculty of medicine carried out an expert assessment and concluded, after examining the applicant, that he was capable of procreating.
On 27 June 2006 the District Court, basing its decision on the findings of the various expert reports, refused the applicant authorisation to undergo gender reassignment, on the ground that he was not permanently unable to procreate and therefore did not satisfy one of the conditions of eligibility for gender reassignment under Article 40 of the Civil Code.
On 18 July 2006 the applicant appealed on points of law against that judgment. In his pleadings the applicant’s lawyer stressed that his client had considered himself since childhood as male rather than female and that this belief was not a mere whim. The applicant had undergone a lengthy course of psychotherapy following which the doctors had concluded that he was transgender and that, from a psychological perspective, it was advisable for him to live as a man. The lawyer further submitted that his client’s ability to procreate did not in any way prevent him from perceiving himself as a man; it was a biological fact over which he had no control. In Turkey as elsewhere in the world, persons who, like the applicant, were unable to reconcile their biological and psychological state were not necessarily single and unable to procreate. There were numerous examples of people who had a predisposition towards transgenderism and who had married and had children before having gender reassignment surgery. It was unfair to make authorisation for a change of biological gender contingent on the ability of the transgender individuals concerned to procreate, whether they considered themselves as men or as women. Accordingly, in refusing to allow the applicant to undergo gender reassignment surgery under Article 40 of the Civil Code – which, in the lawyer’s submission, did not reflect social reality – the courts had restricted his client’s rights and freedoms. The lawyer further alleged that the refusal of the applicant’s request on account of his ability to procreate had been unlawful. In his view, the expression “permanently unable to procreate” should be deleted from the provision in question.
On 17 May 2007 the Court of Cassation upheld the District Court judgment, taking the view that the first-instance court had not erred in its assessment of the evidence.
On 18 June 2007 the applicant’s lawyer lodged an application for rectification of that decision. In his pleadings he submitted that none of the grounds of appeal advanced by the applicant had been taken into account, and that no comment had been made on the official documents and reports included in the file. The lawyer also contested the use of the report of 11 May 2006 prepared by the gynaecology and obstetrics department of Çukurova University’s medical faculty as the basis for rejecting the applicant’s claims. He argued in that regard that the report in question did not have the status of an expert report and had been drawn up following a purely superficial examination of his client’s genital organs that was insufficient to establish his ability to procreate. Even assuming that the various medical reports had sufficed to establish that his client was capable of procreating, the only gender with which his client could identify from a physical and psychological perspective was male. Moreover, that fact had been established on 2 March 2005 in the report of the medical committee of İnönü University, where his client had also been following a long-term course of psychotherapy. The lawyer criticised the failure to take the latter fact into account. Lastly, he submitted that the courts had infringed the applicant’s rights by refusing his request for authorisation to undergo surgery aimed at assigning to him the gender with which he naturally identified.
On 18 October 2007 the Court of Cassation rejected the application for rectification lodged by the applicant, observing that none of the grounds for setting aside enumerated in Article 440 of the Code of Civil Procedure applied in the case at hand.
On 5 March 2013 the applicant lodged a fresh application with the Mersin District Court on the basis of Article 40 of the Civil Code, seeking authorisation to undergo gender reassignment surgery. In his application instituting the proceedings, the applicant’s lawyer gave the following reasons for the request. His client had regarded himself from a young age as male rather than female and for that reason had received psychological counselling since childhood; medical reports had established that, from a psychological viewpoint, it was advisable for him to live henceforth with a male identity; the applicant’s biological identity was at odds with the gender to which he felt he belonged; gender reassignment was necessary to ensure his psychological and mental well-being; on 27 March 2012 he had undergone a double mastectomy and was taking various hormones to increase his testosterone levels; he was working for his brother as a painter and decorator; he went regularly to the gym and had the physical appearance of a man; he was now thirty-two years old and had always regarded himself as a man; the friends he had met after a certain age knew him only as a man; and he did not use the first name indicated on his identity papers. The lawyer added that, in order to bring his physical appearance into line with his perception of himself, his client had resorted to all kinds of methods with damaging side-effects. In his daily life, and especially when he had to produce his identity papers for the authorities, the applicant was subjected to denigrating and humiliating treatment and encountered numerous difficulties because of the discrepancy between his outward appearance and the identity indicated on his papers. The lawyer summed up by requesting the court to allow his client to begin the requisite formalities in order to change his identity in the civil-status register, to grant his client’s request to undergo gender reassignment, to authorise him to undergo gender reassignment surgery and to declare the District Court proceedings confidential.
On 11 April 2013, following a full medical history and examination of the applicant, a committee made up of psychiatrists from İnönü University Medical Centre issued a medical report which found that the applicant was transgender and that gender reassignment was necessary in order to ensure his mental health. The report also stated that an expert assessment should be carried out to establish whether the applicant was permanently unable to procreate.
On 6 May 2013 a forensic medical report was drawn up by a committee from the forensic medicine department of İnönü University Medical Centre. According to the report, during the examination carried out on 11 April 2013 in the forensic medical department, the applicant had stated that he wished to undergo gender reassignment surgery and had already taken steps to that end in the past but had had his claims rejected by the courts. He had then applied to the European Court of Human Rights and had since brought a fresh action. The medical examination had shown that the applicant had a male phenotype (all his external characteristics). He had a beard and a moustache, his breast tissue had been surgically removed and he was receiving treatment following that operation. He had male hair growth on his arms and legs, was undergoing hormone treatment and was embarrassed by the colour of his identity card and had therefore covered it before putting it in his wallet. Lastly, the applicant had stated that reassignment was a necessity for him.
According to the report, blood tests had revealed that the applicant had a total testosterone count of more than 16,000 ng/dl, presumably linked to the hormone treatment he was taking. However, this did not mean that he was permanently unable to procreate.
The report concluded as follows:
“1.  [The applicant] is transgender;
gender reassignment is necessary for his mental health;
[he] is not permanently unable to procreate (as a woman) ...”
On 21 May 2013 the Mersin District Court granted the applicant’s request and authorised the gender reassignment surgery which he sought. In its reasoning, the District Court found it established that the applicant was transgender, that gender reassignment was needed to ensure his mental health, and that it was clear from the evidence of the witnesses called by the applicant that he lived as a man in every respect and suffered as a result of his situation. Accordingly, in view of the evidence and of the reports produced, the conditions set forth in Article 40 § 2 of the Civil Code were satisfied and the request should be granted. The judgment specified that it was final.
...