The case originated in an application (no. 21200/05) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vladimir Aleksandrovich Akhlyustin (“the applicant”), on 11 May 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr O. Speranskiy, a lawyer practising in Ivanovo. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been subjected to covert surveillance in breach of Article 8 of the Convention and that the criminal proceedings against him had been unfair.
On 5 May 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Ivanovo.
At the relevant time the applicant was a member of the Ivanovo Region electoral commission.
On 23 October 2003 a deputy head of the Ivanovo Region Department of Internal Affairs ordered audio-visual “surveillance” (“наблюдение”) of the applicant’s office. The parties did not submit a copy of that decision.
The surveillance was carried out from 27 October to 5 November 2003 by means of a hidden camera.
The applicant was subsequently charged with abuse of power, an offence under Article 285 of the Criminal Code. While studying the criminal case file he discovered that it contained video recordings of him talking on the telephone in his office.
At the trial the applicant pleaded not guilty. He claimed, in particular, that the video recordings were inadmissible as evidence as they had been obtained unlawfully without prior judicial authorisation. He also challenged the authenticity of the recordings.
On 27 September 2004 the Leninskiy District Court of Ivanovo convicted the applicant of abuse of power and sentenced him to two years’ imprisonment, suspended for two years. The court relied on statements by several witnesses, physical evidence, expert reports and the video recordings of the applicant’s telephone conversations. It found that the video recordings were authentic and that they had been obtained in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law.
The applicant appealed. He reiterated, in particular, his argument that the video recordings were inadmissible as evidence.
On 12 November 2004 the Ivanovo Regional Court upheld the conviction on appeal. The court held that the District Court had correctly declared the video recordings admissible as evidence because they had been obtained in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law.
The Operational-Search Activities Act of 12 August 1995 (Law no. 144FZ – hereafter “the OSAA”) provides that “operational-search” measures (“оперативно-розыскные мероприятия”) may include, among other things, the interception of postal, telegraphic, telephone and other forms of communication; the collection of data from technical channels of communication; the inspection of premises, buildings, other installations, vehicles and areas; “surveillance” (“наблюдение”); and “operative experiments” (“оперативный эксперимент”). Audio and video recording, photography, filming and other technical means may be used during operational-search activities, provided that they are not harmful to anyone’s life or health or to the environment (section 6).
The aims of operational-search activities are: (1) to detect, prevent, suppress and investigate criminal offences and identify persons conspiring to commit, committing, or having committed a criminal offence; (2) to trace fugitives from justice and missing persons; and (3) to obtain information about events or activities endangering the national, military, economic or ecological security of the Russian Federation (section 2 of the OSAA, as in force at the material time).
Operational-search measures may be conducted on the following grounds:
In connection with a pending criminal case;
Following the receipt of information
(1)  that a criminal offence has been committed or is ongoing, or is being plotted; or about persons conspiring to commit, or committing, or having committed a criminal offence, even if such information is insufficient for a criminal case to be opened;
(2)  about events or activities endangering the national, military, economic or ecological security of the Russian Federation;
(3)  about fugitives from justice;
(4)  about missing persons or unidentified bodies.
at the request of an investigator or a court in connection with a pending investigation or a pre-investigation inquiry;
at the request of other agencies performing operational-search activities on the grounds mentioned in this section;
on the basis of a decision ordering special State protection of a person in accordance with the law;
at the request of international law-enforcement organisations or lawenforcement authorities of foreign countries, pursuant to international treaties to which the Russian Federation is a party.
Agencies performing operational-search activities may also collect data necessary for security clearance or vetting procedures before recruiting for certain official positions listed in this section of the Act or for verifying the information such officials are required to submit about themselves while in office, in particular with the aim of combatting corruption; before recruiting to positions involving access to facilities that are dangerous for the population or the environment; and before granting a detective or security licence (section 7, as in force at the material time).
Operational-search measures involving interference with the constitutional right to the privacy of postal, telegraphic and other communications transmitted by means of a telecommunications network or mail services, or within the privacy of the home, require prior judicial authorisation (section 8(2) of the OSAA). Such measures may be conducted following the receipt of information (1) that a criminal offence has been committed or is ongoing, or is being plotted; (2) about persons conspiring to commit, or committing, or having committed a criminal offence; or (3) about events or activities endangering the national, military, economic or ecological security of the Russian Federation (section 8(2) of the OSAA). At the material time such measures could be authorised only in cases where a person was suspected of, or charged with, a serious offence or an especially serious criminal offence, or might have information about such an offence (section 8(4) of the OSAA, as in force until 24 July 2007). Such measures could not be conducted on the other grounds mentioned in section 7 (section 8(9) of the OSAA).
On 20 March 2007 the Constitutional Court, in its decision no. 178O-О, dismissed as inadmissible a request for a review of the constitutionality of section 6 the OSAA. It held, in particular, that a separate judicial authorisation was not required for the use of audio and video recording, photography, filming or other technical means, irrespective of whether such equipment was used during operationalsearch activities requiring prior judicial authorisation or during operational-search activities not requiring prior judicial authorisation.
For a summary of the domestic provisions on judicial review of operational-search measures, see Zubkov and Others (nos. 29431/05 and 2 others, §§ 58-76, 7 November 2017).