The case originated in an application (no. 25527/13) against the Kingdom of Spain lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Spanish national, Mr Fernando Vicent Del Campo (“the applicant”), on 2 April 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr G. Rodríguez González, a lawyer practising in León. The Spanish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr R. A. León Cavero, State Attorney.
The applicant complained under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that his right of access to a court had been breached because his request to become a party to liability proceedings brought against the public administration (responsabilidad patrimonial de la Administración) had been refused despite his having a direct interest in defending himself against serious allegations of harassment in the workplace. He further complained under Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention that the judgment rendered within the framework of those proceedings had breached his right to honour and respect for his private and family life, and that no effective remedies had been available to him in that respect.
On 10 February 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Villavente (León).
He worked as a teacher, also acting as head of department, in a public school, the León School of Arts and Crafts (Escuela de Artes y Oficios de León). One of his colleagues – a teacher in the same department – filed a complaint against him with the education authorities for psychological harassment in the workplace. The complaint was dismissed on the basis that there had been no harassment but mere disputes at work.
On 20 June 2006 the colleague filed an administrative claim with the Department of Education of the Regional Government of Castilla-León aimed at seeking redress for the malfunctioning of the public administration. She requested that the administration be found liable for the alleged psychological harassment in the workplace. The competent authorities did not render a decision within the requisite time-limit.
On 25 January 2007 the colleague instituted judicial proceedings (recurso contencioso-administrativo) against the implied rejection of her request of 20 June 2006. She claimed that the applicant had subjected her to workplace harassment, from the academic year 2000/01 onwards in particular, and that the competent authorities had failed to take any measures to prevent it. She described a series of events in which the applicant had allegedly made false accusations against her and subjected her to discriminatory and humiliating treatment, disrespect, insults and death threats at work in the presence of students, parents and other colleagues. The colleague further requested compensation from the Regional Administration of Castilla-León in the amount of 74,434.12 euros (EUR), as well as reinstatement in her position as a teacher at the León School of Arts and Crafts, requesting that all appropriate measures be taken to prevent any possible risks, particularly psychosocial, in the workplace.
On 19 December 2007, after notice of the aforementioned application was given, the respondent – the Regional Administration of Castilla-León – contested the claims and requested the dismissal of the application.
By a judgment (no. 2491/2011) of 2 November 2011, the High Court of Justice of Castilla-León (Administrative Chamber) ruled against the Regional Administration of Castilla-León, ordering it to pay compensation to the plaintiff in the amount of EUR 14,500. It concluded that the situation suffered by her amounted to workplace harassment and that the education authorities, despite being aware of the situation, had not taken effective measures to bring it to an end. Although the court acknowledged that not all the acts or behaviour attributed to the applicant could be considered psychological harassment, it found that on the basis of the evidence collected a situation of psychological harassment in the workplace had been shown to exist.
The High Court of Justice included the following reasoning concerning the applicant, who was frequently identified by name:
“... from the documentary, witness and expert evidence [in the proceedings] [the court] can find that ... a situation of psychological harassment in the workplace has been shown [to exist] on the basis that the head of department’s conduct towards the claimant met the material element – unjustified professional harassment – the temporal element – regular and repeated – and the element of intent – malicious and not by chance – of the so-called bullying (mobbing) ...
a) Not all the acts or behaviour that the plaintiff attributed to Mr Vicent ... constitute psychological harassment towards her ...
b) ... although it should also be considered established that the behaviour ... of Mr Vicent ... was to a certain degree general or collective, ... in the particular case of the plaintiff ... this general behaviour of a lack of respect and manners was translated, more intensively and strongly, into repeated and conscious professional discredit, of underestimation and mockery of her teaching ability, that resulted not only from the documented complaints already described ..., but particularly from the expressive witness evidence ...”
On 15 December 2011 the applicant requested to have access to the file and to become a party to the proceedings. He claimed to have learned of the judgment some days earlier through the publication of information in a León newspaper (Diario de León).
By a decision of 23 January 2012, the High Court of Justice of Castilla-León granted the applicant access to the file but refused his request to be a party to the proceedings on the basis that he could not be considered to be an interested party in liability proceedings against the public administration.
On 1 February 2012 the applicant lodged an appeal against the above-mentioned decision requesting the annulment of the proceedings. The High Court of Justice of Castilla-León dismissed it by a decision of 2 March 2012. On the one hand, the court held that the request for annulment of the proceedings had been made outside the time-limit prescribed by law, since an “appeal for annulment” (incidente de nulidad) should have been submitted within twenty days of the date the applicant became aware of a possible breach of his rights. The court took into account that the applicant had claimed that he had learned of the judgment through the publication of information in a newspaper on 9 and 10 December 2011, and that in any case on 15 December 2011 (the date on which he had requested access to the file and to become a party to the proceedings) he had clearly known the decisive elements for his complaints.
The court nevertheless decided on the merits. It stressed that the proceedings were aimed at determining liability for the damage suffered by the claimant as a result of the acts of the authorities and staff working for the public administration. Therefore, in line with section 145 of Law 30/1992 and the relevant subordinate legislation, within such proceedings neither the authorities nor civil servants could be sued nor, accordingly, could they be a party to the proceedings. The national legislature had set up liability proceedings against the public administration excluding the possibility of its authorities or staff becoming interested parties to them even though in all cases the public officials concerned were identifiable; their professional conduct was being judged and hence their honour and moral integrity could eventually be affected; there was a possibility that the administration concerned would institute a “recovery action” against them; and the administrative or judicial decisions were subject to potential media coverage.
Despite acknowledging that public officials’ professional conduct was being judged and that their honour and moral integrity could be affected, the court held: (i) that the proceedings involved disputes exclusively between the public administration and alleged victims of the acts of its public officials; (ii) that the authorities and staff allegedly causing the damage could not be considered to be interested parties for the purposes of section 31 of Law 30/1992; and (iii) that both liability and compensation are sought from the public administration, as opposed to the public officials concerned. Lastly, the court stated that the public official concerned would only be considered to be an interested party in a recovery action (acción de repetición) under section 145(2) of Law 30/1992, in which each and every one of the elements constituting the liability for which recovery was sought could be contested, including the acts attributed to him or her.
The court thus concluded that the concept of an “interested party” in liability proceedings brought against the public administration should be understood as referring to those allegedly injured by the acts of public officials. The restriction on public officials being a party to such (administrative or judicial) proceedings was however justified by the special nature, purpose and scope of liability proceedings brought against the public administration. According to the court, such proceedings were set up to facilitate redress and compensation for those affected by the acts of public officials. Otherwise, the proceedings would require each and every public official concerned (including, for example, the school management board and education inspectorate, or doctors, nurses, porters and so forth in cases related to healthcare) to be summoned to appear in proceedings in their own defence and with their own representatives, contrary to the regulatory developments, that essentially simplified the proceedings for the benefit of those injured or affected by the public administration.
The applicant then lodged an amparo appeal with the Constitutional Court, invoking a breach of Article 24 of the Spanish Constitution (right to a fair trial). He claimed that, despite his having a direct and personal interest in the proceedings on the basis that his rights and legitimate interests had been affected, he had not been summoned to appear and his request to become a party to the proceedings had been refused. The court declared the appeal inadmissible by a decision of 2 October 2012 (served on the applicant on 9 October 2012) on the grounds that it had not duly justified its special constitutional significance.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
“1. Everyone has the right to obtain effective protection by the judges and the courts in the exercise of his or her rights and legitimate interests, and in no case may he or she go undefended.
Likewise, everyone has the right to be heard by a court established by law, to the defence and assistance of a lawyer, to be informed of any charges brought against him or her, to a public trial without undue delay and with full guarantees, to make use of evidence relevant to their defence, not to incriminate him or herself, not to declare him or herself guilty, and the right to be presumed innocent.”
“1. Judicial proceedings shall be public, with the exceptions provided for in the laws on procedure.
Proceedings shall be predominantly oral, particularly in criminal matters.
Judgments shall always contain a statement of the grounds on which they are based and be delivered in a public hearing.”
The relevant provisions of Law 30/1992 on the legal regime applicable to the public administration and on common administrative procedure (Ley de Régimen Jurídico de las Administraciones Públicas y del Procedimiento Administrativo Común), as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“1. The following shall be considered interested parties in administrative proceedings:
(a) ...
(b) Those who, without having instituted the proceedings, have rights that may be affected by the decision adopted.
(c) Those whose legitimate interests, whether individual or collective, may be affected by the decision and appear in the proceedings as long as no final decision has been taken.
...”
“1. Individuals shall have the right to be compensated by the [public administration] concerned for any damage to their goods and rights, except in cases of force majeure, provided that the damage is the consequence of the normal or abnormal functioning of public services.
...”
“1. For liability [of the public administration] to be effective, individuals shall claim compensation for the damage caused by the authorities and staff directly from the [Administration] concerned.
The [Administration] concerned, when it has compensated those who have suffered damage shall, of its own motion, seek liability from its authorities and its other staff for wilful misconduct or gross negligence ...
To seek such liability the following criteria, among others, shall be weighed: the damage caused, the existence or [non-existence] of intent, the professional liability of the [public officials] and their relation to the occurrence of the damage.
...”
The rules of procedure on the liability of the public administration in force at the relevant time were approved by Royal Decree 429/1993 of 26 March 1993.
The relevant provisions of Law 29/1998 regulating judicial proceedings in administrative matters (Ley reguladora de la Jurisdicción Contencioso-administrativa), as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“1. The following shall be considered to be a respondent party:
(a) The [public administration] and whichever bodies referred to in section 1.3 against whose activity the action is directed.
(b) Persons or entities whose rights or legitimate interests may be affected should the claimant’s claims be upheld.
(c) The [public administration’s] insurer, which shall always be a co-defendant along with the [Administration] insured.
...”
“1. The court registrar ... shall require the [Administration] to forward [him or her] the administrative file, ordering it to issue the summonses referred to in section 49 ...”
“1. The decision to forward the file shall be notified within five days of its adoption to those appearing as interested parties in it, summoning them to appear as defendants within nine days ...
...
Once the file has been received, the court registrar ... shall check that the summonses have been issued and, if it becomes apparent that they are incomplete, [he or she] shall order the [Administration] to issue the necessary [summonses] to ensure the defence of the interested parties that are identifiable.
...”
Constitutional Court judgment no. 15/2016 of 1 February 2016 interpreted the above-mentioned legal provisions in respect of liability proceedings brought against the public administration. The relevant passages of the judgment read as follows:
“ ... what is at stake in liability proceedings brought against the [Administration] by an aggrieved party is not the possible liability of the public official who has participated in or contributed to causing the damage (lato sensu), but the strict liability of the [Administration] for any normal or abnormal functioning of public services, ...
...
... section 139 [of Law 30/1992] has specified the causal element that triggers ... the strict liability of the [Administration] for the functioning of public services, namely that the damage is the consequence of the normal or abnormal functioning of such services, except in cases of force majeure or of damage that the individual has the legal duty to sustain in accordance with the law. Law [30/1992] makes no mention of ... identifying the public official that may have caused the damage ..., nor does it make [the liability] conditional upon establishing [the public official’s] negligence, fault or intent, a perspective which does not even require examination, it being sufficient to prove the damage and the link between the functioning of the public service and the damage caused, ...
The regulation of the action for liability against the [Administration] set up by the legislature, in short, implies that the affected right or legitimate interest is that of the aggrieved party bringing the action for compensation for the objective damage sustained, with the [Administration] being the defendant, without judging any additional, different and subjective liability of the [public officials] who have intervened in the situation at issue by act or omission.
The legal regime of liability in this type of case nevertheless provides that ... the [Administration] may seek indemnity of the amount paid for the functioning of its public services from the public official subjectively liable, by bringing a recovery action under section 145 [of Law 30/1992] ...
...
... the reasoning contained in the legal conclusions of the judgment resulting from the first proceedings (strict liability of the [Administration]) or the statement of facts arising from evidence examined that may relate to the subjective liability of the authorities or staff of the public administration, if they had been made on the occasion of the adduced objective damage examination, shall not under any circumstances entail, insofar as they are not the subject of the strict liability proceedings, the positive effect of substantive res judicata in subsequent proceedings judging the public officials’ subjective liability ...
...
In the light of the above conclusion, the impugned decisions finding the applicant’s lack of legal standing to be a party to the strict liability proceedings against the [Administration] in the absence of a legitimate interest did not cause defencelessness, given that the declaration of liability of the [Administration] does not entail any automatic benefit or damage to [his rights]. It shall be at a later stage, either when bringing the recovery action ... or when instituting a possible disciplinary action, where the applicant may make submissions, present and examine evidence admitted and, where appropriate, lodge an appeal for judicial review of the final administrative decision rendered, thus keeping his opportunities for defence intact.
...”
The relevant provisions of Organic Law 6/1985 of 1 July 1985 on the Judiciary (Ley Orgánica del Poder Judicial), as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“Courts and tribunals shall hold public hearings ... for ... the publication of judgments passed ...”
“The judge rapporteur shall be responsible ... for:
...
Delivering judgments in a public hearing.”
“1. Judicial proceedings shall be public, with the exceptions provided for in the laws on procedure.
Exceptionally, for reasons of public policy or for the protection of rights and freedoms, courts and tribunals, by reasoned decision, may restrict the publication and decree the secrecy of all or part of the proceedings.”
“Interested parties shall have access to books, files and judicial records which are not of a confidential nature ...”
“1. Judgments, once issued and signed by the magistrate or by all the judges who passed them, shall be deposited in the Court Office [Oficina Judicial] and access to the text shall be given to any interested party.
Access to the text of a judgment, or to certain matters therein, may be restricted when it could affect the right to private life, rights of individuals requiring special protection or the guarantee of anonymity of victims or aggrieved parties, where appropriate, as well as, in general, in order to prevent judgments from being used for purposes contrary to the law.
...”
The relevant provisions of Law 1/2000 on Civil Procedure (Ley de Enjuiciamiento Civil), supplementing Law 29/1998 on the matters not provided for therein, as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“1. Judgments and other final decisions, once issued and signed by those who passed them, shall be published and deposited in the Court Office [Oficina Judicial] ...”
Issues pertaining to public access to judicial documents and the publication of judicial decisions and proceedings are further regulated by Regulation 1/2005 on additional aspects of judicial proceedings, approved by the plenary of the General Council of the Judiciary (Consejo General del Poder Judicial) in the Agreement of 15 September 2005. Section 4 provides that it is for the court registrars to facilitate access to judicial documents, including judgments, for those having an interest in them. They may decide to restrict access to or omit personal data where the protection of the honour or private life of any person affected by the judicial decision so requires. A decision to refuse access by the court registrar may be reviewed by the judge or president at the request of the interested party.
The processing and dissemination of judicial decisions is also subject to legislation on data protection, particularly Organic Law 15/1999 of 13 December 1999 on the protection of personal data (Ley Orgánica de Protección de Datos de Carácter Personal) and its developing regulation approved by Royal Decree 1720/2007 of 21 December 2007.
The plenary of the Constitutional Court of Spain approved the Agreement of 23 July 2015 regulating the exclusion of personal identity data in the publication of judicial decisions. Under that agreement, the Constitutional Court of its own motion preserves the anonymity of those who are not party to constitutional proceedings in its judicial decisions. The publication of personal data of parties to such proceedings may also be restricted for the protection of their right to private life. In such cases, the names of those concerned by the publication of Constitutional Court decisions are replaced by their initials, and any other data allowing for their identification is omitted.
The Agreement developed the criteria set forth in Constitutional Court judgment no. 114/2006 of 5 April 2006, which stated the following:
“7. The constitutional requirement for maximum dissemination and publicity of the full text of judicial decisions of [the Constitutional Court] ... is not absolute and may be excluded in certain cases ... [This] principle may be restricted by the possible prevalence of other conflicting fundamental rights and constitutional guarantees, and that should be weighed in each case.
...
The need to weigh and identify the particular interests to take into consideration to justify the exception of full publicity of the decision has been the consistent practice of this Court, it being dependent on a number of criteria also followed by foreign, supranational and international High Courts and, particularly, by the European Court of Human Rights. Hence, this Constitutional Court ... notwithstanding the special care shown in order not to include in its decisions any personal data other than that strictly necessary to formulate its reasoning and rulings, on different occasions ... has proceeded to omit the identification of certain persons mentioned in its decisions, either considering the guarantee of anonymity of victims and aggrieved parties in special cases ...; or the specific duty to protect minors ...
This ... is consistent with the practice followed by the European Court of Human Rights both in its rules of procedure and its case-law ...”