The case originated in an application (no. 32737/16) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Aram Ashotovich Akopdzhanyan (“the applicant”), on 1 June 2016.
The applicant was represented by Mr Y.V. Gusakov, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his exclusion from Russia with an eight-year re-entry ban had violated his right to respect for family life.
On 10 November 2016 the complaints concerning Articles 8 and 13 were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Vanadzor, Armenia.
The applicant arrived in Russia on an unspecified date. Soon afterwards he started cohabiting with Ms Ya. in the town of Surgut, KhantyMansiysk Region. In 2002 they had a daughter, Z.
According to the Government’s submission, on 2 June 2003 the Surgut Town Court sentenced the applicant to three years’ imprisonment, suspended for eighteen months on probation, for the forcible assertion of a private right. From the documents submitted it can been seen that this criminal record was subsequently expunged.
In December 2004 the applicant married Ms Ya.
In May 2009 the applicant and Ms Ya. divorced.
In January 2013 the applicant’s paternity of Ms Z. was officially registered and in January 2014 he and Ms Ya. re-married.
In January 2014 the applicant was charged with causing serious bodily injuries to another person during a quarrel on 30 December 2013. He pleaded guilty under the summary criminal procedure and paid the victim compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage.
On 7 April 2014 the Surgut Town Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to one and half year’s imprisonment, having taken into account his guilty plea, his having compensated in full the victim for the damage caused him, and the fact that he had a minor child. The reasoning in respect of the sentence stated that prior to the commission of the crime the applicant had had no criminal record.
Following an appeal by the applicant, on 18 June 2014 the KhantyMansiysk Regional Court upheld the sentence on appeal.
On 14 July 2015 the Federal Ministry of Justice imposed an exclusion order on the applicant, with a duration limited to eight years (until 2023). The wording of the reasoning for the order was confined to references to section 25.10 of the Entry and Exit Procedures Act and section 31(11) of the Foreigners Act (see paragraphs 29 and 34 below).
On 3 September 2015 the exclusion order was sent to the administration of correctional facility IK-53 in the Sverdlovsk Region, where the applicant was serving his sentence.
On 15 September 2015 the Code of Administrative Procedure (“the CAP”) entered into force.
On 6 October 2015 the applicant was released from prison.
On the basis of the exclusion order, on 6 October 2015 the Federal Migration Authority (“the FMA”) issued a deportation order in respect of the applicant. The wording of the reasoning of the deportation order was limited to references to the applicable legislation. On the same day the FMA ordered the applicant’s placement in a special detention facility.
On 14 October 2015 the applicant lodged an appeal against the exclusion order with the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court in Moscow. Referring to the provisions of the CAP, he requested that the exclusion order be quashed as it disproportionately interfered with his right to respect for family life, as protected by Article 8 of the Convention. He stated that he had been residing in Russia for a number of years, that he had a Russian wife and child, that he and his wife were the owners of their flat and that he had no place to live in Armenia. Moreover, he had not violated immigration regulations.
On 24 November 2015 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court examined the appeal and upheld the exclusion order. In particular, the court stated that the basis for the applicant’s exclusion was his criminal conviction for a serious crime, the fact that it had been issued in compliance with paragraph 2 of Article 8 of the Convention, and the fact that it was both necessary in a democratic society and proportionate. As for the alleged interference with the applicant’s family life, the court stated that:
“... the fact that the applicant’s wife and daughter reside in the Russian Federation does not [automatically mean that] a violation of his right to respect for [his] personal and family life [has been caused] by the exclusion order, as that measure was taken in the light of the public danger the applicant represented ... In addition, according to information from the Main Department for the Execution of Sentences in the Sverdlovsk Region, [while serving his sentence] Mr Akopdzhanyan was penalised on eleven occasions ...
[The court finds that] given that Mr Akopdzhanyan has a non-expunged criminal record and that he had been prosecuted for a serious crime, the decision on his exclusion from Russia was sufficiently substantiated ...”
On 17 December 2015 the applicant was deported from Russia.
On several occasions between 8 December 2015 and 25 January 2016 the applicant’s lawyer tried to lodge an appeal against the abovementioned decision to the Appeals Chamber of the Moscow City Court. Referring to Article 8 of the Convention, he stated that: the exclusion order constituted a disproportionate interference with the applicant’s right to respect for his family life, given the fact that he had a Russian wife and daughter, he had no place to live in Armenia, and he had lived in Russia for a number of years. Those appeals, except for one, were rejected for failure to comply with various procedural requirements.
On 18 March 2016 the Moscow City Court examined the applicant’s appeal against the judgment of 24 November 2015. Referring to Article 8 of the Convention, the court concluded as follows:
“Having regard to the applicant’s arguments relating to his private and family life, the court does not see sufficient elements to justify the application of the Convention to the present case ...
In recognising everyone’s right to respect for his private and family life, Article 8 of the Convention does not allow interference by a public authority with the exercise of that right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
The relevant statute precisely provides such exceptional situations; the exclusion order in respect of the applicant is based on that statute.
The fact that the applicant has a wife and a child in Russia does not, as such, constitute sufficient proof of an allegedly disproportionate interference by the State with his private and family life. That fact does not bar an exclusion order or a deportation order ... The fact that a foreigner has kin who have Russian citizenship does not absolve that foreigner from the need to conform to Russian laws and to bear responsibility for breaching them. There is no evidence substantiating any exceptional and objective circumstances of a personal nature that would support the conclusion of an excessive and unjustified interference by Russia into the applicant’s private or family life.”
On 25 May 2016 (in the documents submitted the date was also referred to as 12 July and 21 July 2016) the applicant’s counsel lodged a cassation appeal against the exclusion order with the Moscow City Court. The document was registered by the court as received on 25 May 2016 under the incoming number 47902. The same document also bears an illegible registration stamp dated 21 July 2016. According to the Government, the cassation appeal was lodged not in May 2016 but at a later date, after 1 June 2016.
On 1 June 2016 the applicant lodged his application with the Court
.
On 29 July 2016 (in the documents submitted the date was also referred to as 21 November 2016) the Moscow City Court examined the cassation appeal and refused to forward it to its Presidium for further examination, having endorsed the conclusions of the first- and secondinstance courts.
On 23 September 2016 the applicant’s counsel lodged a further cassation appeal with the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation.
On 21 November 2016 the Supreme Court declined to examine the appeal.
A competent authority may issue a decision to the effect that a foreign national’s presence on Russian territory is undesirable (in the form of an “exclusion order”). Such a decision may be issued if a foreign national is unlawfully residing on Russian territory or if his or her residence is lawful but creates a real threat to, in particular, public order. If such a decision has been taken, the foreign national in question has to leave Russia; otherwise he or she will be deported. Such a decision may also form the legal basis for the subsequent refusal to allow that person’s re-entry into Russia (section 25.10).
If a competent authority has issued a decision to the effect that the foreigner’s presence on Russian territory is undesirable, that foreigner will be refused entry into Russia (sections 25.10 and 27(7)(7)).
Until 2002 foreign nationals with temporary resident status were not required to apply for a residence permit. Their stay in Russia was lawful as long as their visa remained valid. On 25 July 2002 Law no. 115-FZ on the Legal Status of Foreign Nationals in the Russian Federation (“the Foreigners Act”) was passed. It introduced the requirement of residence permits for foreign nationals.
Section 5 § 2 of the Act provides that a foreign national should leave Russia after the expiry of the authorised period, except in the event that on the date of expiry he has already obtained authorisation for an extension or renewal, or when his application for an extension and the relevant documents have been accepted for processing.
A foreign national married to a Russian national living in Russia is entitled to a three-year residence permit (разрешение на временное проживание) under section 6 §§ 1 and 3 (4).  While the three-year residence permit is still valid, a foreign national may apply for a renewable five-year residence permit (вид на жительство). Such applications are only possible after the foreign national has lived in Russia for at least a year on the basis of a three-year permit (section 8 §§ 1-3).
Section 31(11) of the Foreigners Act provides that an exclusion order should be transmitted, within three days, to the relevant migration authority, which then issues a deportation order.
In decision no. 86-AD05-2 of 7 December 2005, the Supreme Court of Russia considered that it was incumbent on a national court to examine whether enforcement of a deportation order was compatible with Article 8 of the Convention. Given that section 7 of the Foreigners Act prevented a deportee from applying for a temporary residence permit for five years, “a serious issue [could] arise in respect of an interference with [that person’s] right to respect for his or her family life”. In another decision, the Supreme Court varied its reasoning, stating that enforcement of a deportation order “results in the violation of fundamental family ties and impedes the family’s reunification” (decision no. 18-AD05-13 of 24 January 2006). The Supreme Court subsequently considered that a deportation order should be based on considerations which confirm the necessity of such a measure “as the only possible way of ensuring a fair balance between public and private interests” (decision no. 86-AD06-1 of 29 March 2006).
For a summary of the relevant provisions concerning the Code of Administrative Procedure, see Chigirinova v. Russia (dec.), no. 28448/16, 13 December 2016.