The case concerns an alleged breach of the applicant’s right to private life under Article 8 of the Convention by the publication of covertly taken photographs with captions that depicted her leaving hospital with her newborn baby and the ensuing domestic courts’ decisions rejecting her related claims.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Riga.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Līce.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is a lawyer. At the time of the impugned article her partner, J.N., was the chairman of a political party that did not have seats in Parliament. From 1995-2001 he had been the director-general of a Stateowned joint-stock company. He had also taken part in a nationwide advertising campaign in a weekly celebrity-focused magazine, Privātā Dzīve, that appeared in 76,000 copies with a readership of about 474,000.
In 2003 Privātā Dzīve published an article about the dissolution of J.N.’s previous marriage. J.N. had commented on his new relationship with the applicant and had said that they would soon become parents. The article included two photographs of the applicant – one was a portrait and the other showed her sitting in a public location. In the autumn of 2003, the applicant’s and J.N.’s first child was born.
On 30 November 2004 Privātā Dzīve published an article about the birth of the applicant’s second child. A covertly taken photograph of the applicant was used on the magazine’s cover. It showed her leaving hospital carrying her newborn baby in a car-seat. Her partner J.N. could be seen walking behind her. The photograph had the caption: “One year on [J.N.] has another child.”
On page four under the rubric “Children of celebrities” there was a short article with the headline “[J.N.] does not make it in time for the birth of his son”. The article was based on a telephone conversation with J.N., who had provided some information about the birth of his son, such as his weight, height and time of birth. The article was accompanied by nine covertly taken photographs, including the cover photograph, all showing the applicant and J.N. leaving hospital. In addition to the cover photograph, the applicant could be seen in three of them – standing at entrance to the hospital, standing together with J.N., and fixing the windscreen wiper of her car. The other photographs showed either J.N. or both of them leaving the hospital grounds in their cars. The photographs were supplemented with captions addressing the quantity and type of belongings the applicant had had while in hospital, the fact that the applicant and her partner had arrived and departed with their own cars, and that a windscreen wiper had been broken and the pair had tried to fix it.
On 10 March 2006, relying on Articles 89 and 96 of the Constitution (protection of fundamental rights and right to private life), section 1635 of the Civil Law (right to compensation) and Article 8 of the Convention, the applicant brought a civil claim against the publisher, the editor-in-chief, and the journalist who had written the piece. She argued that by covertly taking photographs of an important and intimate moment of her life – leaving hospital with a newborn baby – and publishing them in a magazine without her consent and in the absence of any public interest, the defendants had infringed her right to respect for her private life.
In a judgment of 10 January 2007 the Riga City Central District Court ruled in the applicant’s favour. It observed that it had not been contested that the photographs had been taken covertly and that they had been published without the applicant’s permission. Furthermore, it had not been argued that the applicant was a public figure. While the article primarily concerned J.N., it did not refer to him as a person carrying out any active political functions. Therefore, the interference in the applicant’s private life could not be justified by a reference to society’s right to be informed of the activities of a public person. Having found a violation of the applicant’s right to private life, the court ordered the editor-in-chief to publish an apology on pages one, four and five of the magazine, and to pay compensation for non-pecuniary damage in the amount of 700 Latvian lati (approximately 1,000 euros (EUR)).
In response, on 30 January 2007 Privātā Dzīve republished the article of 30 November 2004 with the same photographs and captions, along with an editorial note expressing disagreement with the judgment.
In a judgment of 11 December 2007 the Riga Regional Court overturned the first-instance court’s judgment and dismissed the applicant’s claim.
On 10 September 2008 the Senate of the Supreme Court quashed the appellate court’s judgment. It pointed out that the applicant had relied on the Court’s 2004 judgment in the case of Von Hannover v. Germany (no. 59320/00, ECHR 2004VI) and the appellate court had failed to provide reasons as to why this judgment had not been relevant for deciding the case.
On 11 December 2008 the Riga Regional Court adopted a new judgment, again dismissing the applicant’s claim. It observed that the photographs featuring the applicant leaving hospital while holding her newborn baby had been taken covertly. However, relying on the Declaration on mass communication media and Human Rights (Resolution 428 (1970) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, adopted on 23 January 1970), it noted that absolute privacy did not exist and a person had to come to terms with the fact that an interference with private life could take place at any time and place. The assessment of the seriousness of the interference had to be made by the domestic courts.
The Riga Regional Court then noted that the interference had to be assessed in the light of the person’s role in society and attitude to publicity. The child’s father, J.N., was a public figure – he was known as the former chair of a State-owned company, the current chair of a political party, and as the advertising face of Privātā Dzīve. In August 2003 Privātā Dzīve had published an article about J.N.’s divorce and about the fact that J.N. and the applicant had been expecting a child. The impugned article had been a continuation of that initial article and had informed the readers that the child mentioned in the article of 2003 had been born (confer paragraph 65 below). That information had been accompanied by nine photographs that formed an essential part of the article. The photographs had been taken in a public place – in the street – and the applicant had not been depicted in a humiliating manner. They had been taken to illustrate a specific event and had not been connected with following the applicant’s everyday life and covertly photographing intimate moments of her private life.
Furthermore, the impugned article had been written on the basis of the information provided by J.N. The applicant had had no grounds to believe that the information about the birth of her child would not be disseminated or that it would be relayed without mentioning her as the child’s mother. As a partner of a public person and a mother of his child, the applicant had to take into account that she could attract media attention and that articles might contain information about his family members, as had happened in the impugned “photo story”. The 2003 article had also featured the applicant’s photographs, to which she had not objected. The applicant’s attitude towards publicity had also been demonstrated in a subsequent interview, published in a different magazine in 2005, where she had given information about her private life, relationship with J.N., stance towards marriage, and her opinions as an activist for gender equality. In particular, the applicant had been quoted as having expressed awareness that the public had taken an interest in her owing to her being J.N.’s partner.
With respect to the applicant’s reliance on the Court’s 2004 judgment in the case of Von Hannover (cited above) the Riga Regional Court noted, firstly, that photographing a person in a public place, albeit without his or her consent, did not constitute an interference with private life. Furthermore, the Court’s interpretation of the Convention could only be applied if the factual circumstances of the two cases were identical. However, there were fundamental differences between the two cases. The photographing of the applicant had only taken place to reflect one particular event – the birth of J.N.’s child – and had not been connected with tracking her daily life; J.N. was a public person who had given information about the birth of his child; the impugned article had depicted the private life of J.N. and the applicant had been featured there only because she had been his partner and they had had a child. Accordingly, the applicant’s right to private life had not been breached.
In an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant she argued that the appellate court had incorrectly applied the case-law of the Court. In particular, the Court’s case-law should be applied in a general manner, and not only in analogous factual circumstances. The appellate court had not analysed whether the interference in her private life had had a legitimate aim and whether it had been necessary in a democratic society, as required by Article 8 of the Convention.
On 22 September 2010 the Senate of the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law. It endorsed the appellate court’s findings and reasoning, having found no support for the applicant’s assertion that there had been systematic flaws in the application of the Court’s case-law. Contrary to the applicant’s allegation, the appellate court had applied the principles established by the Court in its 2004 judgment in case of Von Hannover (cited above).
The Supreme Court considered the conclusion that the taking of photographs in a public place without the person’s consent did not constitute an interference with the right to private life to be in line with the Court’s case of Peck v. the United Kingdom (no. 44647/98, ECHR 2003I). The appellate court had also rightly found that the photographs had not depicted the applicant in a humiliating manner and that they had been obtained to depict one particular event, and had not been the result of following her daily life or secretly photographing intimate moments of her life. As J.N. had informed the public about the pregnancy, the child’s birth and leaving hospital had been turned into a public event.
The Senate of the Supreme Court disagreed with the applicant that the appellate court had failed to assess whether the article depicting her private life had contributed to a public debate. Firstly, J.N. was a public person. Secondly, some aspects of their private life had already been disclosed in the 2003 article in Privātā Dzīve, where J.N.’s divorce and the applicant’s pregnancy had been mentioned. Thirdly, the 2003 article had stirred a debate about J.N.’s private life and family values, as at that time he had still been married to another woman. The impugned photographs had shown that the awaited event described in the 2003 article – the birth of the child – had taken place (confer paragraph 65 below).
The Senate of the Supreme Court also dismissed the applicant’s argument that her failure to challenge the 2003 article had not rendered future publication of her photographs lawful. As the applicant had not objected to the article in 2003, the journalist could have concluded that she would also have no objections against the publication of information and photographs about the birth of her child. The applicant had to take into account that articles about a public person might contain information about their family members. The “photo story” had depicted an event in J.N.’s private life and, in the absence of objections to the previous article, had also showed the applicant.
The relevant Articles of the Constitution provide:
Article 89
“The State shall recognise and protect fundamental human rights in accordance with this Constitution, laws and international agreements binding upon Latvia.”
Article 96
“Everyone has the right to inviolability of his or her private life, home and correspondence.”
Section 1635 of the Civil Law provides that any infringement of rights, that is to say every unlawful activity, gives the person who has suffered damage, including non-pecuniary damage, the right to claim compensation from the wrongdoer, to the extent that he or she may be held liable for such act.
The domestic courts in their judgment relied on the Declaration on mass communication media and Human Rights, adopted by Resolution 428 (1970) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on 23 January 1970. In its relevant part the declaration reads as follows:
“C.  Measures to protect the individual against interference with his right to privacy
There is an area in which the exercise of the right of freedom of information and freedom of expression may conflict with the right to privacy protected by Article 8 of the Convention on Human Rights. The exercise of the former right must not be allowed to destroy the existence of the latter.
The right to privacy consists essentially in the right to live one’s own life with a minimum of interference. It concerns private, family and home life, physical and moral integrity, honour and reputation, avoidance of being placed in a false light, non-revelation of irrelevant and embarrassing facts, unauthorised publication of private photographs, protection against misuse of private communications, protection from disclosure of information given or received by the individual confidentially. Those who, by their own actions, have encouraged indiscreet revelations about which they complain later on, cannot avail themselves of the right to privacy.
A particular problem arises as regards the privacy of persons in public life. The phrase "where public life begins, private life ends" is inadequate to cover this situation. The private lives of public figures are entitled to protection, save where they may have an impact upon public events. The fact that an individual figures in the news does not deprive him of a right to a private life.
...
The right to privacy afforded by Article 8 of the Convention on Human Rights should not only protect an individual against interference by public authorities, but also against interference by private persons or institutions, including the mass media. National legislations should comprise provisions guaranteeing this protection.”
The Court in its 2004 Von Hannover judgment (cited above, § 42) cited Resolution 1165 (1998) on the right to privacy, adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on 26 June 1998. The most pertinent parts of the Resolution read as follows:
“6.  The Assembly is aware that personal privacy is often invaded, even in countries with specific legislation to protect it, as people’s private lives have become a highly lucrative commodity for certain sectors of the media. The victims are essentially public figures, since details of their private lives serve as a stimulus to sales. At the same time, public figures must recognise that the special position they occupy in society - in many cases by choice - automatically entails increased pressure on their privacy.
Public figures are persons holding public office and/or using public resources and, more broadly speaking, all those who play a role in public life, whether in politics, the economy, the arts, the social sphere, sport or in any other domain.
It is often in the name of a one-sided interpretation of the right to freedom of expression, which is guaranteed in Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, that the media invade people’s privacy, claiming that their readers are entitled to know everything about public figures.
Certain facts relating to the private lives of public figures, particularly politicians, may indeed be of interest to citizens, and it may therefore be legitimate for readers, who are also voters, to be informed of those facts.
It is therefore necessary to find a way of balancing the exercise of two fundamental rights, both of which are guaranteed by the European Convention on Human Rights: the right to respect for one’s private life and the right to freedom of expression.”