The case originated in an application (no. 16219/90) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Cypriot national, Mr John (Ioannis) Demades (“the applicant”), on 24 January 1990.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Demetriades, a lawyer practising in Nicosia. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Professor Z. Necatigil.
The applicant alleged a violation of Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention and of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1. Mr R. Türmen, the judge elected in respect of Turkey, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28). The Government accordingly appointed Mr F. Gölcüklü, to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
By a decision of 24 August 1999 the Court declared the application admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). In addition, third-party comments were received from the Cypriot Government, which had exercised their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 61 § 2).
On 1 November 2001 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Third Section (Rule 52 § 1).
By a letter dated 2 July 2003 the Government informed the Court of the adoption and entry into force of the “Law on Compensation for Immovable Properties Located within the Boundaries of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus” and raised an additional preliminary objection in this connection.
The applicant is a Cypriot national of Greek-Cypriot origin, born in 1929 and living in Nicosia.
The applicant states that he is the registered owner of a plot of land (Registration number: 1071, Sheet / Plan: XII/20 E, Plot 122) situated on the sea front in the district of Kyrenia in northern Cyprus. He also maintains that he is the owner of a two-storey house, which he built on the above-mentioned plot of land. He submits that the house was fully furnished and equipped and that it was used by him and his family on a regular basis not only for weekend and holiday purposes but also as a home.
The applicant states that since 1974 he has been prevented by the Turkish armed forces from having access to his property, using and enjoying possession of it as well as developing it. In addition, he claims that according to evidence his home is currently occupied by officers and/or other members of the Turkish armed forces.
On 30 June 2003 the “Parliament of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus” enacted the “Law on Compensation for Immovable Properties Located within the Boundaries of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus”, which entered into force on the same day.