The case originated in an application (no. 58172/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Natalya Nikolayevna Goncharuk (“the applicant”), on 1 August 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr B. Irlitsin, a lawyer practising in Omsk. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 15 June 2018 notice of the complaint concerning the domestic authorities’ failure to notify the applicant of her daughter’s death was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The parties submitted written observations on the admissibility and merits.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Omsk.
On 23 August 2013 the applicant’s daughter, Ms K. Goncharuk, died after falling from a bridge. Her death was registered as suicide. The deceased had some personal belongings and passport with her.
Preliminary criminal inquiry into the accident was initiated.
On 27 August 2013 the applicant contacted Ms B., a friend of Ms K. Goncharuk living in the adjacent room. Ms B. stated that the applicant’s daughter had not been at home for three days.
The applicant filed a missing person complaint with a local police office. However, it was not accepted because a short period of time had passed since Ms K. Goncharuk’s disappearance.
On 29 August 2013 the applicant once again contacted Ms B. to confirm that her daughter was still missing.
An investigator in charge of the preliminary inquiry into the circumstances of Ms K. Goncharova’s death attempted to locate her relatives. On unspecified date between 7 and 13 September 2013 he visited a flat where the applicant’s daughter had resided. He did not manage to get inside, as the door was closed. He also unsuccessfully searched for people with the same last name on the Russian social network “VKontakte”. The investigator did not contact the local police office.
On 16 September 2013 the applicant’s daughter was buried as unclaimed. The burial was authorised by the investigator in charge of her case.
Ten days later the investigator decided not to initiate criminal proceedings, having considered Ms K. Goncharova’s death suicide, and closed the preliminary inquiry.
The applicant contacted the Accidents Record Bureau and thus learned about her daughter’s death.
On 30 September 2013 the applicant asked for the exhumation and reburial of her daughter’s body. Her request was granted on the same day. Reburial took place on 3 October 2013.
In October 2013 the applicant lodged a tort action against the Investigative Committee and the Ministry of Finance.
On 10 December 2013 the Tsentralniy District Court of Omsk dismissed the claim, having found that the investigator had not committed any unlawful actions. The court also noted that the applicant had failed to display requisite diligence and to undertake active steps to locate her daughter.
On 12 February 2013 the Omsk Regional Court upheld the judgment endorsing the District Court’s reasoning.
The applicant’s cassation appeals were dismissed on 25 March 2014 by the Omsk Regional Court and on 20 May 2014 by the Supreme Court of Russia.
The relevant domestic legal provisions were recently summarised in the Court’s judgment in Lozovyye v. Russia, no. 4587/09, §§ 19-25, 24 April 2018.