The case originated in an application (no. 57724/11) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Ms Laman Feruz gizi Babayeva (Ləman Feruz qızı Babayeva - “the applicant”), on 7 September 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr Z. Guliyev, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the refusal to issue a residence order in her favour in respect of her children had violated her right to respect for her family life.
On 8 July 2014 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1981 and lives in Ganja.
The applicant and S. married on 3 February 2002. They had two children, a son (F.) born on 21 December 2002 and a daughter (E.) born on 18 August 2007.
On 22 May 2009 S.’s nephew (B.) suspected that the applicant was having an affair. He went to her flat, where he met J. and killed him, suspecting he was the applicant’s lover.
In May 2009 the applicant and S. separated and the applicant moved with her children to her parents’ house, where they lived from then onwards.
On 26 November 2009 B. was convicted of murder and sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment.
According to the applicant, S. was having an affair with another woman so she decided to apply for divorce. On 12 January 2010 while applying for divorce, the applicant also requested the division of their matrimonial property (a car and flat) and child maintenance. S. lodged a counterclaim, asking for divorce and an order that the children reside with him (custody).
The Nizami District Court of Ganja City requested the Custody and Guardianship Commission of the Nizami District Executive Authority (Nizami rayon İcra Hakimiyyəti Başçısı Aparatı yanında Qəyyumluq və Himayəçilik Komissiyası - “the Commission”) to provide an expert opinion. The first opinion, dated 1 March 2010, stated that both the father and mother’s current homes were suitable environments for raising the children and that the Commission would not object to the court awarding custody of the children to their mother until they reached the age of ten, in accordance with Article 52 of the Family Code (which concerns seeking a child’s opinion in matters affecting his or her interests).
Later the District Court requested further expert opinions from the Commission. In their subsequent two opinions, dated 2 April and 5 July 2010, the Commission stated that the living conditions in both homes were adequate for bringing up the children, but left the decision on custody to the discretion of the court.
On 30 July 2010 the District Court pronounced the divorce, divided the flat equally between the applicant and S., and awarded custody of the children to S. The court dismissed the applicant’s claim for maintenance. The relevant part of the decision, which also referred to the domestic court’s findings in the criminal proceedings, reads as follows:
“The evidence examined during the court hearing shows the existence of numerous facts proving [that] L. Bayramova’s actions [were] incompatible with moral standards, including transcripts of telephone conversations which indicate that a long-term relationship existed between her and J.M., who was murdered ... [by B.]
All this shows that Laman Feruz gizi Bayramova (Babayeva) led an unstable lifestyle. Taking into account that this will affect the children’s being brought up in a morally healthy environment, the court considers that custody of the children should be awarded to the father.”
The applicant lodged an appeal, arguing that the judgment of 30 July 2010 was unsubstantiated. In particular, she argued that the court had unlawfully disregarded the Commission’s first opinion and failed to properly assess the subsequent two opinions confirming it. She further claimed that the court’s acceptance as evidence of telephone transcripts and findings based thereon had breached her private life.
On 14 October 2010 the Ganja Court of Appeal upheld the District Court’s judgment of 30 July 2010, reiterating the first-instance court’s reasoning. It appears from the transcripts of the court hearings held before the Court of Appeal that a representative of the Commission expressed the view that the children should reside with their father in the light of the fact that “the applicant [had] cheated on her husband” and that the father had a stable financial situation, living conditions and lifestyle for bringing up the children.
The applicant appealed, claiming that the courts had failed to ask for the children’s opinion in accordance with the domestic law. She argued that the real reason S. had sought custody was to avoid paying maintenance, and that he had not provided for them financially since they had separated. She also maintained in her submissions that since the separation the children had been in her sole care and she had taken good care of them, sufficiently providing for their well-being. Taking them away from her care and placing them in a different environment would cause great harm to their healthy development. She further argued that even if she had had an affair with J., this should not be grounds for limiting her custodial rights.
On 10 March 2011 the Supreme Court upheld the appellate court’s judgment, reiterating its reasoning.
The Family Code provides that, when parents separate, a child’s residence arrangements are to be determined by an agreement between them. If no such agreement can be reached, the child’s residence arrangements are to be determined by a court order, having regard to the child’s best interests, his or her opinion on the matter and other relevant factors. These include the child’s attachment to siblings and each parent, the parents’ moral and other personal qualities, the child’s age, and ensuring proper conditions for the child’s upbringing and development (Article 60.4).
The parent not living with the child is entitled to maintain contact with him or her and be involved in his or her upbringing and education. The parent living with the child may not hinder his or her contact with the other parent, unless it harms the child’s physical or psychological health or moral development. The parents may reach a written agreement on the manner in which the parent not living with the child is to exercise his or her parental authority. If the parents are unable to come to an agreement, any dispute between them is to be decided by a court following an application by one or both parents, with the participation of the childcare authorities. If a parent does not comply with the court decision, measures provided for by civilprocedure law may be taken against him or her. If that parent deliberately refuses to comply with the court decision, a court may, following an application by the parent not living with the child, allow that parent residence, taking into account the child’s interests and his or her opinion (Article 61).
A child is entitled to express his or her opinion on all family matters concerning him or her, including in the course of any judicial proceedings. The opinion of a child over ten years old must be taken into account, except where it is contrary to his or her interests (Article 52).