The case originated in an application (no. 11901/02) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Oleksandr Sergiyovych Panteleyenko (“the applicant”), on 30 November 2001.
On 15 March 2005 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in the city of .
The applicant’s criminal case and derivative proceedings
In December 2001 the applicant instituted proceedings in the  against the  and its Principal for defamation. The applicant alleged that, during the Attestation Commission’s hearing on 14 May 2001, the Principal had made three statements about him which were libellous and abusive, including one rudely questioning his mental health. The applicant demanded apologies and compensation for moral damage.
During the trial, one of the applicant’s main arguments was that he had never suffered any mental health problems. He adduced to this effect a certificate supposedly issued by a psychiatric hospital, attesting that the applicant had never been treated there.
The case of the defence was that the Principal had never uttered the obscenities attributed to him by the applicant. However, they challenged the authenticity of the above certificate and asked the court to verify the applicant’s assertions. On 21 March 2002 this application was granted and the  was requested to provide information as to whether the applicant had undergone any psychiatric treatment. On 3 April 2002 the hospital submitted to the court a certificate to the effect that for several years the applicant had been registered as suffering from a certain mental illness and underwent in-patient treatment in different psychiatric establishments. However, several years earlier his psychiatric registration had been cancelled due to long-term remission (a temporary lessening of the severity) of the disease. This information was read out by a judge at one of the subsequent hearings; however, no reference to this evidence was made in the final judgment.
On 3 June 2002 the  rejected the applicant’s claim as unsubstantiated. The court found, inter alia, that the applicant had failed to prove that the defendant had made any remarks about his sanity.
The applicant appealed, challenging, inter alia, the lawfulness of the court’s request for information about his mental state.
On 1 October 2002 the Court of Appeal upheld the judgment in substance. On the same day the court issued a separate ruling to the effect that the first instance court’s request for information concerning the applicant’s mental health from the public hospital was contrary to Article 32 of the Constitution, Articles 23 and 31 of the Data Act 1992 and Article 6 of the Psychiatric Medical Assistance Act 2000. In particular, it was indicated that information about a person’s mental health was confidential, and its collection, retention, use and dissemination fell under a special regime. Moreover, the court held that the requested evidence had no relevance to the case.
Summing up the above considerations, the Court of Appeal found that the judges of the lower courts lacked training in the field of confidential data protection and notified the Regional Centre for Judicial Studies about the need to remedy this lacuna in their training programme.
On 24 June 2003 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s request for leave to appeal under the cassation procedure.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
Article 30
“Everyone is guaranteed the inviolability of his or her home.
Entry into a home or other possessions of a person, and the examination or search thereof, shall not be permitted, other than pursuant to a reasoned court decision.
In urgent cases related to the preservation of human life and property or to the direct pursuit of persons suspected of committing a crime, another procedure established by law is possible for entry into a home or other possessions of a person, and for the examination and search thereof.
Article 32
No one shall be subject to interference in his or her personal and family life, except in cases envisaged by the Constitution of Ukraine.
The collection, retention, use and dissemination of confidential information about a person without his or her consent shall not be permitted, except in cases determined by law, and only in the interests of national security, economic welfare and human rights...”
Article 6 of the Code enumerates the reasons for the termination of criminal proceedings, including the absence of any corpus delicti. Article 7 of the Code provides that the case can be closed on the ground of the insignificance of an offence which had been committed.
Article 327 § 4 of the Code provides that the trial court acquits the defendant in the following cases:
if the event of the crime has not been established;
if the defendant’s actions do not constitute any corpus delicti;
if there is a lack of evidence that the defendant was involved in the offence.
The same grounds, called the “exonerating circumstances” (реабілітуючи обставини) constitute a basis for compensation for unlawful prosecution (see paragraph 35 below). The remainder of the grounds for the termination of criminal proceedings, set out in Articles 6, 7 and 7-1 of the Code (including the insignificance of an offence) are called “non-exonerating circumstances” (нереабілітуючи обставини) and do not give rise to a right for compensation for any alleged wrongs committed by the authorities during the investigation.
Article 212 of the Code provides that, on completion of the investigation, the investigator either draws up an indictment or terminates the case.
According to Article 213 of the Code the case can be closed by the investigator on both exonerating and non-exonerating grounds.
Article 227 § 2 of the Code empowers the prosecutor to quash any investigator’s decision and to give binding instructions to the investigating authorities if he/she finds that the proceedings were conducted contrary to the procedural or sustentative law. However, the prosecutor does not have power to award any damages to a defendant for the established wrongdoing on the part of the investigating authorities.
The relevant provisions of the Code provide as follows:
Article 177
“The search shall be carried out if there are sufficient grounds to believe that the means of committing an offence ... and other items and documents important for the case are kept in certain premises.
Article 183
At the beginning of a search the investigator shall provide the [search] warrant to persons who occupy the premises ...and shall propose to them to produce the items or documents specified in the warrant ... If they refuse to do so, the investigator shall carry out the compulsory search.
...When conducting the search the investigator shall have the right to open locked premises if the occupier refuses to open them. The investigator, however, shall avoid inflicting unnecessary damage to doors, locks and other property...
Article 186
During the search ... there shall be seized only those documents and items which are important for the case, as well as property of the accused or defendant in order to secure civil claim or possible confiscation. Items and documents, removed by law from circulation, shall be seized irrespective of their relation to the case.
Article 236-6
The complaint in respect of the decision [ruling] of the body of inquiry, investigator or the prosecutor to terminate the criminal case is examined by the judge within 5 ...days.
The judge requests the case file, studies it and, if necessary, hears the person who lodged the complaint.
... Having examined the complaint, the judge, depending on whether Articles 213 and 214 of this Code have been complied with, takes one of the following decisions:
1) dismisses the complaint;
2) quashes the ruling ... and remits the case for further investigation .”
Article 10 of the Code provides:
Hearings in all courts shall be public except when this conflicts with interests of the protection of the State or another secret protected by law.
The in camera consideration of the case can also be ordered by the reasoned decision of the court with a view to preventing the dissemination of data relating to the intimate details of the life of the persons who participate in the hearing.
 In the in camera hearing participate the parties and their representatives ...and, if necessary, witnesses, experts and translators.
The in camera hearing is conducted in accordance with all procedural rules. The judgments in all cases are pronounced publicly.
The relevant provisions of the Act provide:
Article 23
“Personal information is a complex of documented or publicly acclaimed data about a person.
The main personal data are ...state of health
The sources of the documented personal information are the documents issued on the person’s request, signed by him or her, as well as data about a person collected by the State and municipal authorities, acting within their competence.
The collection of data about a person without his or her permission is prohibited except in accordance with law.
Article 31
The State authorities and organisations, municipal and local authorities whose information system, retain data about citizens are obliged to ensure that they have an unrestricted access to this information, except in accordance with law, as well as to undertake to secure it from the unauthorised access.
The access of unauthorised persons to information about another person, collected in accordance with law by the State authorities, organisations and officials is prohibited.
 ... The necessary amount of data about citizens that can be lawfully received should be strictly limited and can be used only for lawful ends.
Article 37
The following official documents are exempt from the general rule of obligatory provision on the information requests:
... confidential information;
... information that concerns private life of citizens.”
Article 6 of the Act insofar as relevant provides as follows:
“Members of medical staff ... who in connection with their work or studies became aware about a person’s mental disorder, his or her request for psychiatric aid or treatment in psychiatric establishments ... as well as other information concerning the mental state of a person, his or her private life, cannot disclose this information except in accordance with ... this Article.
...Disclosure of information concerning the state of a person’s mental health and provision to him or her of psychiatric aid can take place without the person’s consent if:
...2) it is important for an inquiry, pre-trial investigation or trial, on a written request from ... a judge.
The documents that comprise information concerning the state of a person’s mental health and provision to him or her of psychiatric aid must be stored in compliance with requirements which secure the confidentiality of this information. The provision of the originals of these documents and the making of copies can be carried out only in accordance with law.”
The relevant extract of the Law provides:
Article 2
“The right to compensation for damages in the amount and in accordance with the procedure established by this Law shall arise in the cases of:
- acquittal by a court;
- termination of a criminal case on grounds of an absence of event of a crime, absence of corpus delicti, or lack of evidence of the accused’s participation in the commission of the crime.”