The case originated in an application (no. 32881/04) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by eight Slovak nationals, K.H., J.H., A.Č., J.Čo., J.Če., V.D., H.M. and V.Ž., on 30 August 2004. The President of the Chamber acceded to the applicants’ request not to have their names disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were represented by Ms V. Durbáková, a lawyer practising in Košice and Ms B. Bukovská from the Centre for Civil and Human Rights in Košice. The Slovak Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs M. Pirošíková.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their rights under Articles 6 § 1, 8 and 13 of the Convention had been infringed as a result of the failure by the domestic authorities to make photocopies of their medical records available to them.
By a decision of 9 October 2007 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The Government filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the applicants replied in writing to the Government’s observations.
The applicants are eight female Slovakian nationals of Roma ethnic origin.
The applicants were treated at gynaecological and obstetrics departments in two hospitals in eastern  during their pregnancies and deliveries. Despite continuing to attempt to conceive, none of the applicants has become pregnant since their last stay in hospital, when they delivered via caesarean section. The applicants suspected that the reason for their infertility might be that a sterilisation procedure was performed on them during their caesarean delivery by medical personnel in the hospitals concerned. Several applicants had been asked to sign documents prior to their delivery or on discharge from the hospital but they were not sure of the content of those documents.
The applicants, together with several other Roma women, granted powers of attorney to lawyers from the Centre for Civil and Human Rights, a non-governmental organisation based in Košice. The lawyers were authorised to review and photocopy the women’s medical records in order to obtain a medical analysis of the reasons for their infertility and possible treatment. The applicants also authorised the lawyers to make photocopies of their complete medical records as potential evidence in future civil proceedings for damages, and to ensure that such documents and evidence were not destroyed or lost. The photocopies were to be made by the lawyers with a portable photocopier at the expense of the Centre for Civil and Human Rights.
The applicants attempted to obtain access to their medical records in the respective hospitals through their authorised representative in August and September 2002. The lawyer unsuccessfully asked the management of the hospitals to allow her to consult and photocopy the medical records of the persons who had authorised her to do so.
On 11 October 2002 representatives of the Ministry of Health expressed the view that section 16(6) of the Health Care Act 1994 did not permit a patient to authorise another person to consult his or her medical records. The above provision was to be interpreted in a restrictive manner and the term “legal representative” concerned exclusively the parents of an underage child or a guardian appointed to represent a person who had been deprived of legal capacity or whose legal capacity had been restricted.
The applicants sued the hospitals concerned. They claimed that the defendants should be ordered to release their medical records to their authorised legal representative and to allow them to obtain a photocopy of the documents included in the records.
Six applicants brought an action against the J.A. Reiman University Hospital (Fakultná nemocnica J. A. Reimana) in Prešov (“the Prešov Hospital”) on 13 January 2003.
On 18 June 2003 the Prešov District Court delivered a judgment ordering the hospital to permit the plaintiffs and their authorised representative to consult their medical records and to make handwritten excerpts thereof. The relevant part of the judgment became final on 15 August 2003 and enforceable on 19 August 2003.
With reference to section 16(6) of the Health Care Act 1994 the District Court dismissed the request to photocopy the medical documents. The court noted that the records were owned by the medical institutions concerned and that such a restriction was justified with a view to preventing their abuse. It was not contrary to the plaintiffs’ rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Convention. The applicants appealed against that part of the judgment.
On 17 February 2004 the  in Prešov upheld the first-instance decision, according to which the applicants were not entitled to make photocopies of their medical files. There was no indication that the applicants’ right to have any future claim for damages determined in accordance with the requirements of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention had been jeopardised. In particular, under the relevant law the medical institutions were obliged to submit the required information to, inter alia, the courts, for example in the context of civil proceedings concerning a patient’s claim for damages.
H.M. and V.Ž., the two remaining applicants, brought an identical action against the Health Care Centre (Nemocnica s poliklinikou) in Krompachy (“the ”) on 13 January 2003.
On 16 July 2003 the District Court in Spišská Nová Ves ordered the defendant to allow the applicants’ representative to consult their medical records and to make excerpts thereof. It dismissed the claim concerning the photocopying of the medical documents. The court referred to section 16(6) of the Health Care Act 1994 and noted that even courts or other authorities were not entitled to receive photocopies of medical records. Such a restriction was necessary in order to prevent abuse of personal data contained therein.
The applicants appealed against the decision concerning the photocopying of the documents. They relied on Articles 6 and 8 of the Convention and argued that, unlike public authorities and the medical institutions concerned, they had only limited access to their medical records, which meant that they were restricted in assessing the position in their cases and in bringing an appropriate action for damages.
On 24 March 2004 the  in Košice upheld the first-instance decision to reject the claim concerning the photocopying of the medical records.
On 24 May 2004 the six applicants who had sued the  lodged a complaint under Article 127 of the Constitution. They alleged that the Prešov Hospital, the District Court and the Regional Court in Prešov had violated, inter alia, their rights under Articles 6 § 1 and 8 of the Convention.
As regards Article 6 § 1 the applicants argued that, in practice, handwritten excerpts from medical records could be abused just as photocopies of the relevant documents could. However, preventing the applicants from making photocopies of those documents put them at a disadvantage vis-à-vis the State, to which the medical institutions concerned were subordinated and which would act as defendant in proceedings concerning any future claim for damages. Furthermore, the principle of equality of arms required that the applicants should have at their disposal all the documentation in the form of photocopies. This would enable an independent expert, possibly abroad, to examine them, and also provide a safeguard in the event of the possible destruction of the originals.
Under Article 8 of the Convention the applicants complained that they had been denied full access to documents pertinent to their private and family lives in that they had been refused the right to make photocopies of them.
On 8 December 2004 the  (Third Chamber) rejected the complaint. It found no appearance of a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in the proceedings leading to the ’s judgment of 17 February 2004. As to the alleged violation of Article 8 of the Convention, the  held that the  had correctly applied section 16(6) of the Health Care Act of 1994 and that a fair balance had been struck between the conflicting interests. Reference was made to the explanatory report to that Act. Furthermore, Article 8 of the Convention did not encompass a right to make photocopies of medical documents.
On 25 June 2004 the remaining two applicants lodged a similar complaint under Article 127 of the Constitution alleging a violation of, inter alia, Articles 6 § 1 and 8 of the Convention as a result of the conduct of the representatives of the Krompachy Hospital and in the proceedings leading to the Košice Regional Court’s judgment of 24 March 2004.
On 27 October 2004 the  (Second Chamber) rejected the complaint as being premature. The decision stated that the plaintiffs had lodged an appeal on points of law against the part of the Regional Court’s judgment by which the first-instance decision to grant their claim for access to medical records had been overturned.
Subsequently seven applicants were able to access their files and to make photocopies thereof under the newly introduced Health Care Act 2004 (see paragraph 35 below) in circumstances which are set out in the decision on the admissibility of the present application.
As regards the eighth applicant, Ms J. H., the  only provided her with a simple record of a surgical procedure indicating that surgery had been performed on her and that she had been sterilised during the procedure. On 22 May 2006 the Director of the  informed the applicant that her complete medical file had not been located and that it was considered lost. On 31 May 2007 the Ministry of Health admitted that the  had violated the Health Care Act 2004 in that it had failed to ensure the proper keeping of the medical file of Ms J. H.
Article 3 guarantees to everyone the right to seek judicial protection of a right which has been placed in jeopardy or violated.
Under Article 6, courts shall proceed with a case in cooperation with the parties in a manner permitting the speedy and efficient protection of persons’ rights.
Article 78 § 1 provides that, prior to starting proceedings on the merits, courts can secure evidence on the proposal of the person concerned where it is feared that it will be impossible to take such evidence later.
Article 79 § 2 obliges a plaintiff to submit the documentary evidence relied upon in an action, with the exception of evidence which the plaintiff is unable to submit for external reasons.
Pursuant to Article 120 § 1, parties are obliged to produce evidence in support of their arguments. The decision as to which evidence will be taken lies with the court. Exceptionally, courts can take other evidence than that proposed by the parties where it is necessary for the determination of the point in issue.
Until 31 December 2004, the following provisions of Health Care Act 277/1994 (Zákon o zdravotnej starostlivosti – “the Health Care Act 1994”) were in force:
“Section 16 – Medical records
The keeping of medical records shall form an inseparable part of health care.
All medical institutions ... shall be obliged to keep medical records in written form ... The documents are to be dated, signed by the person who established them, stamped and numbered on each page ...
Medical records shall be archived for a period of 50 years after the patient’s death. ...
A medical institution shall be obliged to provide medical records on a specific written request and free of charge, to a public prosecutor, investigator, police authority or court in the form of excerpts, to the extent that they are relevant in the context of criminal or civil proceedings. The medical records as a whole cannot be put at the disposal of the above authorities.
A patient, his or her legal representative ... shall have the right to consult medical records and to make excerpts thereof at the place [where the records are kept] ...
A medical institution shall provide an expert appointed by a court with information from medical records to the extent that it is necessary for preparing an expert opinion ...
An excerpt from a person’s medical record ... shall contain exact and true data and give an overview of the development of the health of the person concerned up to the date when the excerpt is established. It shall be established in writing on numbered pages.”
The relevant part of the Explanatory Report to the Health Care Act 1994 reads as follows:
“Medical records remain the property of the medical institution concerned. They contain data about the patient and often also about the members of his or her family or other persons. That information being of a strictly confidential and intimate nature, the obligation of non-disclosure extends to them in their entirety. It is therefore necessary to define as precisely as possible cases where a patient or other persons may acquaint themselves with such information.”
Law no. 576/2004 on health care and health care services and on the amendment and completion of certain Acts (Zákon o zdravotnej starostlivosti, službách súvisiacich s poskytovaním zdravotnej starostlivosti a o zmene a doplnení niektorých zákonov – “the Health Care Act 2004”) came into force on 1 November 2004 and became operative on 1 January 2005. It repealed, inter alia, section 16 of the Health Care Act 1994. Its relevant provisions read as follows:
“Section 25 – Access to data included in medical records
Data included in medical records shall be made available by means of consultation of the medical records to:
(a)  the person concerned or his or her legal representative, without any restriction; ...
(c)  any person authorised in writing by the person mentioned in point (a) ... subject to the signature of the latter being certified in accordance with a special law ... to the extent that it is specified in the authorisation; ...
(g) an expert appointed by a court or an authority in charge of a criminal case or whom one of the parties has asked for an opinion ...; the extent of data necessary for preparing the opinion shall be determined by the expert ...
The persons entitled to consult medical records shall have the right to make excerpts or copies of them at the place where the records are kept to the extent indicated in paragraph 1.”
Point 8 of the Recommendation adopted on 13 February 1997 deals with the rights of persons whose medical data have been collected. The relevant part provides:
“Rights of access and of rectification
1. Every person shall be enabled to have access to his/her medical data, either directly or through a health-care professional or, if permitted by domestic law, a person appointed by him/her. The information must be accessible in understandable form.
2 Access to medical data may be refused, limited or delayed only if the law provides for this and if:
this constitutes a necessary measure in a democratic society in the interests of protecting state security, public safety, or the suppression of criminal offences; ...”