The case originated in an application (no. 23641/17) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Ms Nelea Pisică (“the applicant”, who subsequently changed her name to Mrs Nelea Gamarţ), on 16 March 2017.
The applicant was represented by Ms D. Străisteanu, a lawyer practising in Chișinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr O. Rotari.
The applicant alleged in particular that by failing to take effective measures so as to ensure her access to her children, the authorities had breached her right to protection of her family life.
On 5 May 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1981 and lives in Ialoveni.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 7 September 2002 the applicant married P. While they were married they had a son, who was born on 14 July 2003.
On 6 March 2006 the applicant obtained a divorce. She also obtained custody of her son.
The applicant remained in the family house, and after a while she again started cohabiting with her former husband and subsequently gave birth to two more sons (twins) on 5 August 2007. P. acknowledged that he was the father of the two boys.
According to the applicant, in 2012 P. started being aggressive towards her. On 26 December 2012 she left the family home with her three children and claimed financial maintenance from P.
On 29 July 2013 P. came to the house where the applicant lived and forcibly put the two younger children in his car, driving them to his house without the applicant’s permission.
Shortly thereafter the applicant lodged a court action, requesting custody of the two younger children. On 31 July 2013 she asked the Ialoveni District Court to examine the case urgently, stating that she was certain that P. was manipulating the children and using various means to turn them against her. She submitted that since their abduction she had not been able to speak to them, and asked the court to order P. not to keep the children away from her. On 31 July 2013 she also complained about the incident of 29 July 2013 to the local police, who allegedly failed to respond.
On 19 August 2013 the applicant complained to the Ialoveni Department for Social Assistance and Family Protection (“the DSAFP”). She mentioned that since the children had been taken away from her she had been able to talk to them only sporadically, always in P.’s presence, and for short periods of time. During those meetings P. had been aggressive towards her, had in an authoritarian manner prohibited her from asking certain questions which he perceived as being detrimental to his position, and had prohibited the children from speaking about certain things. She was convinced that P. was manipulating the children and turning them against her.
On 3 September 2013 P. returned the children to the applicant. On 4 September 2013, following requests by both parents, the DSAFP recommended a schedule, according to which all three children would stay with their father every second weekend and the rest of the time would stay with their mother.
According to the applicant, P. continued to follow and insult her, threatening her with violence. She asked for a protection order and on 10 September 2013 the Ialoveni District Court ordered him not to approach the applicant or the three children for three months. That order was not enforced, and the children remained at P.’s house until an unknown date.
On 10 December 2013 P. allegedly went to the applicant’s house and forcibly took the two younger children to his own house without her permission. On an unknown date the children were returned to the applicant.
On 20 December 2013 the applicant sought and obtained a three-month extension of the protection order of 10 September 2013.
On 13 January 2014 the applicant made a complaint to the Ialoveni prosecutor’s office, stating that on 26 December 2013 P. had gone to the kindergarten which the two younger children attended and had taken them, despite her protests, promising to bring them back on 1 January 2014. He had done this in spite of the protection order of 20 December 2013. She added that on 10 January 2014 P. had met the children in the street and tried to convince them to go with him, telling them nasty things about the applicant. She insisted that the protection order be enforced.
At the Ialoveni District Court’s request, on 30 January 2014 the DSAFP issued a conclusion regarding who should have custody of the two younger children. The DSAPF noted that both parents were able and willing to bring up their children. The children loved both parents equally and wanted to be close to both of them.
On an unspecified date in April 2014 P. took his older son to his house and refused to return him to the applicant. She complained to the police about that on 19 April 2014.
On 8 May 2014 the applicant complained to the police that P. had taken the older child to his house and had prevented her from having contact with him. She stated that subsequently the child had missed several days of school. She had been to see him on a day when he had had exams and had managed to talk to him for about twenty minutes. He had told her that his father took him out with him in his car all day long instead of taking him to school. She had also found out that P. was trying to turn her son against her.
On an unspecified date in June 2014 P. took one of the younger children to his house and refused to return him to the applicant. In August 2014 P. asked the applicant to allow the third son to spend the holidays with his brothers, promising that after that all three children would be returned to her house. However, after allowing this, the applicant was unable to see the children.
On 13 July 2014 the applicant complained to the local police that her older son was being held by P. without her permission, despite her having custody of the child (see paragraph 8 above). She added that her son was being manipulated by P., and that P. was convincing him that she was a bad mother and that he did not want to live with her.
On 14 July 2014 the applicant asked the Ialoveni District Court to issue a protection order in respect of her and the children. She stated, inter alia, that P. had acted aggressively towards her, threatening to take the children away, which he had ultimately done. She considered that P.’s actions had negative consequences on the children’s psychological well-being.
On 15 July 2014 the applicant asked the Ialoveni District Court to accelerate the examination of the case concerning custody of the two younger children, given that it concerned a sensitive issue and P. had caused several unnecessary delays. That request was rejected on 16 July 2014, the court finding that the delays were related to the fact that several judges had withdrawn from the case, and that there was no reason to find that the proceedings had been excessively long.
On 15 July 2014 the applicant also complained to the DSAFP that she was unable to see her sons, and that when she called her older son he would talk to her in a way which suggested that there was someone next to him indicating how he should reply. She made a similar complaint to the Human Rights Centre on 16 July 2014, stating that in the previous four months she had lodged many complaints concerning P.’s abusive actions and the breach of her parental rights with various authorities.
On 16 July 2014 the Ialoveni District Court rejected the applicant’s application for a protection order (see paragraph 24 above). It appears that in the course of 2014 all the judges of the Ialoveni District Court withdrew from the case because they had previously issued protection orders or been otherwise involved in the proceedings. On 26 August 2014 the case was thus transferred to the Hîncești District Court.
On 19 November 2014 the DSAFP issued another conclusion, for the Hîncești District Court, reiterating its previous findings, but adding that the children’s psychological state was being seriously affected. Although they had had a positive attitude towards both parents earlier, they had radically changed their views after living with their father. The DSAFP recommended that a report concerning the children’s psychological state be produced, and that they be separated from both parents for a period of one month and placed in a placement centre, in order to receive psychological assistance in the absence of influence by either parent.
On 3 December 2014 a psychological report concerning the children was produced. The relevant expert concluded: that the children were being involved in the conflict between the parents; that their initially positive attitude towards both parents had clearly become negative as regards the applicant, as a result of P.’s influence; that depriving the children of contact with their mother was a form of emotional abuse; and that any meeting with their mother would constitute a traumatising event for the children while they continued to live with their father.
On 19 January 2015 the DSAFP issued another conclusion, largely reiterating its previous findings. On 6 February 2015 the Hâncești District Court rejected as unfounded the request made by the DSAFP in its conclusion of 19 November 2014 for the children to be temporarily placed in a placement centre.
On 6 February 2015 the Hâncești District Court awarded P. custody of the two younger children.
On 24 June 2015 the Chișinău Court of Appeal reversed that judgment, awarding the applicant custody of the two younger children.
On 5 August 2015 the applicant complained to the police that P. was continuing to refuse to allow her to have contact with her sons, despite the court judgment of 24 June 2015. She mentioned that P. had insulted her and had told her that while the children were with him they would not be willing to see her. She asked the police to take urgent measures to remove the children from P.’s family and allow specialists in psychology to do their work in assisting the children. She reiterated her complaint to the police on 18 September 2015, also requesting that the children be placed in a placement centre as a matter of urgency, and that P. have no access to them while they were receiving psychological assistance.
On 10 November 2015 the applicant complained to the Prosecutor General’s Office, stating that P. had managed to influence their children to the extent that they hated her. They suffered from parental alienation syndrome and the authorities had failed to prevent that, despite her many complaints concerning P.’s actions. She asked for the children to be removed from P.’s family as a matter of urgency and placed in a placement centre in order to receive psychological assistance. She also asked for criminal proceedings to be initiated against P. The parties did not inform the Court of any reaction to this complaint.
On 11 November 2015 the Supreme Court of Justice rejected an appeal by P. That judgment was final.
On 19 January 2016 the applicant submitted a writ of enforcement in respect of the judgment of 24 June 2015 to a bailiff. On the same day the bailiff invited P. to comply with the final judgment by handing over the children. P. did not comply.
On 9 February 2016, after the expiry of the time-limit for voluntarily complying with the final judgment, the bailiff went to P.’s house, accompanied by the local social welfare office, a psychologist and the applicant. P. allowed them in, but the children refused to leave, stating that they wanted to stay with their father.
The applicant continued to complain to various authorities regarding the failure to reunite her with her children, P.’s influence on them, and how he had turned them against her. She also asked for the children to be temporarily removed from P.’s family and placed in a placement centre, where they would be protected from the influence of both parents.
On 29 February 2016 the prosecutor’s office initiated a criminal investigation against P. after the applicant complained of domestic violence in the form of his emotional abuse of the children. At the same time, the prosecutor annulled nine previous decisions refusing to initiate criminal proceedings against P., as well as a decision rejecting a complaint by the applicant’s lawyer. The case was subsequently sent to court on 17 January 2017, and was ongoing when the latest observations by the parties were received in 2018.
On 22 March 2016 the bailiff asked the Chișinău Court of Appeal to give an explanation for the judgment in the applicant’s favour. On 11 May 2016 the court rejected that request, since the judgment was clear. In the meantime, on 30 March 2016 the bailiff had asked for a court order allowing forced entry into P.’s house. The court rejected that request on 18 January 2017, finding that the bailiff had unrestricted access to P.’s house.
On 15 December 2016 the Ialoveni prosecutor’s office obtained a new court protection order in favour of the applicant, obliging P. to stay away from her and the three children for three months. The court largely relied on the findings in the report of 3 December 2014 (see paragraph 29 above), and found that the children were being subjected to emotional abuse which could lead to the development of parental alienation syndrome.
On 16 December 2016 the applicant and her brother went to the school which all three children attended, accompanied by two police officers. Since the decision of 15 December 2016 prohibited P. from approaching the children, the applicant hoped to be able to take them home. However, according to her account of the events, the school administration and the local authorities took measures to prevent this action, notably by calling P.’s relatives and allowing them to enter the room where the children were and influence them, while they also insulted the applicant. Subsequently, the deputy mayor of the village where the children lived (who was acting as a guardian local authority) ordered that the three children be placed with their grandparents (P.’s parents) on an emergency basis for a period of seventy-two hours. He subsequently extended the order for the children’s placement with their grandparents for a period of up to forty-five days.
On 19 December 2016 another attempt to enforce the judgment failed, owing to the children being opposed to living with their mother.
On 27 January and 3 February 2017 the local police and the mayor’s office asked the applicant to show more interest in the children’s psychological state. In particular, while acknowledging that she was unable to establish contact with them, the applicant was blamed for refusing any form of cooperation, which prevented the mayor’s office from adopting any relevant decision. At the same time, P. was not allowed to approach the children and she was the only legal guardian. She was urged to “assume her share of the responsibility”, as the only person able to offer the children protection at that time.
On 6 February 2017 a psychologist issued a conclusion concerning the state of mind of the children, who were at that time with P.’s parents owing to a protection order preventing him from contacting his children. She found that all three children had been seriously affected by the separation from their father as a result of the protection order, and that any action aimed at rebuilding their relationship with their mother would be premature, as the children were displaying clear signs of resistance against their mother, who was associated with the “loss” of their father.
In the weeks that followed, the reconciliation procedure between the applicant and P. continued, with the involvement of a number of officials. Three meetings between various authorities took place on 7, 14 and 17 February 2017, aimed at identifying solutions for enforcing the judgment of 24 June 2015.
On 6 and 13 June 2017 P. complained to the DSAFP that the applicant was not interested in rebuilding her relationship with the children, stating that she had only come to their school once every two months, for thirty minutes each time.
On 7 June 2017 there was a new attempt to enforce the final court judgment. P. prepared the children’s belongings and the applicant was ready to take them to her house. Together with a number of officials, the applicant was able to enter P.’s home and talk with the children. However, they refused to come with her, despite being encouraged by P. to do so.
On 9 and 23 June, as well as on 18 and 28 September 2017 the local welfare authorities met in a working group in order to identify ways of restoring the relationship between the applicant and her children.
On 21 March 2018 P. lodged a court action, asking for custody of the children. On 5 July 2018 the Ialoveni District Court allowed that application in part, transferring custody of the two younger children to P., but rejecting the application in respect of the older child.
On 5 December 2018 the Chișinău Court of Appeal upheld the lower court’s judgment. It found, inter alia, that both younger children, who were eleven by that time, had clearly expressed their wish to live with their father and not their mother. Moreover, the local welfare authority had concluded that the change of custody would be in the best interests of the children, who had strong ties to their father and would suffer from a change in their place of residence.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure read as follows:
Article 394.  The legal force of a decision by an appellate court
“The decision of an appellate court shall be final (definitivă) from the moment it is adopted, and shall be enforced in accordance with the present Code and other laws.”
Article 435.  The suspensive effect of an appeal on points of law (recurs)
“(1)  An appeal on points of law shall suspend the enforcement of a judgment in a case concerning moving boundaries, the destruction of plants and seeds, the demolition of buildings or any other immovable items, and in other cases provided for by law.
...
(8)  In non-pecuniary cases, the enforcement of a judgment may be suspended following the reasoned request of an appellant.”