The case originated in an application (no. 44817/04) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Laszlo Kilyen (“the applicant”), on 25 November 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Ghere, a lawyer practising in Târgu-Mureş. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr R.-H. Radu, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that the search carried out at his home by police officers in his absence constituted a breach of his right to respect for his home as guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention.
On 29 April 2008 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant, Mr Laszlo Kilyen, was born in 1972 and lives in Murgeşti.
On 10 May 2003 police officers T.M. and L.C.V. were carrying out an investigation into the theft of two cars in the village of Murgeşti. The applicant, who lived alone in a house with a yard, was away from home on a trip abroad. On the same day at around 4 p.m., the two officers entered the applicant’s yard by breaking the main gate which had a closing system made by the applicant from metal wires. The officers took note of the chassis series of two cars found in the applicant’s shed. They also looked in several boxes which contained spare parts for cars.
After a certain period of time, the applicant’s neighbour, K.M., entered the yard and questioned the two officers about the reason for their presence there. T.M. and L.C.V. disclosed their identities and informed K.M. that they were carrying out an investigation into the theft of two cars. Before leaving the yard, the officers informed K.M. that the two cars found in the applicant’s shed were not the ones reported stolen and left him a summons ordering the applicant to report to the police station as soon as possible.
On 15 May 2003, upon his return home, the applicant lodged a complaint with the Prosecutor’s Office of the Mureş County Court against the two police officers for the crime of trespassing under Article 192 of the Criminal Code. He alleged that the officers had entered his yard in his absence and without his consent. He also sought civil damages from the two alleged perpetrators.
In his statement given before the prosecutor on 1 July 2003, the applicant mentioned that he was a car mechanic and that he often travelled to Hungary to buy spare parts. He alleged that he felt harassed by local police officers working in the Car Theft Department who, on several occasions, had entered his yard in his absence in order to check whether he was hiding stolen cars. The applicant also alleged that, although the police never found stolen cars in his possession, the frequent police checks gave him a reputation in the village of being a car thief.
The two officers declared before the prosecutor that they had found K.M. in the applicant’s yard and had entered believing that he was the owner and assuming that they had his permission.
On 8 July 2003 the Prosecutor’s Office of the Târgu Mureş Court of Appeal decided to discontinue the proceedings against T.M. and L.C.V. The prosecutor investigating the case noted that the two officers had entered the applicant’s yard in his absence and without his permission. However, when K.M. had arrived at the scene, they had immediately disclosed their identities. Moreover, they had been on duty and had only noted the chassis series of the applicant’s cars. The prosecutor therefore concluded that the officers had had no intention of committing a crime. On 29 October 2003 a complaint by the applicant against this decision was rejected by the superior Prosecutor from the Prosecutor’s Office of the Târgu Mureş Court of Appeal.
On 27 January 2004 the applicant appealed against the prosecutors’ decisions before the Târgu Mureş Court of Appeal. He alleged that the two officers had illegally entered his home in his absence, without his consent and without a search warrant. He also complained that his rights as guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention had been breached by the unlawful search carried out by the two police officers.
The Court of Appeal rejected the applicant’s appeal on 27 February 2004 holding that T.M. and L.C.V. had acted in accordance with their duties as provided for by articles 41, 42 and 43 of Law no. 360/2002 on the Status of Police Officers. The court underlined that the officers had disclosed their identities and the purpose of their presence on the premises as soon as the applicant’s neighbour enquired. It was further held that they had been on duty and carrying out an investigation, and therefore it could not be held that they had intended to commit a crime.
The appeal by the applicant on points of law (recurs) against this decision was dismissed on 28 May 2004 by a final judgment of the High Court of Cassation and Justice which held that the officers had acted in accordance with the provisions of the Law no. 218/2002 on the Organisation of the Romanian Police. The court held that the officers had been in the presence of a witness and that they had disclosed their identities, and therefore had no intention of illegally entering the applicant’s home.
Article 192 of the Criminal Code, in force at the relevant time, reads as follows:
“Entering, in any way and without having the right, a residence, a room, a shed or a surrounding area of any of these, without the consent of the person using them, or refusing to leave these places at the person’s request, is punishable by a term of imprisonment of six months to four years.
If the action is committed by an armed person or a group of two or more persons ... the punishment is a term of imprisonment of three to ten years.”
The pertinent Articles of the Code of Criminal Procedure concerning searches, in force at the relevant time, before the reform of the latter by Law no. 281 of 24 June 2003 and Government Ordinances no. 66 of 10 July 2003 and no. 109 of 24 October 2003, read as follows:
“Where a person who is asked to hand over an object or a document as referred to in Article 98 denies its existence or denies having it, or where it is necessary for the discovery and collection of evidence, the authorities in charge of the investigation, or the court, may order a search.
There may be a body search or a home search.”
“The authorities in charge of the investigation can perform home searches only on the basis of an authorisation from the prosecutor.
The home search may be performed without the prosecutor’s authorisation only when the person whose home shall be searched gives his or her written consent to the search.
Where the perpetrator is caught in the act of committing a crime, the search is performed without the prosecutor’s authorisation.”
“Before starting the search, the authorities in charge of the investigation are obliged to disclose their identity and, in the cases provided for by law, to present the authorisation given by the prosecutor.
The seizure of objects or documents, as well as the search, are carried out in the presence of the person whose home is searched, or in case he or she is absent, in the presence of a representative, a member of the family or a neighbour with full capacity.
These operations carried out by the authorities in charge of the investigation require the presence of witnesses.”
Articles 41 and 42 of Law no. 360/2002 on the Status of Police Officers provide for obligations of police officers such as loyalty towards the institution and the principles of the rule of law and respect towards citizens. Police officers must also continuously improve their professional skills, be polite, professional and respectful towards their superiors and their colleagues, support their colleagues in their work duties, maintain professional secrecy and not abuse their official powers or compromise the prestige of their position or the institution to which they belong. Article 43 of the same Law lists the rules imposed on police officers such as: not to ask for or receive bribes, not to use force unless this is provided for by law, not to cause physical suffering for the purpose of obtaining information and not to be involved in politics or immoral activities.
Law no. 218/2002 on the Organisation of the Romanian Police regulates the structure of the police force, the organisation of the local police units and their relationship with the central unit, the duties of the police force and the general rights and obligations of all categories of persons working for the police (police officers, public servants and contractual staff). Article 31 (1) (e) of Law no. 218/2002 provides as follows:
“e)  if a crime has been committed, in the course of pursuing criminals or investigating a terrorist act, police officers may enter homes, commercial premises company offices, public or private institutions, political or social organisations irrespective of their owner, and board any means of Romanian transportation, under the conditions provided for by law.”
In its second paragraph Article 31 also provides the following:
“(2)  In exercising their rights under this law, the policemen have the duty to respect the fundamental human rights and liberties provided by law and the European Convention of Human Rights.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in force at the relevant time, concerning the victim’s request for civil damages within the criminal trial are as follows:
“A victim who has sought civil damages during a criminal trial may submit his or her request before the civil courts if the criminal court has left the matter undecided.”
“The final judgment delivered in a criminal trial is binding on the civil court with respect to the existence of the act, the person who committed it and his or her guilt. ...”
The relevant provisions concerning civil liability, namely Articles 998-999 of the Civil Code, in force at the relevant time, are described in Iambor v. Romania (no. 1) (no. 64536/01, § 142, 24 June 2008).