The case originated in an application (no. 1574/13) against the Republic of Estonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Estonian national, Mr Egon Jaeger (“the applicant”), on 18 December 2012.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr J. Kuus, a lawyer practising in Tartu. The Estonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kuurberg, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his body search in Tartu Prison had been carried out in a degrading manner in breach of his privacy.
On 10 May 2013 the complaint concerning the applicant’s body search was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1987. He is currently serving a prison sentence.
On 10 October 2010 the applicant, who was serving his sentence in Tartu Prison, took a walk together with other detainees. When he entered the accommodation block, two prison guards searched him in the stairwell of the building. According to the applicant he was requested to lower his trousers and underpants twice and lift his sexual organ. A guard felt his underpants to find out whether any tobacco products had been hidden therein. According to the applicant he was in the sight of other detainees, since the door to the stairwell where the search was carried out had a transparent window. Another door leading from the stairwell to a corridor of the accommodation block also had a transparent window and detainees or female prison officers could have seen him through it or entered the stairwell at any time.
The applicant claimed from the prison administration 25,000 kroons (EEK) (corresponding to approximately 1,600 euros (EUR)) for the non-pecuniary damages he had allegedly sustained. He named three of the detainees who had been behind him when he had entered the building and had been searched.
The prison administration rejected the applicant’s claim. Relying on the statements of one of the prison guards involved, the administration found that the search had been conducted in private and not in the sight of other detainees. According to the prison guard’s written statements, the detainees had entered the stairwell one by one. One guard had searched their jackets and the other one had searched the detainees. In the event that they suspected a detainee, they had closed the door in order to create a private space and the detainee in question had been requested to lower his trousers. Only the detainee to be searched and two guards had been in the stairwell.
The applicant lodged a complaint with the Tartu Administrative Court. He reiterated his claim, named three detainees who had seen his search and included written statements from two of them.
By a judgment of 21 September 2011 the Administrative Court rejected the applicant’s claim. It found reliable the statements of the prison guard, according to whom the applicant’s privacy had been respected.
The applicant appealed to the Tartu Court of Appeal. At the Court of Appeal hearing he submitted that the windows of the doors to the stairwell had measured 1 m by 30 cm and that some days after his complaint to the Administrative Court they had been covered by metal sheets to prevent other detainees from seeing the searches.
By a judgment of 16 March 2012 the Tartu Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It established that the search had lasted for a few minutes at most and noted that the applicant had not been sure whether any other detainees had been in the stairwell. He had been unable to explain from where exactly the detainees named by him had seen his search. The Court of Appeal concluded that his privacy had not been violated. It further found that in order to effectively manage a large number of detainees, the prison also had to have the possibility of carrying out a body search of a detainee, when necessary, in a location other than a private room designated for that purpose. In order to conduct such a search it was sufficient that the authorities had a suspicion that a detainee re-entering the building after a walk had hidden cigarettes – which were prohibited in prison – in his underwear.
By a judgment of 17 October 2012 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It upheld the Court of Appeal’s finding that the applicant’s privacy had not been infringed and his dignity had not been diminished. One of the three judges delivered a separate opinion. He considered that it was not decisive whether the third persons had in fact seen the detainee’s body search. It could not be presumed that a person who was being searched was able to establish at the same time whether the search had been seen, what exactly had been seen and by whom. When a body search was carried out in a situation and location where it was not guaranteed that third persons would not see the person’s nudity, the person concerned was bound to feel that his privacy had not been respected and that other persons might have seen the procedure being performed. Such a situation damaged the person’s dignity and could cause feelings of insecurity, anguish and degradation.
According to information provided by the Government, the applicant had three reprimands on record at the time of the search in question, including for unauthorised possession of a cigarette. From the date of the events at issue until mid-2013, twenty further disciplinary punishments had been imposed on him, primarily for violations related to the possession of unauthorised items, mainly cigarettes.
Article 26 of the Constitution of the Republic of Estonia (Eesti Vabariigi põhiseadus) reads as follows:
“Everyone is entitled to respect for his or her private and family life. Government agencies, local authorities and their officials may not interfere with any person’s private or family life, except in the cases, and pursuant to a procedure, provided for by law to safeguard public health, public morality, public order or the rights and freedoms of others, to prevent a criminal offence, or to apprehend an offender.”
The Imprisonment Act (Vangistusseadus) provides as follows:
“(1)  In order to discover prohibited items or substances, prison service officers have the right to search prisoners, their personal effects, dwellings, non-work rooms, other premises and the grounds of the prison. A prisoner shall be searched by a prison officer of the same sex as the prisoner.
...
(4)  The search procedure shall be established by a regulation of the Minister of Justice.”
Regulation no. 23 of the Minister of Justice on the Procedure for Supervisory Control over the Execution of Imprisonment and Remand in Custody (Vangistuse ja eelvangistuse täideviimise üle järelevalve korraldamine), adopted on 1 April 2003 and as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“(1)  A person may be searched fully or partly.
(2)  A person’s full search shall be conducted in a place where his privacy is secured.
(3)  A person shall be searched by persons of the same sex.
...”
“(1)  Search of a prisoner is compulsory in the following circumstances:
upon entry into and exit from the prison;
before and after a visit;
during the search of a place when the prisoner is present during the search;
before escorting.
(2)  A prison service officer also has the right to search a prisoner in circumstances not mentioned in subsection (1).”
Pursuant to section 8-2 of Regulation no. 72 of the Minister of Justice on the Internal Prison Rules (Vangla sisekorraeeskiri), adopted on 30 November 2000 and as in force at the material time, a prisoner was allowed to smoke in the prison only in places designated for this purpose, and at the time when he had the right to be in such a place. A prisoner was not allowed to keep with him any tobacco products or smoking materials. Such products and materials were to be deposited by a prison service officer. The prison service would distribute tobacco products and smoking materials to a prisoner only for the time when he had the right to be in places where smoking was allowed.
Section 12(5) of Tartu Prison’s House Rules (Tartu Vangla kodukord), as in force at the material time, provided that persons detained in Tartu Prison were allowed to smoke in designated areas of the exercise yard. Cigarettes were distributed to detainees at the beginning of a walk. After the walk, they were obliged to deposit any unused cigarettes at the place and time designated by a prison officer.