The case originated in an application (no. 19601/16) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an American national, Mr Miomir Adžić (“the applicant”), on 7 April 2016.
The applicant was represented by Ms I. Bojić, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that in the proceedings for the return of his son the domestic courts had not held a single hearing and that by refusing to order his son’s return to the United States those courts had breached his right to respect for his family life.
On 1 September 2016 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Charlotte, North Carolina (the United States of America).
The case concerns “non-contentious” proceedings for the return of the child instituted on 13 October 2011 in which the domestic courts refused to order the return of the applicant’s son to the United States after the child’s mother (a Croatian national and the applicant’s former wife) had in August 2011 “wrongfully retained” him in Croatia within the meaning of the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (“the Hague Convention”).
Specifically, on 15 March 2012 the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court (Općinski građanski sud u Zagrebu), without holding a single hearing, dismissed the applicant’s request for the return of the child. Following an appeal by the applicant, on 2 July 2012 the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) quashed the Municipal Court’s decision and remitted the case. In so deciding it, inter alia, instructed the Municipal Court to hold a hearing. The relevant part of the County Court’s decision reads as follows:
“... the first-instance court based [its] decision in part on undisputed facts, and in the relevant part on the arguments and evidence submitted by the counterparty ... even though it failed to give an opportunity to the petitioner to comment on them ... [T]herefore, the petitioner’s appeal has to be allowed, the first-instance decision quashed and the case remitted ...
In the fresh proceedings, the first-instance court shall correct the above error by scheduling a hearing (section 309(5) of the Family Act) at which it shall, together with the parties (sections 297-298 of the Civil Procedure Act), examine the circumstances of the case.”
In the fresh proceedings the Municipal Court obtained an opinion from a forensic expert in psychiatry on whether returning the child to the United States would expose him to psychological harm – that is, to a risk envisaged in Article 13 paragraph 1 (b) of the Hague Convention (see paragraph 27 below with further references). On 21 May 2014 that court, without holding a hearing, again dismissed the applicant’s request for his son to be returned to the United States. This decision was upheld on appeal by the Zagreb County Court on 22 October 2014. The Municipal Court justified its decision not to hold a hearing in the following way:
“... the court did not take evidence by hearing the parties because that would significantly protract the proceedings, bearing in mind that in their testimonies – precisely because they have a personal stake in the outcome of the proceedings and their objectivity is very questionable – the parties mostly want to praise and present themselves in the best light while discrediting the opposing party ... [S]uch testimonies are [therefore] generally not at all suitable [in terms of assisting a court in establishing the facts of a case] and reaching a decision.”
Those return proceedings (see paragraphs 6-8 above) were already subject to the examination by the Court. In the first Adžić case the Court in the judgment of 12 March 2015 held that the domestic authorities had failed to act expeditiously in the proceedings in question. The Court had accordingly found a violation of the State’s positive obligations under Article 8 of the Convention (see Adžić v. Croatia, no. 22643/14, §§ 96-99, 12 March 2015). At the time the Court adopted its judgment, i.e. 17 February 2015, the proceedings were still pending before the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) upon a constitutional complaint lodged by the applicant.
In his constitutional complaint the applicant complained of a violation of his right to fair procedure, in particular of a breach of his right to an oral hearing and a breach of the principle of equality of arms and the adversarial principle. More specifically, the applicant submitted that the ordinary courts had not held a single hearing in the case and that the firstinstance court had not informed him of its decision to obtain an opinion from a forensic expert in psychiatry, thus preventing him from objecting to the choice of expert. He further complained that he had not been involved in the expert’s assessment, even though he had previously expressed his willingness to make himself available for such an assessment. The applicant also complained that the domestic court’s refusal to order the return of his son constituted a violation of his right to respect for family life.
By a decision of 28 October 2015 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint. It served its decision on his representative on 4 December 2015. The Constitutional Court examined only the alleged violation of the applicant’s right to fair procedure, because it considered that the alleged violation of his right to family life had been addressed by the Court in the first Adžić case (see paragraph 9 above).
The other relevant facts of the case are set out in detail in the Court’s judgment in the first Adžić case (see Adžić, cited above, §§ 6-57).
The relevant provisions of the Family Act of 2003 (Obiteljski zakon, Official Gazette no. 163/03 with subsequent amendments), which was in force between 22 July 2003 and 1 September 2014, provided as follows.
Sections 306-335 set out special rules on the non-contentious procedure applicable in judicial proceedings in family matters.
Section 320 provided that, unless those rules provided otherwise, the rules of regular civil procedure were applicable mutatis mutandis in such proceedings. This section thus effectively excluded the application of general rules of non-contentious procedure set out in the Judicial Noncontentious Procedure Act of 1934 (see paragraphs 23-26 below).
Section 308 contained some technical rules concerning hearings. Section 309 provided:
-  that a court could also render a decision without holding an oral hearing if it considered that the hearing was not necessary (paragraph 1),
-  that a court could also base its decision on evidence that had not been presented before the same court (paragraph 2),
-  that parties and other participants in the proceedings could also make their statements in writing (paragraph 3),
-  that parties and other participants in the proceedings could make their statements even when other parties or participants were not present, and that the court did not always have to give the other party an opportunity to comment on such statements (paragraph 4).
However, paragraph 5 of that section provided that paragraphs 1 to 4 did not apply when there was a dispute between the parties regarding the decisive facts.
Section 319 provided that a petition to reopen proceedings was not available against a final decision adopted in non-contentious proceedings in family matters.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 4/77 with subsequent amendments, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 53/91 with subsequent amendments), which has been in force since 1 July 1977, provide as follows.
Section 250 provides that a court shall commission an expert opinion when the establishment or clarification of certain facts requires expert knowledge which the court does not possess.
Section 251(2) provides that before appointing an expert, the court must consult the parties, but in urgent cases it may do so without consulting them beforehand.
Section 260(1) provides that it is for the court to decide whether the expert shall present his or her findings and opinion only orally at the hearing, or also in writing before the hearing.
Section 261(4) provides that if the expert opinion is contradictory or has shortcomings, or if there is reasonable suspicion as regards its accuracy, an opinion from another expert shall be obtained only if those shortcomings or suspicion cannot be remedied by hearing the expert again.
Relevant provisions of the Judicial Non-contentious Procedure Act (Zakon o sudskom vanparničnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia no. 175/34), which has been applicable in Croatia since 1934, provide as follows.
Section 21(1) provides that, unless the Act provides otherwise, the rules of regular civil procedure are applicable mutatis mutandis in noncontentious proceedings.
Section 21(4) provides that, in principle, decisions in noncontentious proceedings are adopted without a hearing. If oral hearings are held, they are not public.
Section 21(5) provides that the special formalities of regular civil proceedings do not apply as regards hearing the parties and other participants and making inquiries. Parties give statements orally or in writing. When a number of persons have to be heard, each may be heard without the others being present.
The text of Article 12 and of Article 13 of the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, which Convention entered into force in respect of Croatia on 1 December 1991, is quoted in the Court’s judgment in the first Adžić case (see Adžić, cited above, § 62).
The relevant part of the Guide to Good Practice Child Abduction Convention: Part II - Implementing Measures, published in 2003 by the Hague Conference on Private International Law, reads as follows:
“As far as compatible with domestic law, including due process considerations, provisions in implementing legislation to ensure that Hague return applications are dealt with promptly and expeditiously may include:
...
5  Rules of evidence
5.1  ...
5.2  Documentary evidence: considering Convention procedures allowing documentary evidence from requesting States and thereby eliminating the need to hear oral evidence; save in exceptional cases, placing greater reliance on documentary evidence and sworn statements and less reliance on oral evidence; and in cases where the issue demands oral evidence (conflict in affidavits which goes to a critical point), keeping oral evidence time limited and focused upon the issue.
5.3  Personal appearance of the applicant: considering whether a requirement for the applicant’s personal appearance at the proceedings would cause undue delay in the consideration of the case.
...
Rules and practices concerning the taking and admission of evidence, including the evidence of experts, should be applied in return proceedings with regard to the necessity for speed and the importance of limiting the enquiry to the matters in dispute which are directly relevant to the issue of return.
...
‘Delay in legal proceedings is a major cause of difficulties in the operation of the Convention. All possible efforts should be made to expedite such proceedings. Courts in a number of countries normally decide on requests for return of a child on the basis only of the application and any documents or statements in writing submitted by the parties, without taking oral testimony or requiring the presence of the parties in person. This can serve to expedite the disposition of the case. The decision to return the child is not a decision on the merits of custody.’
The Convention relaxes certain evidentiary rules as a way of speeding up return proceedings. Article 30 of the Convention is intended to facilitate the introduction of documentary evidence, including affidavits. Under Article 30, any application submitted to the Central Authority or petition submitted to the court, along with any documents or information appended thereto, are admissible in court. States are encouraged to ensure, where necessary through implementing legislation, that such documentary evidence can be given due weight under the national evidence rules.
Hague return cases lend themselves to determination by summary proceedings. A full trial, consisting of an evidentiary hearing, will normally not be necessary or desirable. Legislation may provide that affidavit evidence, transcripts of oral evidence and legal argument from the requesting State are admissible as evidence of fact. Rules adopted in several jurisdictions provide for expedited hearings to this effect.
In a number of countries, Hague return proceedings are now conducted primarily on the basis of written submissions and evidence. In order to expedite proceedings, rules have been developed in some countries (often by the judiciary) to define and limit the circumstances in which oral evidence may be admitted. Oral testimony does not necessarily cause undue delay under strict judicial control. Much may depend on the issue. For example, in some jurisdictions oral evidence is more likely to be admitted if there is conflicting documentary evidence by the parties which cannot be resolved without cross-examination or oral evidence. If that is the case, as a general matter, both parties should be given a chance to be heard.
In some jurisdictions where the Convention is functioning very effectively, hearings may be based on affidavits as evidence-in-chief in most instances and conducted without oral testimony, particularly from expert witnesses. When oral evidence is given, usually where there is an unresolvable clash in affidavit evidence on a crucial point, it is highly focused and time limited. In other States no special rules exist. In many systems the individual judge trying the case has a degree of discretion.
...
Due to the international character of Convention cases and the geographical distances involved, the legal requirement in some countries of the applicant’s personal appearance at the proceedings in the requested State may cause delay in the proceedings and add excessive expenditure for the applicant. A requirement for the applicant’s personal appearance at the proceedings may, in some cases, have the effect of rendering the Convention remedy unavailable. In many instances it may not be necessary for both parents to be physically present at a return hearing, but rather the left-behind parent could be represented to assure full consideration of relevant issues.
The use of affidavit evidence for overseas applicants may facilitate the proceedings. In such cases it is important that no adverse inference is to arise because the overseas applicant is unavailable for cross-examination on his or her affidavit evidence. To this end, some jurisdictions have court rules which allow for cross-examination of the applicant in his/her own jurisdiction with transmission of the transcript to the requested State for use at the hearing of the application for return.”
The International Child Abduction Database (INCADAT) is the leading legal database on the Hague Convention. It was established by the Permanent Bureau of the Hague Conference on Private International Law with the object of making accessible on the Internet many of the leading judicial decisions taken by national courts around the world in the application of the Hague Convention, thereby facilitating its uniform interpretation. INCADAT is a free and comprehensive tool for researching cases, case summaries and legal analysis of the application of the Hague Convention. The website also provides additional material relevant to this area of law. For example, it contains case-law analysis sorted by legal issues. This part of the database under the Oral Evidence category states:
“To ensure that Convention cases are dealt with expeditiously, as is required by the Convention, courts in a number of jurisdictions have restricted the use of oral evidence, ...
...
Under the rules applicable within the European Union for intra-EU abductions (Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 (Brussels II a)) Convention applications are now subject to additional provisions, including the requirement that an applicant be heard before a non-return order is made [Article 11(5) Brussels II a Regulation], and, that the child be heard ‘during the proceedings unless this appears inappropriate having regard to his or her age or degree of maturity’ [Article 11(2) Brussels II a Regulation].”
The relevant provision of Council Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 of 27 November 2003 concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility (known as “Brussels II bis Regulation”), namely Article 11 paragraph 5, reads as follows:
“A court cannot refuse to return a child unless the person who requested the return of the child has been given an opportunity to be heard.”