The case concerns the authorities’ refusal to grant leave to the applicant, who was in prison, to pay a last visit to his terminally ill father.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lived in Budapest. He was represented by Ms B. Pohárnok, a lawyer practising in Budapest and acting on behalf of the Hungarian Helsinki Committee.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, Ministry of Justice.
On 9 September 2017 the applicant died. His mother, Ms József Jánosné Pintér, a Hungarian national who was born in 1954 and lives in Eger, submitted that she intended to pursue the proceedings in the applicant’s stead.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Between 2 December 2014 and 15 March 2015 the applicant was in detention in Baracska Prison on account of thirteen regulatory (traffic) offences for which he had not paid the fines. As a result, the penalty had been converted to imprisonment.
On 13 January 2015 the applicant filed a request with the prison governor seeking extraordinary leave of absence for three days in order to visit his father, who was terminally ill with cancer. The prison administration acknowledged receipt of the request on 19 January 2015. In the request, which was supported by medical documents diagnosing the applicant’s father with terminal-stage metastatic pancreas cancer, the applicant explained that he intended to pay a last visit to his father at his home, to where the father had been discharged from hospital in view of his impending death. The applicant explained that he wished to see his father unescorted, without handcuffs, and promised to return to the prison of his own accord.
On 13 February 2015 the Veszprém District Court asked the prison to make the applicant available to stand trial in another case, concerning charges of fraud, on 26 February 2015. On that date, the applicant was convicted and sentenced to two years and four months’ imprisonment. The sentence was to commence on 16 March 2015.
Meanwhile, the statutory thirty-day time-limit for the examination of the applicant’s request expired on 22 February 2015. On that day the applicant was informed that his father had died earlier the same day. No formal decision was ever given on his request for leave. An internal memorandum from the prison administration dated 30 January 2015 shows that the request had not been approved because the applicant had insisted on visiting his father unescorted. Other internal documents of the prison administration submitted by the Government demonstrate that the relevant officers would have supported the applicant’s request only if he had agreed to go under escort.
Act no. CCXL of 2013 on the Execution of Punishments, Measures, Certain Coercive Measures and Confinement for Infractions (“the Act”) provides as follows:
Section 20
“(3) If the head of an organisational unit of the penitentiary institution acts upon a request, he or she must take measures or decide within thirty days, unless the given matter requires extraordinary arrangement. In justified cases the given deadline to adjudge the request may be extended in writing once, by up to an additional 30 days, according to subsection (1). The applicant must be informed about the extension in writing.”
Section 21
“(1) A complaint against any measures or decision of the penitentiary institution may be submitted to its head. In cases defined in this Act the convict or any person detained on any other legal basis may submit a request for judicial review, or bring an action before a court.”
Section 123
“(1) On the basis of permission issued by the governor of the penitentiary institution, convicted prisoners may – with or without an escort – visit a seriously ill close relative or attend the funeral of a close relative.
(2) In issuing the permission referred to in subsection (1) above, the governor of the institution may order the use of devices restricting movement and, in exceptional cases, may refuse permission to visit, attend a funeral or pay respects.”
Section 141
“(4) The decision on approving the request may also be notified to the prisoner orally.
(5) The merits of the decision and the date of notification must be entered in the records and the written decision must simultaneously be handed over to the convicted prisoner or person detained under any other legal basis.”