The case originated in an application (no. 68453/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a national of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ms Danka Pajić (“the applicant”), on 23 October 2013.
The applicant was represented by Ms A. Bandalo and Ms N. Labavić, lawyers practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged discrimination on the grounds of her sexual orientation in obtaining a residence permit in Croatia, contrary to Articles 8 and 14 of the Convention.
On 12 December 2013 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, having been informed of their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (a) of the Rules of Court), did not avail themselves of this possibility.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Brčko, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On 29 December 2011 the applicant lodged a request for a residence permit in Croatia on the grounds of family reunification with her partner, Ms D.B., who was living in Sisak. She submitted that she had been educated in Croatia and that she had lived in Zagreb for seventeen years. She also explained that she wanted to live with D.B., with whom she had been in a relationship for two years, and with whom she wanted to establish a household and start a business.
By a letter dated 28 December 2011 D.B. stated that she owned a house in Sisak where she wanted to live with the applicant. She explained that she had been in a relationship with the applicant for two years and that they wanted to live together so as to avoid constant travelling and the distance between them.
During the proceedings the Sisak Police Department (Policijska uprava Sisačko-moslovačka) found that the applicant and D.B. had been in a relationship since October 2009 and that in order to maintain their relationship they had been travelling to see each other. It was also established that the applicant had recently stayed with D.B. in the period between 16 September and 4 December 2011.
On 24 February 2012 the Sisak Police Department dismissed the applicant’s request with a summary reasoning indicating that all the relevant requirements under the Aliens Act had not been met.
The applicant appealed against that decision to the Ministry of the Interior (Ministarstvo unutarnjih poslova; hereinafter: the “Ministry”), arguing that it could be inferred from the decision of the Sisak Police Department that her request had been dismissed because the Aliens Act did not allow family reunification for same-sex couples. She considered that there had been no grounds for a difference in treatment based on sexual orientation and that the relevant law should not be construed in a manner that allowed for such a possibility. She relied, inter alia, on the Constitution and the Prohibition of Discrimination Act, arguing that even if she was not to be considered as D.B.’s “immediate family member”, within the meaning of the Aliens Act, she should in any case be considered as her “other relative” within the meaning of that Act.
On 8 June 2012 the Ministry dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the Sisak Police Department. The relevant part of the Ministry’s decision reads:
“Concerning the family reunification, based on which the request for the regularisation of the status of an alien in Croatia has been submitted in the case at issue, [it is to be noted that] the case file shows that the appellant relies on the existence of a same-sex relationship with the Croatian national D.B., which has allegedly lasted for two years ...
The impugned decision shows that the [first-instance body], other than citing the [relevant] provisions of the Aliens Act, also cited section 3 of the Family Act, according to which the effects of an extramarital relationship, that is to say the rights and obligations following from its existence, relate to a union between an unmarried woman and man which has lasted for at least three years, or less if a child was born of [the union]; and section 2 of the Same-Sex Union Act ... which defines a same-sex union as a union between two persons of the same sex (partners) who are not married, or in an extramarital relationship or other same-sex union, which has lasted for at least three years and which is based on the principles of equality of partners, mutual respect and assistance as well as the emotional bonds of partners.
...
It follows that the [Same-Sex Union] Act does not define a same-sex union as a family and the Family Act does not cover same-sex unions. It should also be taken into account that the provisions of the Aliens Act concerning temporary residence for family reunification do not provide for a possibility of regularisation of the status of an alien on the grounds of [the existence of] a same-sex union, nor does such a union fall within the scope of [the term] ‘immediate family member’ incorporated in that Act, which makes it clear that there is no legal ground for granting the request of the appellant.
Therefore, the appellant wrongly considers that the first-instance body should have applied section 56 § 4 of the Aliens Act in her case ... because that provision clearly provides that exceptionally to the provision defining immediate family members, ‘other relative’ could be so considered if there are specific personal or serious humanitarian reasons for a family reunification in Croatia.”
On 24 July 2012 the applicant lodged an administrative action with the Zagreb Administrative Court (Upravni sud u Zagrebu), arguing that she had been discriminated against in comparison to different-sex couples who had a possibility to seek family reunification under the Aliens Act. She relied on the domestic anti-discrimination legislation, including the Prohibition of Discrimination Act, as well as the Convention and the Court’s case-law.
The Zagreb Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s action on 30 January 2013. The relevant part of the judgment provides:
“The cited section 56 § 3(1) and (2) of the Aliens Act provides that the immediate family members are spouses or persons who live in an extramarital relationship in accordance with Croatian legislation. The cited sections 3 and 5 of the Family Act show that marriage and extramarital relationship are unions between a man and a woman. Thus, union between two same-sex persons cannot be considered under the relevant legal provisions as marriage or an extramarital relationship.
Union between two same-sex persons can be considered under the legal term same-sex union under the conditions provided for in section 2 of the Same-Sex Union Act. However, given the limited legal effects of a same-sex union, the possible existence of such a union does not represent a basis for family reunification. It should be noted that section 56 of the [Aliens] Act explicitly enumerates persons who are to be considered immediate family members or who are to be exceptionally considered [so], which leads to a conclusion that it cannot be extended to cover persons living in a same-sex union.
Accordingly, the granting of a request for temporary residence of an alien on the grounds of family reunification depends on the satisfaction of the requirements under sections 52 and 56 of the Aliens Act. In the case at issue the plaintiff is neither married nor in an extramarital relationship with the Croatian national D.B., which is not in dispute between the parties. It therefore follows that the plaintiff cannot be considered an immediate family member within the meaning of section 56 § 1(1) and (2) of the [Aliens] Act and thus she did not justify the purpose (in the concrete case: family reunification) for which a temporary residence of an alien in Croatia can be granted ...
In view of the cited legal provisions, and the facts of the case, this court finds that in the concrete case it was not possible to grant the plaintiff’s request.”
On 8 March 2013 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), contending that she had been discriminated against on the basis of her sexual orientation. She relied on the Convention and the relevant domestic anti-discrimination legislation, and she cited the Court’s case-law on the question of discrimination related to sexual orientation.
On 29 May 2013 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint, endorsing the reasoning of the lower bodies. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“8.  The Constitutional Court reiterates that discrimination under Article 14 of the Constitution does not have an independent standing for a constitutional complaint but must be submitted in conjunction with another (substantive) constitutional right. Discrimination means difference in the treatment of persons in the same or relevantly similar situations without an objective and reasonable justification. Article 14 of the Constitution contains constitutional guarantee against discrimination on any ground in securing a concrete right.
Although the appellant relied in her constitutional complaint in Article 35 of the Constitution and the related Article 8 of the Convention, the Constitutional Court finds that these provisions are not applicable in the case at issue.
1.  In the proceedings before it, the Constitutional Court did not find facts or circumstances which would suggest that in the proceedings before [the lower bodies] the appellant was discriminated against on any ground ... Thus her complaint of a violation of Article 14 § 1 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court finds unfounded.
2.  The Constitutional Court also notes that the appellant, in the concrete case, did not show that she has used the legal avenue under the Prohibition of Discrimination Act ...
There has therefore been no violation of her constitutional right under Article 14 §§ 1 and 2 of the Constitution.
The case-law of the European Court cited in the constitutional complaint is of no relevance for the case at issue since it relates to cases concerning health insurance and inheritance of tenancy rights by same-sex partners living in a stable (de facto) relationship.”
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010 and 5/2014) read as follows:
“Everyone in the Republic of Croatia shall enjoy rights and freedoms regardless of their race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other belief, national or social origin, property, birth, education, social status or other characteristics.
All shall be equal before the law.”
“Everyone has the right to respect for and legal protection of his or her private and family life, dignity, reputation and honour.”
The relevant part of section 62 of the Constitutional Court Act (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 49/2002) reads as follows:
“1.  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that an individual act on the part of a State body, a body of local or regional self-government, or a legal person with public authority, concerning his or her rights and obligations or a suspicion or accusation of a criminal deed, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms or his or her right to local or regional self-government guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter “a constitutional right”) ...
If another legal remedy exists in respect of the violation of the constitutional right [complained of], a constitutional complaint may be lodged only after that remedy has been used.”
The relevant provisions of the Aliens Act (Zakon o strancima, Official Gazette nos. 79/2007 and 36/2009) provide:
“(1)  Temporary stay is stay of an alien for a period of 90 days ...
(2)  An alien who does not need a visa to enter the territory of the Republic of Croatia can stay [on its territory] for a maximum period of 90 days in a period of 6 months, which starts to run from the day of the first entry.
(3)  An alien referred to in paragraph 2 of this section who has stayed for 90 days before the expiry of the six-month time-limit, can again enter and stay in the Republic of Croatia after the expiry of the time-limit of 6 months, which starts to run from the day of the first entry.”
“Temporary residence may be granted for the following purposes:
family reunification; ...”
“Temporary residence shall be granted to an alien if:
...
he or she has justified the purpose of the temporary residence.”
“(1) Temporary residence for the purpose of family reunification may be granted to an alien who is an immediate family member of:
- a Croatian national;
...
(3)  Immediate family members are:
spouses,
persons who live in an extramarital relationship in accordance with Croatian legislation,
...
(4)  Exceptionally to the provision of paragraph 3 of this section, an immediate family member of a Croatian national ... can be also another relative if there are specific personal or serious humanitarian reasons for a family reunification in Croatia.”
Further amendments to the Aliens Act (Official Gazette nos. 13/2011 and 74/2013), in section 56 § 5, explicitly define the extramarital relationship referred to in that Act as a union between an unmarried woman and man which has lasted for at least three years, or less if a child was born of the union. Section 235 of these amendments provides that the proceedings instituted under the 2007 Aliens Act (see paragraph 19 above) shall be terminated under that Act.
The Family Act (Obiteljski zakon, Official Gazette nos. 116/2003, 117/2004, 136/2004, 107/2007, 57/2011, 61/2011 and 25/2013) in its relevant parts provides:
“An extramarital relationship [within the meaning of this Act] is a union between an unmarried woman and man which has lasted for at least three years, or less if a child was born of [the union].”
“Marriage is a legal union between a woman and a man.”
The relevant provisions at the relevant time of the Same-Sex Union Act (Zakon o istospolnim zajednicama, Official Gazette no. 116/2003) provided:
“Same-sex union within the meaning of this Act is a union between two persons (hereinafter: partners) of the same sex who are not married, or in an extramarital relationship or other same-sex union, which has lasted for at least three years and which is based on the principles of equality of partners, mutual respect and assistance as well as the emotional bonds of partners.”
“Legal effects of same-sex union are the right to the support of one of the partners and the right to obtain and regulate mutual relations with regard to property as well as the right to mutual assistance.”
“(1)  Any discrimination, direct or indirect, on the basis [of the existence] of same-sex union or homosexual orientation, is prohibited.
...”
The Same-Sex Union Act was repealed by the enactment of the Same-Sex Partnership Act (Zakon o životnom partnerstvu osoba istog spola, Official Gazette no. 92/2014) that came into force on 1 September 2014, which provides for a possibility of establishing a registered partnership between persons of the same sex. These amendments also introduced the possibility of family reunification for same-sex couples who live in an informal partnership, that is to say a relationship which has lasted for at least three years and otherwise satisfies all the requirements for a registered same-sex partnership. The relevant provision of this Act reads:
“... [T]he same-sex partners living in an informal partnership, which has lasted for at least three years, have the right to submit a request for temporary residence in the Republic of Croatia, as provided under the special legislation.”
The relevant parts of the Prevention of Discrimination Act (Zakon o suzbijanju diskriminacije, Official Gazette no. 85/2008) provide:
“(1)  This Act ensures protection and promotion of equality as the highest value of the constitutional order of the Republic of Croatia; creates conditions for equal opportunities and regulates protection against discrimination on the basis of race or ethnic origin or skin colour, gender, language, religion, political or other conviction, national or social origin, state of wealth, membership of a trade union, education, social status, marital or family status, age, health, disability, genetic inheritance, gender identity, expression or sexual orientation.
(2)  Discrimination within the meaning of this Act means putting any person in a disadvantageous position on any of the grounds under subsection 1 of this section, as well as his or her close relatives.
...”
“This Act shall be applied in respect of all State bodies ... legal entities and natural persons ...”
“Anyone who considers that, owing to discrimination, any of his or her rights has been violated may seek protection of that right in proceedings in which the determination of that right is the main issue, and may also seek protection in separate proceedings under section 17 of this Act.”
“(1)  A person who claims that he or she has been a victim of discrimination in accordance with the provisions of this Act may bring a claim and seek:
(1)  a ruling that the defendant has violated the plaintiff’s right to equal treatment or that an act or omission by the defendant may lead to the violation of the plaintiff’s right to equal treatment (claim for an acknowledgment of discrimination);
(2)  a ban on (the defendant’s) undertaking acts which violate or may violate the plaintiff’s right to equal treatment or an order for measures aimed at removing discrimination or its consequences to be taken (claim for a ban or for removal of discrimination);
(3)  compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage caused by the violation of the rights protected by this Act (claim for damages);
(4)  an order for a judgment finding a violation of the right to equal treatment to be published in the media at the defendant’s expense.”
In 2009 the Office for Human Rights of the Government of Croatia (Ured za ljudska prava Vlade Republike Hrvatske) published a “Manual on the Application of the Prevention of Discrimination Act” (Vodič uz Zakon o suzbijanju diskriminacije; hereinafter: the “Manual”). The Manual explains, inter alia, that the Prevention of Discrimination Act provides two alternative avenues which an individual can pursue, as provided under section 16 of that Act. Accordingly, an individual may raise his or her discrimination complaint in the proceedings concerning the main subject matter of a dispute, or he or she may opt for separate civil proceedings, as provided under section 17 of the Act.
On 9 November 2010, in the case no. U-III-1097/2009, the Constitutional Court declared a constitutional complaint alleging discrimination by a decision of the Parliament on the basis of the political affiliation of a deputy inadmissible for non-exhaustion of domestic remedies. The Constitutional Court found that the appellant had failed to pursue the relevant administrative remedies and the remedies provided under the Prevention of Discrimination Act. It declined, however, to determine what the relationship between several possible avenues in a case concerning allegations of discrimination was on the ground that it was primarily for the competent courts to determine that matter.
The Government also provided a first-instance judgment of the Varaždin Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Varaždinu), no. P-3153/10-89 of 12 July 2012, by which a civil action of D.K. against the Zagreb University, Varaždin Faculty of Organisation and Informatics (Sveučilište u Zagrebu, Fakultet organizacije i informatike Varaždin), alleging discrimination based on his sexual orientation, has been partially accepted. By this judgment, the Varaždin Municipal Court established, inter alia, that D.K. had suffered discrimination related to his employment status on the basis of his sexual orientation and ordered the defendant not to undertake any acts which could prevent his promotion on the basis of his sexual orientation.
The relevant provision of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 16 December 1966 reads:
“All persons are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal protection of the law. In this respect, the law shall prohibit any discrimination and guarantee to all persons equal and effective protection against discrimination on any ground such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.”
In the case X v. Colombia, CCPR/C/89/D/1361/2005, on 30 March 2007 the United Nations Human Rights Committee reaffirmed its case-law according to which Article 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights comprises also discrimination based on sexual orientation.
In its Recommendation 924 (1981) on discrimination against homosexuals of 1 October 1981, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) criticised various forms of discrimination against homosexuals in certain member States of the Council of Europe.
In the Recommendation 1470 (2000) on the situation of gays and lesbians and their partners in respect of asylum and immigration in the member States of the Council of Europe of 30 June 2000, PACE observed the following:
“2.  The Assembly is concerned by the fact that immigration policies in most Council of Europe member states discriminate against lesbians and gays. In particular, the majority of them do not recognise persecution for sexual orientation as a valid ground for granting asylum, nor do they provide any form of residence rights to the foreign partner in a bi-national same-sex partnership.
...
Therefore the Assembly recommends that the Committee of Ministers:
...
urge the member states:
...
to take such measures as are necessary to ensure that bi-national lesbian and gay couples are accorded the same residence rights as bi-national heterosexual couples; ...”
In Recommendation 1474 (2000) on the situation of lesbians and gays in Council of Europe member States of 26 September 2000, PACE called on member States, among other things, to include sexual orientation among the prohibited grounds for discrimination in their national legislation.
It also reiterated the need to adopt and implement anti-discrimination legislation, including sexual orientation and gender identity among the prohibited grounds for discrimination in Resolution 1728 (2010) on discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity of 29 April 2010.
The relevant parts of Recommendation CM/Rec(2010)5 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on measures to combat discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity of 31 March 2010 read:
“Recommends that member states:
...
ensure that legislative and other measures are adopted and effectively implemented to combat discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity, to ensure respect for the human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons and to promote tolerance towards them;
...
Right to respect for private and family life
...
Where national legislation confers rights and obligations on unmarried couples, member states should ensure that it applies in a non-discriminatory way to both same-sex and different-sex couples, including with respect to survivor’s pension benefits and tenancy rights.
Where national legislation recognises registered same-sex partnerships, member states should seek to ensure that their legal status and their rights and obligations are equivalent to those of heterosexual couples in a comparable situation.”
The relevant provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2000/C 364/01) read:
“Everyone has the right to respect for his or her private and family life, home and communications.”
“Everyone is equal before the law.”
Any discrimination based on any ground such as ... sexual orientation shall be prohibited.
...”
Several Directives of the European Union, although not directly applicable, are also of interest in the present case. The Council Directive 2003/86/EC of 22 September 2003 on the right to family reunification lays down the conditions for the exercise of the right to family reunification by third country nationals residing lawfully on the territory of a Member State.
In Recital 5 it calls upon the Member States to give effect to its provisions without discrimination on the basis of, inter alia, sexual orientation.
In the relevant part of Article 4, under the heading “Family Members”, it provides the following:
“(3)  The Member States may, by law or regulation, authorise the entry and residence, pursuant to this Directive and subject to compliance with the conditions laid down in Chapter IV, of the unmarried partner, being a third country national, with whom the sponsor is in a duly attested stable long-term relationship, or of a third country national who is bound to the sponsor by a registered partnership in accordance with Article 5(2) ...”
In addition, the relevant part of Article 5 the same Directive provides:
“When examining an application concerning the unmarried partner of the sponsor, Member States shall consider, as evidence of the family relationship, factors such as a common child, previous cohabitation, registration of the partnership and any other reliable means of proof.”
The Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and Council of 29 April 2004 concerns the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States.
Recital 31 of this Directive requires that its provisions be implemented without discrimination between the beneficiaries on grounds of, inter alia, sexual orientation.
In Article 2 the term “family members” is defined in relation to, among other things, a partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted a registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation of a Member State, if the legislation of the host Member State treats registered partnerships as equivalent to marriage and in accordance with the conditions laid down in the relevant legislation of the host Member State.