The case originated in an application (no. 67394/17) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Dzhamidin Tagirovich Aliverdiyev (“the applicant”), on 29 August 2017.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 9 January 2018 notice of the complaint concerning the applicant’s eviction was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lives in the Republic of Dagestan.
Between 1991 and 2009 the applicant worked in the Prosecutor’s office of the Astrakhan region (“the prosecutor’s office”).
On 8 July 2003 the Governor of the Astrakhan region decided that, in order to provide accommodation for prosecutors, the regional authorities should purchase such accommodation and transfer it to the regional prosecutor’s office for operational management as tied accommodation.
On 14 July 2003 the regional authorities bought a two-room flat in Akhtubinsk, Astrakhan Region.
According to the applicant, in July 2003 the prosecutor of Akhtubinsk allocated that flat to the applicant, as he was in need of housing.
In December 2003 the Governor amended his decision of 8 July 2003 and ordered that the purchased accommodation should be transferred to the prosecutor’s office for complimentary usage for a period of five years and not for operational management as tied accommodation.
On 22 January 2004 the regional authorities and the regional prosecutor’s office concluded an agreement concerning complimentary usage by the prosecutor’s office of regional property, including the flat provided to the applicant. The agreement was concluded for a period of five years and entered into force on the date of signature by the parties.
In 2009 the applicant retired but continued living in the flat. The prosecutor’s office did not ask him to vacate the flat when he retired.
In 2015 the regional authorities contacted the prosecutor’s office with the request that the 2004 agreement either be terminated or that an additional agreement be concluded in order to extend the 2004 agreement.
In September 2015 the prosecutor’s office replied that the agreement had come to an end in 2009, and there had therefore been no need to terminate it or to sign any additional agreement.
In March 2016 the regional authorities brought court proceedings seeking the eviction of the applicant and his family from the flat. They submitted that the flat in question had been the property of the Astrakhan region and had been transferred to the prosecutor’s office in 2004 for temporary use as tied accommodation for a period of five years. The agreement had come to an end on 22 January 2009. The applicant and his family had no legal grounds for occupying the flat and they therefore had to be evicted.
The applicant lodged a counter-claim against the regional authorities, seeking acknowledgement that he had de facto been using the flat as a social tenant and the conclusion of a social tenancy agreement with him. He submitted the following arguments:
- in 2003 the prosecutor of Akhtubinsk had allocated the flat to him because he had been in need of housing;
- he had not been aware of the agreement of 22 January 2004 concluded between the prosecutor’s office and the regional authorities;
- the flat had been allocated to him for an indefinite period of time without any indication of the temporary nature of such allocation;
- he and his family had been living in that flat since 2003 and had been paying charges for it and had paid for its renovation;
- his eviction would be in breach of the Housing Code.
The applicant also asked the court to dismiss the eviction claims as lodged out of time. In particular, the 2004 agreement had come to an end in January 2009 and the three-year time-limit for lodging the eviction claim had therefore expired in 2012.
The regional authorities submitted that it was not until 2015 that the prosecutor’s office had informed them that the agreement had come to an end in 2009. The three-year time-limit had therefore started running only in 2015.
On 1 June 2016 the Akhtubinskiy District Court (“the District Court”), in the Astrakhan region, held that the regional authorities had lodged their eviction claim in time and ordered the applicant and his family to be evicted. The District Court dismissed the applicant’s counter-claims. The District Court held, in particular, that the flat had been the property of the Astrakhan region and had been allocated to the applicant as tied accommodation for a five-year period provided for by the agreement of 22 January 2004. The applicant had retired from the prosecutor’s office, the five-year term had expired and therefore his right to occupy that flat had come to an end.
In his appeal against the judgment of 1 June 2016 the applicant submitted that the court had not examined his arguments, had arbitrarily deprived him and his family of home and put him ‒ a retired person with a minor child ‒ on the street. In particular, the flat in question had not been officially registered as a tied accommodation and he had been de facto using it as a social tenant.
On 28 September 2016 the Astrakhan Regional Court (“the Regional Court”) dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The Regional Court held, in particular, that between 2002 and 2009 the applicant had not been on the housing list and therefore he had not been in need of housing. The applicant had not provided any evidence to confirm that the prosecutor’s office had concluded a tenancy agreement with him in respect of the flat.
On 27 December 2016 a judge of the Regional Court refused the applicant’s request for the case to be referred on appeal to the court of cassation.
On 3 April 2017 a judge of the Supreme Court refused to refer the applicant’s cassation appeal to the Civil Chamber of the Supreme Court.