The case originated in an application (no. 28025/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Cypriot national, Mrs Eleni Kolona (“the applicant”), on 1 August 2003.
The applicant was represented before the Court by Mr A. Demetriades, a lawyer practising in . The Cypriot Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr P. Clerides, Attorney-General of the .
The applicant died on 23 December 2004. The application is being pursued by her husband, Mr C. Pappas, who is also the administrator of her estate.
On 4 November 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1926 and at the material time lived in Limassol. She died on 23 December 2004.
The deceased applicant was the owner (half-a-share) of a plot of land with a house on it in the  in the district of Limassol. The said house was the applicant's home.
By letter dated 22 May 1997 the applicant's lawyer at the time informed the Minister of Communications and Works that the applicant had found out, by chance, that the works planned to take place in her village would entail the compulsory acquisition of her house and its demolition. He further noted that the authorities had been misinformed that no one had been living in the house. He emphasised that the applicant would not consent to the loss of her home and would challenge any administrative act for its compulsory acquisition.
On 25 July 1997 a notice of compulsory acquisition of the applicant's property was published in the Official Gazette of the  (administrative act no. 908). The compulsory acquisition was for the purpose of the construction, improvement, alignment and surfacing of a public road. The notice stated as follows:
“Notification is hereby given that the immovable property described in the Schedule set out below is essential for the following purpose of public benefit, namely for the creation and development of roads in the Republic and its compulsory acquisition is imperative for the following reasons, namely the construction, improvement, alignment and surfacing of the road.”
On the same day a requisition order was issued under the Requisition of Property Law of 1962 (as amended) and published in the Official Gazette (no. 930):
“Because the immovable property described in the Schedule set out below ... is essential for the following purposes of public benefit, namely for the creation and development of public roads in the Republic or for any of these purposes and its requisition is imperative for the following reasons, namely the construction, improvement, alignment and surfacing of the Pelendri main road”
The initial duration of the order was for one year. It was subsequently extended until 23 July 1999 by publication in the Official Gazette of 12 June 1998 and until 22 July 2000 by publication in the Official Gazette of 18 June 1999.
By letter dated 29 July 1997 the applicant lodged an objection to the compulsory acquisition and requisition of her property with the Ministry of Communications and Works.
The applicant's objection was dismissed and on 15 May 1998 a compulsory acquisition order issued under the Compulsory Acquisition Law 1962 (Law 15/1962 as amended) was published in the Official Gazette (no. 576). The order referred to the earlier notice of compulsory acquisition.
On 14 July 1998 the applicant lodged a recourse before the Supreme Court (first instance administrative jurisdiction) seeking the annulment of the compulsory acquisition order. She claimed, inter alia, that the impugned administrative act would result in her forced displacement from her village and her ancestral roots.
On 19 July 2000, whilst the applicant's right of appeal was still in force, the Public Works Department of the Ministry of Communication and Works demolished the applicant's house.
On 23 August 2000 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court (revisional administrative jurisdiction) challenging the first instance judgment and the demolition of her house pending the expiration of her right to appeal. In her grounds of appeal she noted, inter alia, that the authorities had not taken possession of her property until 19 July 2000, namely, the day that they demolished her house and that following the expiry of the requisition order on 22 July 2000 no other requisition order had been issued. She further invoked Article 8 of the Convention.
“...
Whereas in accordance with the provisions of the Compulsory Acquisition Law, the compensation for the aforementioned acquisition was not paid or deposited.
Whereas the Acquiring Authority considers the immovable property which is described in the Schedule of this order which is part of the immovable property which is described in notice no. 908 as not required for the public benefit purposes which are referred to in notice no. 908.
For these reasons, the Minister of Communications and Works, exercising the powers granted to him by the Council of Ministers by section 7 of the Compulsory Acquisition Law ... with the present notification revokes notice no. 908/97 and order no. 567/98 in so far as they concern the immovable property described in the Schedule of this order”.
following your instructions we proceeded with the immediate demolition of the house on 19 and 20 July 2000 after repeated telephone conversations with the owner's son ...
Before the demolition process commenced we had a telephone conversation with the complainant's son and we once again mentioned the fact that we would proceed with the demolition of the house.
After this, once the house was opened up in the presence of the police, the Limassol District Officer, the Community Chairman and the Community Secretary of Pelendri village, all objects that were in the house were listed by all the abovementioned which were subsequently taken to a safe place and we proceeded to demolish the house”.
In the meantime, on 30 April 2002 a new notice of compulsory acquisition of the applicant's property was published in the Official Gazette (no. 443). Subsequently, on 17 May 2002 an order of compulsory acquisition (no. 499) was published.
On 29 May 2002 the applicant was offered the sum of CYP 12,500 as compensation for the compulsory acquisition of her property. The Government submitted that no agreement had been reached between the applicant and the authorities concerning the compensation.
On 18 February 2003 the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal (see paragraph 16 above). In particular, it held that the demolition could not be considered as “damage” connected to the compulsory acquisition order that had been revoked, since, as admitted also by the applicant, the demolition had been carried out after the revocation of that order and whilst the requisition order was still in force. The court noted that, in accordance with its jurisprudence, “damage” in this context should be a direct result of the contested act and not of another cause. Accordingly, the court concluded that no issue of “damage” arose and thus no further examination of the validity of the revoked compulsory acquisition order was justified. The court also pointed out that timely notification of the revocation, which had been the Government's responsibility, would have rendered further consideration of the recourse unnecessary and further, took into account the fact that the compulsory acquisition order had been revoked on the ground that the acquisition of the applicant's property was not necessary for the public benefit purposes stated in the initial notice of compulsory acquisition. The Supreme Court granted the costs of the proceedings, both first instance and appeal, in favour of the applicant.
In the meantime, on 29 September 2002, following the demolition of her house, the applicant lodged a recourse before the Supreme Court (first instance administrative jurisdiction) challenging the lawfulness of the decision and/or order to demolish her house and the act of demolition. She invoked Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 in this respect.
On 26 March 2002 the Supreme Court dismissed the recourse. The court held that the act of demolition had not been an executory administrative act but the implementation of the administrative act of requisition. Furthermore, the court considered that there had not been a violation of the applicant's rights under Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention. In this respect it noted that under Article 23 (3) of the Constitution limitations to property, by law, were permissible on certain grounds. In the event of a lawful limitation on property, the above Article provided for just compensation which was determined, in the case of disagreement, by the civil courts. The right therefore of the applicant to compensation for the expropriated property was safeguarded. Furthermore the court considered that, in the event the Supreme Court upheld an appeal lodged by the applicant and annulled the compulsory acquisition order, she would be able to claim compensation for any damage suffered as a result of the administrative act under Article 146 (6) of the Constitution.
On 7 May 2002 the applicant lodged an appeal before the Supreme Court (revisional administrative jurisdiction) against the first instance judgment. In her appeal grounds the applicant claimed, inter alia, that the demolition of her home violated her rights under Article 8 of the Convention and that the Supreme Court, at first instance, had wrongly omitted to examine Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and to find a violation of Article 13 of the Convention.
On 21 November 2006 the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the first instance judgment. In particular, it held that the demolition of the applicant's house had not been an executory administrative act. Furthermore, it considered that it was not necessary to examine the question whether the demolition came within the parameters of the requisition order since, even in the case of a negative reply, the act at issue would be that of unlawful trespass falling within the ambit of private law and not public law. A remedy for such an act could be sought only by way of action before the district court. The Supreme Court held that it did not have jurisdiction to examine the case further on the basis of Article 146 of the Constitution and it therefore did not examine the remaining grounds of appeal.
Article 23 of the  Constitution provides as follows, in so far as relevant:
“(1)  Every person, alone or jointly with others, has the right to acquire, own, possess, enjoy or dispose of any movable or immovable property and has the right to respect for such a right. The right of the Republic to underground water, minerals and antiquities is reserved.
(2)  No deprivation or restriction or limitation of any such right shall be made except as provided in this Article.
(3)  Restrictions or limitations which are absolutely necessary in the interests of public safety or public health or public morals, or town and country planning or the development and use of any property for the promotion of the public benefit or for the protection of the rights of others, may be imposed by law on the exercise of such a right.
Just compensation shall be promptly paid for any such restrictions or limitations which materially decrease the economic value of the property; in case of disagreement, such compensation is to be determined by a civil court.
(4)  Any movable or immovable property or any right over or interest in any such property may be compulsorily acquired by the Republic, or by a municipal corporation or by a commune for educational, religious, charitable or sporting institutions, bodies or establishments within its competence and only from the persons belonging to its respective community, or by a public corporation or a public utility body on which such a right has been conferred by law and only
(a)  for a purpose which is to the public benefit and shall be specially provided by a general law for compulsory acquisition which shall be enacted within a year from the date of the coming into operation of this Constitution;
(b)  when such purpose is established by a decision of the acquiring authority and made under the provisions of such law stating clearly the reasons for such acquisition;
(c)  upon payment in cash and in advance of just and equitable compensation, to be determined in case of disagreement by a civil court.
Any immovable property or any right over or interest in any such property compulsorily acquired shall only be used for the purpose for which it has been acquired. If within three years of the acquisition such purpose has not been attained, the acquiring authority shall, immediately after the expiration of the said period of three years, offer the property at the price it has been acquired to the person from whom it has been acquired. Such person shall be entitled within three months of the receipt of such offer to signify his acceptance or nonacceptance of the offer, and if he signifies acceptance, such property shall be returned to him immediately after his returning such price within a further period of three months from such acceptance.
...
Any movable or immovable property may be requisitioned by the Republic or by a Communal Chamber for the purposes of the educational, religious,, charitable or sporting institutions, bodies or establishments within its competence and only where the owner and the person entitled to possession of such property belong to the respective Community, and only
(a) for a purpose which is to the public benefit and shall be specially provided by a general law for requisitioning which shall be enacted within a year from the date of the coming into operation of this Constitution; and
(b) when such purpose is established by a decision of the requisitioning authority and made under the provisions of such law stating clearly the reasons for such requisitioning; and
(c) for a period not exceeding three years; and
(d) upon the prompt payment in cash of a just and equitable compensation to be determined in case of disagreement by a civil court.
...
Any interested person shall have the right of recourse to the court in respect of or under any of the provisions of this Article, and such recourse shall act as a stay of proceedings for the compulsory acquisition; and in case of any restriction or limitation imposed under paragraph 3 of this Article, the court shall have power to order stay of any proceedings in respect thereof.
Any decision of the court under this paragraph shall be subject to appeal.”
Article 146 of the Cyprus Constitution provides as follows, in so far as relevant:
“1. The Supreme Constitutional Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate finally on a recourse made to it on a complaint that a decision, an act or omission of any organ, authority or person, exercising any executive or administrative authority is contrary to any of the provisions of this Constitution or of any law or is made in excess or in abuse of powers vested in such organ or authority or person.
...
Upon such a recourse the Court may, by its decision-
(a) confirm, either in whole or in part, such decision or act or omission; or
(b) declare, either in whole or in part, such decision or act to be null and void and of no effect whatsoever, or
(c) declare that such omission, either in whole or in part, ought not to have been made and that whatever has been omitted should have been performed.
Any decision given under paragraph 4 of this Article shall be binding on all courts and all organs or authorities in the Republic and shall be given effect to and acted upon by the organ or authority or person concerned.
Any person aggrieved by any decision or act declared to be void under paragraph 4 of this Article or by any omission declared thereunder that it ought not to have been made shall be entitled, if his claim is not met to his satisfaction by the organ, authority or person concerned, to institute legal proceedings in a court for the recovery of damages or for being granted other remedy and to recover just and equitable damages to be assessed by the court or to be granted such other just and equitable remedy as such court is empowered to grant.”
Section 4 of the Compulsory Acquisition Law of 1962 (Law 15/162, as amended) provides as follows:
“Where any property is required to be compulsorily acquired for the purpose of a public benefit, the acquiring authority shall cause a notice of the intended acquisition in the form set out in the Schedule hereto ... to be published in the official Gazette of the Republic, containing a description of the property intended to be acquired, stating clearly the purpose for which it is required and the reasons for the acquisition, and calling upon any person interested in such property to submit to such authority within a specified time, being not less than two weeks from the date of the publication thereof, any objection which he may wish to raise to such acquisition ...”
Under section 8 (1) of the above law, the acquiring authority must within fourteen months from the publication of the notice of acquisition enter into negotiations for the acquisition of the property referred to in the notice through private agreement and the agreed determination of the compensation as well as its apportionment between all interested persons. If agreement is not reached within the period of time referred to above, the acquiring authority is obliged to make a direct offer of the compensation assessed by it.
Under section 9 of the same law, without prejudice to the provisions of section 8 above, if up to the publication of the acquisition order no agreement has been reached as provided by section 8, the acquiring authority or any interested person may by application ask the Court to determine the compensation to be paid for the acquisition as well as, when this is required, the apportionment of such compensation between the persons interested therein. The purpose of this type of proceedings is the determination of such compensation (Lina Neocleous v. The Attorney-General of Cyprus, Supreme Court judgment of 31 May 1992). Sections 10 and 11 of the above Law set out the rules governing the assessment and grant of the compensation.
Under section 3 of the Requisition of Property Law of 1962 (Law 21/62, as amended), in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the provisions of this Law, property may be requisitioned for public benefit purposes.
In so far as the duration of a requisition order is concerned, section 4 (3) of the above Law, provides as follows:
“The requisition order shall be in force for a period or periods not exceeding three years in total, specified in such order or, if nothing is provided there for, until three years have elapsed from the commencement of the coming into force of the requisition.
Provided that at any time during the period the requisition order is in force, the requisitioning authority may by an order published in the official gazette of the Republic -
(a) revoke the requisition order or,
(b) extend the period of time specified in the requisition order for a further period or periods, not exceeding the three years from the date on which the requisition order first came into force, as the requisitioning authority may deem necessary”.
Under sections 6 and 7 of the Requisition of Property Law, the requisitioning authority acquires a right to gain possession of the property to enable it to execute the works necessary for achieving the purpose specified in the order during the period that the requisition order was in force. In particular, section 6 (1) provides as follows:
“When by virtue of article 4 a requisition order is issued, possession of such property may be acquired by the requisitioning authority on the date specified by the said order as the date of commencement of the coming into force of the order or any later time, and be retained until the validity of such order is terminated as provided by this law”.
Sections 8 to 13 of this Law set out the rules governing the assessment and grant of the compensation to be awarded in respect of requisition of property. In particular, the relevant provisions of section 8 provide as follows:
“8 (1) The compensation payable with reference to the requisition of immovable property by virtue of the provisions of this law consists of the following amounts, namely –
...
(c) an amount equal to any diminution in the value of such property which may have resulted from the presence in or on such property, of any building or other construction, work or building of an annex, built or constructed or annexed by the requisitioning authority, or from any damage caused to such property during the period in which possession was retained by virtue of the requisition order, not taking into consideration natural wear and tear or any damage made good by the requisitioning authority.
...
(e) an amount equal to the reasonable expenditure incurred, other than on the part of the requisitioning authority, for the purpose of complying with the requisition order.
Provided that
...
(ii) an amount is not paid by virtue of paragraph (c) with reference to damage to immovable property, greater than the value of such property at the time when possession of it was acquired by virtue of the requisition order, not taking into consideration any increase in the value of the property resulting from the special circumstances under which the requisition of the said property was rendered necessary.
...
(4) Compensation due by virtue of paragraph (c) of section (1) is rendered claimable at the end of the period in which possession of the property was retained by virtue of the requisition order and is paid to the person who was the owner of the property at the time (such term also includes the person who is entitled to be registered as the owner of the property).
...”.
Under section 10 the requisitioning authority ought, at the earliest possible time from which the compensation for the requisition became claimable, enter into negotiations for the agreed determination and apportionment thereof among the interested parties. Section 11 states that if within three months from the date when the compensation became claimable no agreement is reached as provided by section 10 or, although the aforesaid period of three months has not elapsed, it is not foreseen that an agreement will be reached in the circumstances, the requisitioning authority or any interested party may ask the Court to proceed to the determination of such compensation or, where this is required, to the apportionment thereof among those interested therein.
In its judgment in the case of Athinoulla Tamasiou v. the Republic (judgment of 28 March 1991 in recourse 1133/90) the Supreme Court held, inter alia, the following:
“Requisition is an exceptional temporary measure. It is the temporary deprivation of possession, use and enjoyment of property.
Compulsory acquisition is a permanent measure of deprivation of property for the purposes specified in the Constitution and in accordance with the procedure provided for in the relevant legislation.
The limitation of the period of requisition to three years does not exclude the attainment of a public benefit purpose of much longer and even permanent duration. Commencement of the process for the compulsory acquisition of property, usually follows, or precedes the requisition, which is a temporary measure. When the process of acquisition and transfer of ownership is not complete but it is necessary to commence the execution of works for the public benefit, depending on the circumstances of the case, the property can be legally requisitioned for commencement of the works. In the event that the process of acquisition does not come through, payment of compensation is provided for both under paragraph 8 of Article 23 of the Constitution and section 8 of the Law, for anything done during the period of requisition under the requisition order, including the reinstatement of the property to its original state (status quo).
Works for improvement of roads do not affect the lawfulness of the requisition and are made for the purpose for which the requisition order was issued”.
In the above case the applicant in question had filed a recourse against the works that the authorities had commenced on her property on the basis of a requisition order which had been issued on the same day of the notice of compulsory acquisition. Her house had not been affected; only the outside part of the shops on the land had been affected without, however, any effect on their operation. Her recourse was dismissed on the basis that the acts she complained about did not constitute executory administrative acts.
Furthermore, in the case of Republic of Cyprus v. N. Pantelides and Others (judgment of 5 October 1993 in appeal 1487, 1993 3 A.D.D. 456) a requisition order had been issued in respect of part of the respondents' property. They then filed a recourse against that order and also applied for an interim order to suspend the execution of the order until the recourse was decided. The authorities had submitted that a notice of compulsory acquisition was going to be issued in the Official Gazette of the Republic. At first instance the Supreme Court found that the requisition order was unlawful and granted the application for the interim order. On appeal the Supreme Court set aside the first instance judgment and annulled the interim order. The Supreme Court, held, inter alia, that in accordance with the domestic jurisprudence the authority to issue a requisition order was independent of the authority to issue a compulsory acquisition order and, that the latter, was not a prerequisite for a requisition order, even if the nature of the works to be executed during the period of requisition for attaining its aim were of a permanent nature. In such a case an acquisition order would be issued to provide a legal basis for the works. The fact that a requisition order could only remain in force for a maximum period of three years did not exclude the carrying out of works within that period for the achievement of the purpose to the public benefit of a much longer or permanent duration.
The law of tort provides, inter alia, for actions claiming damages in respect of trespass to land. Under section 43 of the Civil Wrongs Law (Cap. 148) unlawful trespass to immovable property consists of any unlawful entry on, or unlawful damage to or unlawful interference with any such property by any person. Under this section trespass is actionable per se (see, amongst other authorities, Adrian Holdings Ltd v. , Civil Appeal 9486, Supreme Court judgment of 14 October 1998 and Papakokkinou v. Theodosiou (1991) 1 CLR 379, at p. 384).