The case originated in three applications (nos. 43519/07, 43524/07 and 45247/07) against the Republic of Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Serbian nationals, Mr Ivan Milojević (“the first applicant”), Mr Miodrag Radosavljević (“the second applicant”) and Mr Petar Veličković (“the third applicant”), on 5 September 2007 and 3 October 2007 respectively. They were born in 1978, 1952 and 1962.
The first and the second applicants, who live in Ćuprija, were represented by Mr M. Cvetković, a lawyer practising in Belgrade. The third applicant, who lives in Niš, was represented by Mr Z. Mitić, a lawyer practicing in Niš. The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms V. Rodić.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their dismissal violated their right to private life and that judicial decisions delivered in respect of their dismissals were arbitrary.
On 3 September 2013 complaints concerning the alleged violation of applicants’ right to private life and arbitrariness of judicial decisions were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible.
The applicants were employed as police officers. They were all charged with the commission of various criminal offences. They were dismissed from the police force pursuant to Article 45 of the Ministry of Interior Act 1991 which was in force at the time. Subsequently, all the applicants were acquitted. However, their dismissals remained in force. They unsuccessfully challenged their dismissals in civil proceedings before the national courts.
On 26 April 2004 a criminal complaint was lodged against the first applicant with the Jagodina District Court (“the District Court”). He was reported to have instigated his superior, the second applicant, to abuse his power. He was arrested the same day and criminal proceedings were instituted against him.
On 26 April 2004, simultaneously with the initiation of criminal proceedings, the Ministry of Interior instituted disciplinary proceedings against the applicant. He was suspended from the police force on the same day, pending the decision of the Disciplinary Court.
On 5 May 2004 the Ćuprija Municipal Prosecutor charged the applicant for alleged instigation to abuse of power.
On 7 June 2004 the competent directorate of the Ministry of the Interior rendered a decision by which the applicant was dismissed from the police force. The decision noted that criminal proceedings had been instituted against the applicant and that Article 45 of the Ministry of Interior Act 1991 which was in force at the time of the dismissal could be applied. The applicant lodged an appeal against this decision. On 16 July 2004 the Minister, acting as a second-instance administrative body, rejected his appeal, confirming the dismissal.
On 27 August 2004 the disciplinary proceedings against the applicant were stopped without any decision on the merits. The Disciplinary Court concluded that the applicant had already been dismissed from the police force as a result of the initiation of the criminal proceedings against him and that this fact rendered the disciplinary proceedings redundant.
On 29 November 2004 the Ćuprija Municipal Court (“the Municipal Court”) acquitted the applicant. The Prosecutor appealed against this decision. On 29 March 2005 the District Court confirmed the Municipal Court’s decision and the applicant’s acquittal became final.
Shortly after the applicant’s acquittal in the criminal proceedings, he instituted civil proceedings in which he requested the annulment of the above decisions on dismissal. On 10 March 2006 the Municipal Court accepted the applicant’s claim and ordered the Ministry of Interior to reinstate him in his former post. The court held that the formulation of Article 45 of the 1991 Ministry of Interior Act left broad discretionary powers to the Ministry of Interior to dismiss its employees even when no criminal responsibility was attributable to them. It concluded that this legal solution “most certainly left the possibility of abuse of this authority.” It also observed that the applicant had been acquitted in criminal proceedings instituted against him. Finally, the court noted that the applicant had been dismissed without any determination of his disciplinary responsibility but solely through the use of the discretionary power given to the Ministry by Article 45 of the 1991 Ministry of Interior Act and without any further reasoning.
The Ministry of the Interior appealed against this decision. On
The Ministry of the Interior lodged an appeal on points of law before the Supreme Court. On 25 April 2007 the Supreme Court quashed the District Court’s decision and decided that the applicant’s dismissal was lawful. According to the Supreme Court, the Ministry of Interior had used its discretionary power under Article 45 of the Ministry of Interior Act 1991 in accordance with the law. It concluded that the applicant’s acquittal in the criminal proceedings and the absence of a decision on the merits in the disciplinary proceedings were irrelevant to his dismissal. It also held that the lower courts had overstepped the limits of their authority in considering the necessity, proportionality and correctness of the dismissal decision.
On 26 April 2004 a criminal complaint was lodged against the second applicant with the District Court. He was alleged to have committed the crime of abuse of power. He was arrested the same day and criminal proceedings were instituted against him.
On 26 April 2004, simultaneously with the initiation of the criminal proceedings, the Ministry of Interior instituted disciplinary proceedings against the applicant. He was suspended from the police force on the same day, pending the decision of the Disciplinary Court.
On 5 May 2004 the Municipal Prosecutor charged the applicant with alleged abuse of power.
On 7 June 2004 the Ministry of Interior rendered a decision by which the applicant was dismissed from the police force. The reasoning of the decision was identical to that in the case of the first applicant. The applicant appealed against this decision. On 19 July 2004, the second-instance administrative body confirmed the decision.
On 27 August 2004 the disciplinary proceedings against the applicant were stopped without any decision on the merits for the same reasons as in the case of the first applicant.
On 29 November 2004 the Municipal Court acquitted the applicant. The prosecutor lodged an appeal which was dismissed on 29 March 2005 by the District Court. It confirmed the Municipal Court’s decision and the applicant’s acquittal became final.
The applicant instituted civil proceedings after the acquittal, in which he requested the annulment of the above decision on dismissal. On 25 April 2005 the Municipal Court accepted the applicant’s claim and ordered the Ministry of Interior to reinstate him in his previously held post. The reasoning of the court was the same as in the case of the first applicant.
The Ministry of the Interior appealed against this decision. On 8 July 2005 the District Court upheld the decision and reasoning of the Municipal Court.
The Ministry of the Interior lodged an appeal on points of law. On 27 March 2007 the Supreme Court quashed the above decisions on the same grounds as in the case of the first applicant.
On 19 October 1999, the Vranje District Prosecutor lodged an indictment with the Vranje District Court (“the District Court”) against the third applicant for the alleged unauthorised possession of weapons and ammunition. On 17 December 1999 the Vranje District Court found him guilty as charged and sentenced him to one year of imprisonment.
On 14 June 2000 the Ministry of Interior rendered a decision by which the applicant was dismissed from the police force with the same reasoning as in the case of the first and the second applicants. The applicant appealed. On 13 July 2000 the second-instance administrative body confirmed the above decision. No disciplinary proceedings were instituted against the applicant.
On 6 November 2001 the Supreme Court confirmed the applicant’s conviction in criminal proceedings. The applicant lodged a request for the re-opening of the proceedings, which was granted. On 2 September 2005 the Vranje District Court acquitted the applicant. The Prosecutor appealed against this decision. On 22 February 2006 the Supreme Court confirmed the acquittal.
Shortly after the applicant was acquitted in the criminal proceedings, he instituted civil proceedings in which he requested the annulment of the 14 June 2000 decision on dismissal.
On 18 October 2006 the Vranje Municipal Court accepted the applicant’s claim and ordered the Ministry of the Interior to reinstate the applicant in his previously held post. The Ministry of the Interior appealed. On 7 February 2007 the Vranje District Court quashed this decision, giving essentially the same reasons as in the decisions of the Supreme Court delivered in the cases of the first and the second applicant. The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law. On 3 August 2007 the Supreme Court upheld the District Court’s decision.
In the criminal proceedings against the third applicant, another police officer, G.M. was a co-defendant. G.M. was charged with the same crime as the applicant and was acquitted. He is still employed as a police officer.
The third applicant also instituted a separate set of civil proceedings in which he requested compensation for non-pecuniary damage related to his unlawful detention, stress sustained in prison and the loss of reputation caused by the imprisonment. On 10 October 2008 the Gnjilane Municipal Court partially accepted the applicant’s claim and awarded him 780,000 dinars (RSD), (approximately 6,330 euros (EUR)). On 18 December 2008 the Gnjilane District Court partially upheld this decision, decreasing the awarded amount to RSD 530,000 (approximately EUR 5,640). The awarded sum was paid to the applicant accordingly.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
Everyone shall have the right to a public hearing before an independent and impartial tribunal established by the law within a reasonable time which shall pronounce judgment on their rights and obligations, grounds for suspicion resulting in initiated procedure and accusations brought against them.”
The relevant provisions of this Act read as follows:
A person can be employed by the Ministry of Interior in the post of police officer and employee responsible for specific duties if, besides fulfilling the general requirements for employment in the civil service, he also fulfils the following special requirements:
1) that the person was not convicted of criminal offences against constitutional order and security, the armed forces, economy and property, abuse of power and crimes motivated by financial gain or immoral motives;
2) that no criminal proceedings are pending against the person for criminal offences which are prosecuted ex officio and that there is no protective measure established by a final decision of the court precluding the applicant from employment or conduct of duties, as long as such protective measure is in force.
An employee of the Ministry of Interior shall be dismissed ex lege if convicted by a final decision of a court for crimes enumerated in Article 34(1)(1) of this Act; an employee of the Ministry of Interior can also be dismissed if he or she ceases to fulfil the requirements of Article 34(1) or (2) of this Act or it is subsequently discovered that he or she did not meet the requirements for employment in the civil service at the time of employment.”
In 2005 the Ministry of Interior Act 1991 was repealed and the Police Act 2005 was adopted following an official letter of the Constitutional Court instructing the Parliament to clarify the reasons for the dismissal of police officers against whom criminal proceedings were initiated. The Constitutional Court in its letter also requested the Parliament to determine the rights of those officers who were acquitted or against whom the charges were dropped. Article 165(3) of the Police Act 2005 provides that a police officer can only be suspended pending criminal proceedings.
The relevant provision of this Act reads as follows:
A person can join the civil service provided that he or she:
1) is a national of SFR Yugoslavia;
2) is over 18 years old;
3) fulfils general health requirements;
4) has adequate education;
5) has never been sentenced for the commission of a crime to more than 6 months’ imprisonment and has never been convicted for a crime which makes that person unsuitable for the civil service;
6) fulfils other requirements provided by law or other rules or by the act on systematisation of a particular organ.”
Article 426 § 11 of the 2011 Act provides that terminated civil proceedings may be reopened if it subsequently becomes possible for a party in civil proceedings to rely on a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights finding a violation of a human right, which could have resulted in a more favourable decision in the domestic proceedings.
The Constitutional Court has so far delivered two decisions in cases with essentially the same factual background as those in the present cases (Stefanović v. Serbia, UŽ-753/2008, 19 January 2011 and Radovanović v. Serbia, UŽ-1757/2009, 27 September 2012). The relevant parts of the decision of 27 September 2012 read as follows:
“The Constitutional Court finds that Article 45 of the Ministry of Interior Act provides for a possibility, but not an obligation, of delivering a decision on termination of employment of a police officer when criminal proceedings are opened against him for criminal offences that are prosecuted ex officio.
Therefore, the only condition that needs to be met at the moment of the delivery of the decision on termination of employment which is founded on the discretionary power from the quoted provision of the Act is that criminal proceedings against a police officer are ongoing.
In the opinion of the Constitutional Court, the possibility of dismissing a police officer in accordance with Article 45 of the Ministry of Interior Act was introduced precisely for the purpose of protecting the specific nature of the Ministry’s work and its particular significance for State affairs. On the other hand, the actual utilisation of this possibility presupposes the limitation of the rights of individuals for the protection of the public interest. Every limitation of individual rights must be necessary for the achievement of a legitimate goal and that goal is, in this case, the protection of the interests of police integrity.
The Constitutional Court points out that the civil courts in labour disputes, when deciding on the annulment of an act delivered on the basis of discretionary power, are bound to examine the lawfulness of such acts. In this particular case, this means that the civil courts should have examined if the decision on the termination of employment could be delivered and if the conditions for its delivery required by law were met. This means that the legality of the decision on termination of employment should be assessed in the light of the circumstances of a specific case at the moment of the delivery of the decision. It is the Constitutional Court’s opinion that the subsequent acquittal of the applicant in the criminal proceedings cannot be of relevance when assessing the legality of the impugned decision on termination of employment, since the Ministry of Interior Act prescribes as the only condition for the dismissal the initiation of the criminal proceedings at the time of the delivery of the decision.
The Ministry of Interior Act, however, has no instructions on the legal consequences of the final judgment of a criminal court by which the defendant is acquitted and the influence of such decision on the police officer’s dismissal.
Since the Ministry of Interior Act gives discretionary power to the competent authority to use or not to use its right to dismiss a police officer if criminal proceedings are instituted against him, and since no provision of this Act provides an answer on what are the legal consequences of the acquittal of the former employee, the Constitutional Court holds that in this particular case it was necessary for the civil courts to assess, besides the legality of the decision on dismissal, the issue of the proportionality between the legitimate aim which was sought to be achieved by these decisions on one side and individual rights on the other.
The ordinary courts in this case failed to assess the nature of the limited rights, the aim of that limitation, the achievement of such aim and proportionality between the legitimate aim and the consequences of the limitation of individual rights produced by the decision on dismissal reached in accordance with discretionary powers from Article 45 of the Ministry of Interior Act [...], which resulted in violation of the applicant’s right to a fair trial and his right to work.”
In its decision of 19 January 2011 the Constitutional Court also noted:
“The Constitutional Court finds that the potential use of discretionary powers [under Article 45 of the Ministry of Interior Act] contrary to the purpose for which it was established, or potential abuse of such power, had to be a subject of deliberation in the civil proceedings against the impugned decision on dismissal before the ordinary courts. In the opinion of the Constitutional Court, these proceedings are a ‘corrective measure’ in cases where the discretionary power was used contrary to the purpose for which it was established, especially since the Ministry of Interior Act did not prescribe what will happen to an employee who was dismissed [on the grounds of Article 45], but who was acquitted by a final decision in criminal proceedings or the indictment against him was withdrawn.
 [...]
On the basis of what has been stated, the Constitutional Court holds that, from the perspective of the right to fair trial, the ordinary courts were obliged to examine if in this specific case the discretionary power of the employer prescribed by Article 45 of the Ministry of Interior Act was exercised contrary to its purpose...
 The Constitutional Court holds that the impugned judgments of the District Court [...] and the Supreme Court [...] violated the applicant’s right to fair trial...”