The case originated in an application (no. 15379/16) against the Kingdom of Norway lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Somali national, Ms Mariya Abdi Ibrahim (“the applicant”), on 17 March 2016.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms A. Lutina, a lawyer practising in Oslo. The Norwegian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr M. Emberland of the Office of the Attorney-General (Civil Affairs).
The applicant alleged that there had been a violation of her rights under Articles 8 and 9 of the Convention when the domestic authorities had consented to her son being adopted by his foster parents.
On 20 September 2016 the application was communicated to the Government. In the Court’s letters of 11 September 2019, the parties were invited to make any submissions they might wish on the possible relevance of the Grand Chamber’s judgment in the case of Strand Lobben and Others v. Norway ([GC], no. 37283/13) to the instant case. Both parties made additional submissions further to that invitation.
Written submissions were received from the Government of the Czech Republic, which had been granted leave to intervene as a third party in the proceedings in accordance with Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in Somalia in 1993. In 2009 she left her home unaccompanied while she was pregnant. The father came from the same city as the applicant. They were not married and he did not acknowledge paternity. The applicant went to her uncle in Kenya and in traumatic circumstances there she gave birth to her son, X, in November 2009.
In February 2010 the applicant left Kenya with X. They first went to Sweden, before applying for asylum in Norway that same month. The applicant was granted a temporary residence permit with refugee status in Norway by a decision dated 4 June 2010. She has two cousins in Norway.
In order to be assisted in caring for X, the applicant and X went to a parent-child institution in 2010. On 28 September, the institution sent a notification of concern to the child welfare services, as it found X to be at risk of harm in the care of the applicant. The notification stated in conclusion the following:
According to the institution, the applicant had been informed of these concerns via an interpreter the day before.
X was then placed in emergency foster care and on 6 November 2010 the municipality applied to the County Social Welfare Board (fylkesnemnda for barnevern og sosiale saker) for a care order. The applicant opposed the application and lodged alternative claims for X to be placed in her cousin’s home or in a Somali or Muslim foster home. Her claims to that effect were not heard; the Board issued a care order on 10 December 2010 and granted her contact rights of two hours, four times yearly; X was placed in care with a Christian family on 13 December 2010. The child welfare services were authorised to supervise the contact sessions.
The applicant brought the Board’s decision before the District Court and during the hearing before that court dropped the alternative claim for X to be placed in a Somali or Muslim foster home.
In its judgment of 6 September 2011 the District Court upheld the Board’s decision in respect of the care order but altered the decision on contact rights and fixed those at one hour, six times yearly. It based its decision on contact rights, inter alia, on the need for X to keep in touch with his cultural background and on its opinion that it was, at the time, uncertain whether the applicant’s care skills would improve and, accordingly, whether the care order would be long-term. At the same time, it found that X’s vulnerability and need for peace and stability in his care situation did not indicate frequent contact. There is no information about the applicant having appealed against the District Court’s judgment.
On 11 September 2013 the child welfare services applied to the County Social Welfare Board for an order to withdraw the applicant’s parental responsibilities for X, and for consent to the foster parents’ adopting him. An alternative claim that the applicant be refused contact with X was also lodged.
The Board, composed of one lawyer qualified to act as a professional judge, one psychologist and one lay person, heard the case from 27 to 28 February 2014. The meeting was attended by the municipality’s representative and its counsel, and the applicant and her counsel. Twelve witnesses and an expert testified.
In its decision of 21 March 2014 the Board granted the child welfare services’ principal request. It found that X had become so attached to his foster parents that removing him from the foster home could lead to serious problems for him and, also, that the applicant would be permanently unable to provide him with proper care. Based on an overall assessment of the general and individual factors in the case, the Board found that there were particularly compelling reasons for granting consent for the foster parents to adopt X. In its view, adoption would be in X’s best interests as it would create stability and security for him. Adoption would also be more effective than long-term foster placement in contributing to his healing at the personality level (tilheling på det personlighetsmessige plan). It stated that X’s rights would be strengthened and that he would gain a stronger identity as a member of a caring family.
Upon the applicant’s appeal against the Board’s decision, the District Court held a hearing from 4 to 6 November 2014. The court’s bench was composed of one professional judge, one psychologist and one lay person. Eight witnesses were called. An expert witness attended and was present throughout the hearing, and testified after the other evidence had been presented.
In its judgment of 21 November 2014, the District Court upheld the Board’s decision. The District Court endorsed the Board’s grounds for depriving the applicant of parental responsibility and granting consent for adoption, and referred to the Board’s reasons, but with some specifications and additions.
On further appeal by the applicant, the High Court held a hearing from 12 to 13 May 2015. The High Court’s bench comprised three professional judges, one psychologist and one lay person. The applicant attended, together with her counsel. Eight witnesses gave evidence, of whom four, including psychologists S.H.G. and K.P., gave expert testimony. Before the High Court, the applicant acknowledged that X had become so attached to his foster parents that to return to her would be difficult. She also accepted that X had had reactions to contact sessions and admitted that it might be the case that contact should be avoided at certain periods in the future, but she would not apply for his return and at that time it could not, she maintained, be concluded with certainty that any contact with her in the future would not be in X’s best interests. In particular she argued that his need to keep in touch with his cultural and religious roots indicated that the possibility for contact should also be ensured in the future.
In its judgment of 27 May 2015 the High Court stated that the parties agreed that X had become so attached to his foster parents that removing him could lead to serious problems for him, and that a unanimous High Court agreed with the parties on this point. It went on to reiterate that X had been placed with the foster parents when he was one year old and had, at the time of its judgment, been there for four and a half years. Before this, he had spent two and a half months in an emergency foster home. He had only lived with his biological mother for the first ten months of his life. He regarded the foster parents as his parents and all available information indicated that he was strongly attached to them.
In addition, X was a vulnerable child with special care needs. It had to be assumed that he would be at particular risk of serious harm if he were removed from the environment he was used to and placed in the care of his biological mother, with whom he had only had sporadic contact. Since a return to the applicant was in any event not at stake (ei tilbakeføring under alle omstende [er] uaktuell), it was unnecessary to decide on whether the applicant would be permanently incapable of providing appropriate care for him.
The decision in the case rested on an assessment of whether adoption would be in X’s best interests. A majority in the High Court concluded that it would, and mostly agreed with the grounds given for this in the Board’s decision and the District Court’s judgment.
In the majority’s view, there were several risk factors relating to the applicant’s ability to provide proper care. There had also been many (fleire) who had observed that the applicant had had serious difficulties caring for X during the first year in Norway. At the time of the High Court’s judgment, the applicant had become older and seemed more mature. Given her age and history, it was understandable that she had had considerable challenges in respect of caring for X. X had to be regarded as a child with special care needs and appeared to have possible early attachment disorder. The majority found that he had been subjected to gross neglect, both practically and emotionally. The parent-child institution had referred to him being in physical danger several times during their stay there. Another witness, M.L., had also been concerned about the applicant’s ability to care for X on a practical level. To the High Court, the most central aspect of the neglect nonetheless appeared to be the lack of emotional contact and security.
The High Court’s majority stated that the above could be a reflection of the applicant’s functioning and life situation during the pregnancy, birth and postnatal period, but it had all the same created a serious situation for X and his development. He had displayed trauma reactions when seeing his mother again. These reactions following contact sessions could, for example, be that he screamed for several hours at a time, or was agitated and anxious for several days. The reactions had been noticed at the kindergarten too. His reactions had been observed both during and after the contact sessions. The hospital had also made a statement regarding these reactions. The majority disagreed with psychologist S.H.G., who had been of the view that X’s reactions could be related to his emergency placement in care in 2010, as it found it unlikely that a separation when X had been ten months old could give such reactions later in his life.
X had become calmer after contact sessions had been discontinued in 2013. Since then, he had allegedly only met the applicant twice. It had been very stressful for him to experience these emotional outbursts after contact sessions with the applicant. He was still vulnerable to sounds, large crowds and too many stimuli. This indicated that he was highly sensitive, which was to be expected in someone who was displaying reactions to trauma.
In the majority’s view, X needed to feel as secure as possible in his relationships. He needed stability, calm and continuity where he lived at the time – in the foster home. The better mental development that could be secured, the better equipped he would be to deal with any identity issues that could arise during his adolescence. All the available information suggested that X had a strong and fundamental attachment to his foster parents and foster family. Great emphasis had to be placed on this relationship, in line with the case-law of the Supreme Court.
The considerations of ensuring that a particularly vulnerable child would have a continued attachment to the environment in which he was deeply rooted had to be weighed against other weighty considerations that applied. The High Court reiterated that in all cases adoption entailed a breach of the biological principle, which held a very strong position in any decision. In the instant case, the foster parents had not been willing to carry out an “open adoption” with contact visits for the applicant also in the future, and there were additional aspects in the case related to ethnicity, culture and religion, and also religious conversion. The fact that the applicant was a Muslim and the intended foster parents Christian raised special issues that were further highlighted by the latter being active Christians who intended to baptise the adopted child.
The High Court noted that the County Social Welfare Board, in connection with the care order, had commented on the choice of foster home based on ethnic, cultural and religious considerations. Further information about which assessments had been carried out by the child welfare services when X had been placed in a foster home with ethnically Norwegian parents had not emerged during the presentation of evidence, but the High Court assumed that there had been no available foster parents with a more similar cultural background. It was known that there was a serious shortage of foster parents from minority backgrounds. The High Court stated that regardless of how one otherwise looked upon the choice of foster home, the placement that had initially been made had a bearing on the assessment of what was in the best interests of X at the time of its judgment.
In the foster home, X had been brought up in accordance with his foster parents’ values. It had to be assumed that it was these values that he regarded as his own and identified with at the time of the High Court’s assessment. In this situation, consideration of the ethnicity, culture and religion of the biological family had to carry less weight than it would otherwise. In the event of a further foster home placement, X would also be exposed to the values that the foster parents abided by. There was nonetheless an important distinction between being a foster child and an adopted child, since the parents, if the child were adopted, planned to baptise him and change his name. The applicant would experience this as a final break with the religious values she held, and would find it difficult to accept. It was possible to feel that it would be a more flexible solution to postpone the baptism until the child himself could decide in the matter when he turned fifteen, but the majority still could not see that these circumstances carried decisive weight against adoption.
The High Court’s majority considered that a further foster home placement could give rise to trouble in connection with the applicant’s wishes that X for example be circumcised, attend Koran school and follow Muslim food traditions. Her statement in the High Court that she at the time had seen it as best for X to remain with his foster parents had not been called into question, but the High Court was somehow uncertain (noko usikker) as to how permanent this opinion would be, and whether demands for X to be returned to her care would be made in future. A vulnerable boy such as X required a calm and stable situation. Adoption would create clarity, strengthen X’s identity development and make him an equal member of the family.
In the light of the above, the High Court’s majority found that there were particularly compelling reasons for allowing the adoption and thus voted to dismiss the applicant’s appeal. The minority found that the reasons for allowing the adoption were not sufficiently compelling, but that there were reasons for not granting her contact rights for the time being.
On 23 September 2015 the Supreme Court’s Appeals Leave Committee (Høyesteretts ankeutvalg) refused the applicant leave to appeal.
Articles 102 and 104 of the Norwegian Constitution of 17 May 1814 (Grunnloven), as revised in May 2014, read as follows:
It follows from the Supreme Court’s case-law – for instance its judgment of 29 January 2015 (Norsk Retstidende (Rt.) 2015 page 93, paragraphs 57 and 67) – that the above provisions are to be interpreted and applied in the light of their international law models, which include the Convention and the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights.
Section 4-20 of the Child Welfare Act of 17 July 1992 (barnevernloven) reads:
“If a county social welfare board has made a care order for a child, the county social welfare board may also decide that the parents shall be deprived of all parental responsibility. If, as a result of the parents being deprived of parental responsibility, the child is left without a guardian, the county social welfare board shall as soon as possible take steps to have a new guardian appointed for the child.
When an order has been made depriving the parents of parental responsibility, the county social welfare board may give its consent for a child to be adopted by people other than the parents.
Consent may be given if
(a) it must be regarded as probable that the parents will be permanently unable to provide the child with proper care or the child has become so attached to persons and the environment where he or she is living that, on the basis of an overall assessment, removing the child may lead to serious problems for him or her, and
(b) adoption would be in the child’s best interests, and
(c) the adoption applicants have been the child’s foster parents and have shown themselves fit to bring up the child as their own, and
(d) the conditions for granting an adoption under the Adoption Act are satisfied.
When the county social welfare board consents to adoption, the Ministry shall issue the adoption order.”
Other relevant materials of domestic and international law are reiterated in the Court’s recent judgment in the case of Strand Lobben and Others v. Norway [GC], no. 37283/13, §§ 122-139, 10 September 2019, to which reference is made.