The case originated in an application (no. 41738/10) against the Kingdom of Belgium lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Georgie Paposhvili (“the applicant”), on 23 July 2010. The applicant died on 7 June 2016. On 20 June 2016 the applicant’s family, namely his wife, Ms Nino Kraveishvili, and their three children, Ms Ziala Kraveishvili, Ms Sophie Paposhvili and Mr Giorgi Paposhvili, expressed the wish to pursue the proceedings before the Court.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms J. Kern, a lawyer practising in Antwerp, and Ms C. Verbrouck, a lawyer practising in Brussels. The Belgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr M. Tysebaert, Senior Adviser, Federal Justice Department.
On 23 July 2010 the applicant applied to the Court requesting interim measures under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, with a view to staying execution of the order to leave the country. Alleging that his removal to Georgia would expose him to risks to his life and physical well-being and would infringe his right to respect for his family life, the applicant claimed to be a victim of a potential violation of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Convention. Although the domestic proceedings had not yet been concluded at the time the application was lodged, the applicant nevertheless argued that the remedies in question would not have the effect of staying execution of his removal. On 28 July 2010, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, the Court requested the Government not to remove the applicant pending the outcome of the proceedings before the Aliens Appeals Board.
The application was assigned to the Fifth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1). A Chamber of that Section composed of Mark Villiger, President, Angelika Nußberger, Boštjan M. Zupančič, Ann Power-Forde, Ganna Yudkivska, Paul Lemmens and Aleš Pejchal, judges, and Claudia Westerdiek, Section Registrar, delivered a judgment on 17 April 2014. The Chamber unanimously declared the application admissible and held that the enforcement of the decision to remove the applicant to Georgia would not entail a violation of Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention. It held by a majority that there had been no violation of Article 8 of the Convention. A dissenting opinion by Judge Pejchal was annexed to the judgment. On 14 July 2014, in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention, the applicant requested the referral of the case to the Grand Chamber. The panel of the Grand Chamber granted the request on 20 April 2015.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined in accordance with Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
From the deliberations of 21 June 2016 onwards, Guido Raimondi, the newly elected President of the Court, replaced Dean Spielmann. From the deliberations of 22 September 2016 onwards, Nebojša Vučinić, substitute judge, replaced Johannes Silvis, who was prevented from sitting (Rule 24 § 3).
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The Georgian Government exercised their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (a)). The Human Rights Centre of Ghent University, a non-governmental organisation, was granted leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 16 September 2015 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Verbrouck, Ms Kern, Mr Motulsky, Ms Niedlispacher and Mr Baramidze, and their replies to the questions asked by one of the judges.
The applicant was born in 1958. He lived in Brussels and died there on 7 June 2016.
He arrived in Belgium via Italy on 25 November 1998, accompanied by his wife and a six-year-old child. The applicant claimed to be the father of the child, an assertion which the Government contested. The couple subsequently had a child together in August 1999 and another in July 2006.
On 29 December 1998 the applicant was arrested and taken into custody on charges of theft. On 14 April 1999 he received a sentence of seven months’ imprisonment, which was suspended except for the period of pretrial detention.
In 1999 and 2000 the applicant and his wife were arrested on several occasions in connection with theft offences.
On 28 April 2000 the applicant’s wife was sentenced to four months’ imprisonment for theft.
On 18 December 2001 the applicant was convicted of a number of offences including robbery with violence and threats, and received a sentence of fourteen months’ imprisonment, which was suspended except for the period of pre-trial detention.
On 9 November 2005 the applicant was sentenced by the Ghent Court of Appeal to three years’ imprisonment for involvement in a criminal organisation with a view to securing pecuniary advantage using intimidation, deception or corruption.
Having already spent time in pre-trial detention, he was subsequently detained in Forest Prison and then in Merksplas Prison, where he continued to serve his sentence.
On 26 November 1998, the day after their arrival, the applicant and his wife lodged an asylum application.
As the applicant’s wife stated that she had travelled through Germany, a request to take back the applicant and his family was sent to the German authorities under the Dublin Convention of 15 June 1990 determining the State responsible for examining applications for asylum lodged in one of the Member States of the European Communities (“the Dublin Convention”).
After the German authorities had refused the request, it transpired that the applicant and his family were in possession of a Schengen visa issued by the Italian authorities. A request to take charge of them was therefore sent to the Italian authorities and was accepted on 4 June 1999.
On 22 September 1999 the applicant lodged a further asylum application, using a false identity. It was immediately rejected after his fingerprints had been checked.
On 23 October 2000 the Aliens Office informed the applicant’s lawyer that the proceedings concerning the asylum application of 26 November 1998 had been concluded on 11 June 1999 with the refusal of the application.
On 20 March 2000 the applicant lodged a first request for regularisation for a period of more than three months, on the basis of section 9(3) (since 1 June 2007, section 9bis) of the Aliens (Entry, Residence, Settlement and Expulsion) Act of 15 December 1980 (“the Aliens Act”). In support of his request the applicant stated that he and his wife had a daughter born in Georgia before their arrival in Belgium and another daughter born in Belgium in 1999.
On 30 March 2004 the Aliens Office declared the request devoid of purpose as the applicant had left the country and been intercepted in Germany. It found that the request was in any case unfounded in view of the fact that the applicant’s medical treatment for tuberculosis had ended (see paragraph 49 below). The Aliens Office also referred to the applicant’s lack of integration in Belgium and the numerous breaches of public order he had committed.
On 28 April 2004 the applicant lodged a second request for regularisation of his residence status on the basis of section 9(3) of the Aliens Act. He cited as exceptional circumstances the duration of his residence in Belgium and his integration into Belgian society, the risks that a return to Georgia would entail for his children’s schooling, the fact that he had been the victim of persecution and his state of health.
The Aliens Office declared the request inadmissible on 5 April 2007 on the ground that the evidence adduced did not amount to exceptional circumstances for the purposes of section 9(3) of the Act such as to warrant the lodging of the request in Belgium rather than with the competent diplomatic mission or consulate, as was the rule. The Aliens Office noted that the applicant had been allowed to remain in the country for the sole purpose of the asylum proceedings, which had been concluded by a final decision. It also cited as reasons the lack of any need for medical supervision, the applicant’s precarious and unlawful residence status, the absence of a risk of persecution in Georgia and the possibility for the children to continue their schooling in that country.
In a judgment of 29 February 2008 the Aliens Appeals Board rejected an application by the applicant to set aside the Aliens Office’s decision. It noted in particular that, since the decision complained of had not been accompanied as such by a removal measure, it could not give rise to a risk of violation of Article 3 of the Convention.
On 10 September 2007, relying on the same grounds as those invoked under section 9ter of the Aliens Act (see paragraph 54 below) and on his family situation, the applicant lodged a request for regularisation on exceptional grounds under section 9bis of the Aliens Act.
On 7 July 2010 the Aliens Office refused the request for regularisation, taking the view that the protection of the State’s best interests took precedence over the applicant’s social and family interests and that by committing serious punishable acts the applicant himself had placed his family’s unity in jeopardy. That decision was served on the applicant on 11 July 2010.
On 26 July 2010 the applicant lodged a request with the Aliens Appeals Board under the ordinary procedure for a stay of execution of the decision of 7 July 2010 rejecting his request for regularisation of his status, together with an application to have that decision set aside. In so far as necessary, the application also related to the order to leave the country issued on the same date (see paragraph 78 below). The applicant alleged a violation of Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention and argued that his serious health problems amounted to exceptional humanitarian circumstances as defined by the Court in D. v. the United Kingdom (2 May 1997, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1997III), that he would not have access to treatment in Georgia and that the discontinuation of treatment would lead to his premature death. He further alleged an infringement of Article 8 of the Convention and of the International Convention on the Rights of the Child, on the ground that if he were returned to Georgia he would be separated from his family permanently.
The request and application were refused by the Aliens Appeals Board in a judgment of 16 March 2015 on the ground that the applicant had not attended the hearing or been represented.
On 5 November 2009 the applicant’s wife lodged a request for regularisation on exceptional grounds under section 9bis of the Aliens Act, relying on her family situation and the duration of her residence in Belgium.
On 29 July 2010 she and her three children were granted indefinite leave to remain.
In 2006, while the applicant was in prison (see paragraph 17 above), he was diagnosed with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia in Binet stage B, with a very high level of CD38 expression. No treatment was commenced.
As his health had deteriorated, the applicant was admitted to the Bruges prison hospital complex from 14 August to 23 October 2007 in order to receive a course of chemotherapy.
A report prepared on 11 February 2008 by Antwerp University Hospital, where the applicant was being treated, stated that his condition was life-threatening and that, on the basis of the averages observed in 2007, his life expectancy was between three and five years. The report stated that, following treatment, his white blood cell count had fallen significantly.
From 8 to 14 May 2010 the applicant was confined to hospital in Turnhout with respiratory problems. The medical report concerning his stay recommended that the applicant be treated as an outpatient by a lung specialist and a haematologist. This treatment did not materialise on his return to Merksplas Prison, where he was being held.
On 22 July 2010 a doctor from Antwerp University Hospital visited the applicant in the Merksplas closed facility for illegal aliens (see paragraph 79 below), to which he had been transferred in the meantime, in order to carry out a full medical check-up. The doctor’s report noted that the applicant’s leukaemia, which was progressing rapidly towards Binet stage C, had not been monitored sufficiently and that a different course of chemotherapy was required.
In August 2011 the applicant’s condition worsened and the doctors observed that his leukaemia had progressed to Binet stage C, with anaemia and widespread enlargement of the lymph nodes (life expectancy of twentyfour months). It was decided to switch to a different course of chemotherapy.
On 12 September 2012 a doctor from the haematology department of St Pierre University Hospital in Brussels, where the applicant was being treated following his release (see paragraph 82 below), drew up a certificate which stated as follows:
“...
Possible complications if treatment is discontinued. Failure to treat the liver and lung disease could result in organ damage and consequent disorders (respiratory insufficiency, cirrhosis and/or liver cancer). Without treatment, the [chronic lymphocytic leukaemia] could lead to the patient’s death as a result of the disease itself or the effects of serious infections.
A return to Georgia would expose the patient to inhuman and degrading treatment.
Progression and prognosis. Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL): good if treated, but the risk of relapse is real, so that close monitoring is required even during remission. ...”
After a relapse diagnosed in 2013, the doctors in St Pierre University Hospital observed in March 2014 that the applicant’s leukaemia had developed into lymphocytic lymphoma, and his chemotherapy was adjusted accordingly. A positronemission tomography (PET) scan performed on 22 September 2014 showed a lack of response to the chemotherapy, a progression of the disease in the lymph nodes and the liver, and a pulmonary infection.
The applicant’s treatment was handed over to the Institut Bordet in Brussels, a hospital devoted exclusively to the treatment of cancer patients.
In December 2014 the applicant began to receive a new course of treatment as part of a study. He was given Ibrutinib, designed in particular to improve his overall condition, which had been compromised by complications arising out of the treatment (fungaemia, pulmonary infections, septicaemia and cholecystitis, resulting in his being admitted to hospital on several occasions). The treatment was prescribed in order to improve the applicant’s overall condition in preparation for a donor stem cell transplant.
A medical certificate issued on 25 May 2015 by the specialist treating the applicant, Dr L., head of the experimental haematology laboratory at the Institut Bordet, stated that the patient’s viral load was stable. The doctor stressed that discontinuing treatment would result in the patient’s death. Because of the patient’s immunosuppression and the aggressive nature of the leukaemia, treatment in a specialised haematology unit was necessary, as was a donor stem cell transplant, which offered the only remaining prospect of a cure provided that it was performed during the two-year “window of response” to Ibrutinib.
The applicant stated that the stem cell transplant, originally scheduled to take place in April 2015, had not been performed to date because he did not have a residence permit in Belgium as required by the Organ Removal and Transplant Act of 13 June 1986.
On 14 July 2015 a new medical report was prepared by Dr L. which read as follows:
“The patient’s CLL [chronic lymphocytic leukaemia]
...
The patient has been suffering from CLL for nine years (diagnosed in 2006), and by 2011 had already reached stage C and Rai IV [stage IV according to the Rai criteria]. He had already had three lines of treatment prior to Ibrutinib, which he is currently taking, and was refractory to the third line of treatment (R-CVP chemotherapy).
It is clear from the medical literature that if Ibrutinib is discontinued in such a situation, the average life expectancy is three months. ...
The literature also shows that only 7% of patients being treated with Ibrutinib achieve complete remission. Mr Paposhvili is currently in partial remission and is thus wholly dependent on the treatment. This is a new targeted therapy to which he would have no access in his country of origin. With continuous treatment the patient’s prognosis is more favourable, with an 87% survival rate after three years. ...
CLL and especially treatment with Ibrutinib can give rise to serious complications which fully justify regular supervision in a specialised setting. This is particularly true since the patient is in a weak state and has a serious medical history (tuberculosis and stroke) and significant comorbidities (active chronic hepatitis and COPD [chronic obstructive pulmonary disease]). ...
In the case of a young person – Mr Paposhvili is only 57 – the current guidelines advocate using Ibrutinib in order to obtain the best possible response, followed by a donor peripheral blood stem cell transplant. A HLA [human leukocyte antigen] matched donor has been identified for the patient.
Although risky, a donor transplant offers the only prospect of a cure for the patient; he would be unable to have such a transplant in his country of origin.
...
Conclusions
The [Aliens Office’s medical adviser] concludes ... [that] the condition of the patient’s vital organs is not directly life-threatening. That all depends on what is meant by ‘directly’. The patient is suffering from a cancer that is potentially fatal in the short term (median survival time nineteen months) ... and most likely within six months without appropriate treatment.
Moreover, if the treatment is not tailored to the patient’s overall immunosuppression, there is a serious risk of death caused by infection, especially in a Gold stage II COPD patient with a history of tuberculosis. ...”
On 1 August 2015 treatment with Ibrutinib became eligible for reimbursement in Belgium.
Because of the side-effects of this treatment, which might compromise the donor transplant, the dose of Ibrutinib was reduced from three doses to one dose per day.
In 2000 the applicant was diagnosed with active pulmonary tuberculosis. He was treated for that condition under the emergency medical assistance and social welfare assistance schemes.
During 2008 the applicant’s tuberculosis was found to have become active again.
As a result of that disease the applicant developed chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, for which he received treatment.
In addition, the applicant suffered from hepatitis C, which was also diagnosed in 2006 and was probably linked to a history of drug abuse. It was accompanied by liver fibrosis. According to a medical report dated 24 April 2015 his hepatitis, which had been treated effectively in 2012 and 2013, had become stable.
A magnetic resonance imaging scan carried out in March 2015 showed that the applicant had suffered a stroke, resulting in permanent paralysis of the left arm. The effects of the stroke were managed with an anti-epilepsy drug.
On 10 September 2007, relying on Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention and alleging, in particular, that he would be unable to obtain treatment for his leukaemia (see paragraph 34 above) if he were sent back to Georgia, the applicant lodged a first request for regularisation on medical grounds on the basis of section 9ter of the Aliens Act.
On 26 September 2007 the Aliens Office refused the request on the ground that, under section 9ter(4) of the Act, the applicant was excluded from its scope on account of the serious crimes which had given rise in the meantime to a ministerial deportation order issued on 16 August 2007 (see paragraph 73 below).
On 17 December 2007 the applicant lodged a request for a stay of execution of that decision under the ordinary procedure, together with an application to set aside. He alleged in particular that the Aliens Office had relied exclusively on the ministerial deportation order in excluding him from the scope of section 9ter of the Aliens Act, without investigating his state of health or the risk he ran of being subjected to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention, and without weighing up the interests at stake as required by Article 8 of the Convention.
In a judgment of 20 August 2008 the Aliens Appeals Board dismissed the applicant’s claims in the following terms:
“It is clear from the wording of [section 9ter] that there is nothing to prevent the administrative authority, when dealing with a request for leave to remain on the basis of the above-mentioned section 9ter, from ruling immediately on the exclusion of the person concerned from the scope of the said section 9ter without first being required to take a decision on the medical evidence submitted to it, if it considers at the outset that there are substantial grounds for believing that the person concerned has committed any of the acts referred to in section 55/4, cited above. Indeed, the examination of that evidence is superfluous in such a situation since the person responsible for taking the decision has in any event already decided that the individual is excluded from the scope [of section 9ter].
...
As regards the alleged violation of Article 3 of the Convention, it should be observed that the decision complained of in the present application is not accompanied by any removal measure, with the result that the alleged risk of discontinuation of treatment in the event of the applicant’s return to Georgia is hypothetical.”
The Aliens Appeals Board also dismissed the complaint under Article 8 of the Convention in view of the fact that the impugned decision had not been accompanied by any removal measure.
In the meantime, on 3 April 2008, the applicant had lodged a second request for regularisation on medical grounds on the basis of section 9ter of the Aliens Act. In addition to his various health problems he referred to the fact that he had been continuously resident in Belgium for eleven years and had lasting social ties in that country, and to his family situation. He also argued that if he was sent back he would be left to fend for himself while ill in a country in which he no longer had any family ties and where the medical facilities were unsuitable and expensive.
The request was refused by the Aliens Office on 4 June 2008 for the same reason it had cited previously (see paragraph 55 above).
On 16 July 2008 the applicant lodged an application with the Aliens Appeals Board to have that decision set aside.
In a judgment of 21 May 2015 the Aliens Appeals Board rejected the application to set aside. It held that, where the above-mentioned exclusion clause was applied, the Aliens Office was not required to rule on the medical and other evidence contained in the request for regularisation. According to the Aliens Appeals Board, such examination was superfluous by virtue of the exclusion clause alone. The Board pointed out that its task was to review the lawfulness of the measure. This review did not permit it to substitute its own assessment of the facts that were deemed to have been established and were not apparent from the administrative file; rather, its task was confined to ensuring that the formal requirement to provide reasons had been complied with and that the reasoning was not based on a manifest error of assessment. As to the complaints alleging a violation of Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention, the Aliens Appeals Board stated that the assessment of the medical situation of an alien facing removal whose request for regularisation had been rejected should be carried out, as applicable, at the time of enforcement of the removal measure.
On 22 June 2015 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against that judgment with the Conseil d’État. One of the grounds of appeal was based on Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention. The applicant submitted that the Aliens Appeals Board could not have been unaware that several orders to leave the country had already been issued against him prior to the decision not to examine his request for leave to remain, and that his expulsion had been suspended only as a result of the interim measure applied by the Court (see paragraph 87 below). The applicant further argued that the Aliens Appeals Board had breached the provisions of the Convention by postponing until the date of enforcement of the removal measure the examination of the medical situation of an alien suffering from a serious illness who had requested leave to remain on medical grounds, without studying the specific risks.
In an order of 9 July 2015 the appeal on points of law was declared inadmissible. The Conseil d’État held that, contrary to the applicant’s assertion, the grounds for setting aside advanced before the Aliens Appeals Board had simply stressed, in a theoretical and general manner, that section 9ter of the Act encompassed the application in domestic law of the obligation under Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention prohibiting the removal of a seriously ill person if such a measure was liable to result in death or inhuman and degrading treatment; no specific explanation had been given, however, as to how the applicant himself risked facing that situation. The Conseil d’État also observed that the applicant had not argued before the Aliens Appeals Board that orders to leave the country had been issued against him, or that a removal measure could be revived; he was therefore unable to rely on those arguments in his appeal on points of law. In any event, the Conseil d’État held that the Aliens Appeals Board had in no way erred in finding that the examination of the medical situation of an alien facing removal whose request for leave to remain had been rejected should be carried out, as applicable, at the time of enforcement of the measure.
The applicant was requested to report to the Aliens Office’s medical service on 24 September 2012 for a medical check-up and to enable the Belgian authorities to reply to the Court’s questions.
The report prepared by the medical adviser on that occasion listed the consultations held and the treatment that had been administered to the applicant. It stated that his leukaemia had stabilised after several cycles of chemotherapy and was being monitored closely, and that the applicant was under medical supervision for his lung disease.
Referring to the Court’s judgment in the case of N. v. the United Kingdom ([GC], no. 26565/05, ECHR 2008), the report concluded as follows:
“On the basis of this medical file it cannot ... be concluded that the threshold of severity required by Article 3 of the Convention, as interpreted by the Court, has been reached ...
It appears from the medical file that the diseases to which the medical certificates refer ... do not disclose a direct threat to the patient’s life. The conditions from which the applicant suffers are serious and potentially fatal but are currently under control.
None of the patient’s vital organs is in a condition that is directly life-threatening. His hepatitis C is not currently causing any cirrhosis. The pulmonary disease is being controlled by treatment consisting solely of an inhaled corticosteroid. The patient’s haematological disorder is currently stable. The lymph nodes are no longer swollen and the patient’s haemolytic anaemia is resolved. Chemotherapy has been discontinued for the time being.
... Neither monitoring of the patient’s vital parameters nor ongoing medical supervision is necessary in order to ensure the patient’s survival.
The disease cannot be considered at present to be in the terminal stages. ... The patient is close to Binet stage A at present. His chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is also currently under control.”
A medical report drawn up on 23 June 2015 by the medical adviser to the Aliens Office provided a detailed review of the applicant’s clinical history and current state of health and the treatment being administered. It concluded as follows:
“On the basis of [the] medical file it cannot therefore be concluded that the threshold of severity set by Article 3 of the Convention, which requires a risk to life on account of the applicant’s critical condition or the very advanced stage of his or her illness, has been reached (N. v. the United Kingdom [GC], no. 26565/05, ECHR 2008, and D. v. the United Kingdom, 2 May 1997, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1997III).
The diseases referred to in the most recent update to the medical file ([Dr L.], 25 May 2015) ... do not disclose:
– a direct threat to the life of the patient. The illnesses from which the applicant suffers are serious and potentially fatal but are currently under control. ...
– that the condition of the patient’s vital organs is directly life-threatening. ...
– a critical state of health. Neither monitoring of the patient’s vital parameters nor ongoing medical supervision is necessary in order to ensure the patient’s survival. The disease cannot be said to be in the terminal stages at present ...”
On 10 June 1999, on the grounds that the Belgian authorities did not have responsibility under the Dublin Convention for examining the asylum application, the Aliens Office issued an order for the applicant and his wife to leave the country with a view to their transfer to Italy. However, their departure was postponed because the applicant’s wife was pregnant.
After the birth, the family was granted leave to remain until 14 October 1999 because the new-born baby was in hospital. Their leave to remain was subsequently extended until 15 March 2000 on the ground that the child needed regular supervision by a paediatric gastroenterologist.
The time-limit for enforcement of the order for the family to leave the country was extended several times during the first half of 2000 because of the need to treat the applicant’s tuberculosis (see paragraph 49 above) and the six-month course of anti-tubercular treatment required by the whole family.
On 23 October 2000 the Aliens Office informed the applicant’s lawyer that the time-limit had been extended until such time as the applicant and his child were fully recovered.
On 16 August 2007, while the applicant was serving a prison sentence (see paragraph 17 above), the Minister of the Interior, in a deportation order issued under section 20 of the Aliens Act, directed the applicant to leave the country and barred him from re-entering Belgium for ten years. The order referred to the applicant’s extensive criminal record, allied to the fact that “the pecuniary nature of the offences demonstrate[d] the serious and ongoing risk of further breaches of public order”.
The order became enforceable on the date of the applicant’s release but was not in fact enforced because the applicant was undergoing medical treatment at the time.
The applicant, who was in hospital, did not contact his lawyer in order to lodge an application to have the ministerial order set aside. However, on 15 November 2007 the lawyer lodged an application on his own initiative. In a judgment of 27 February 2008 the Aliens Appeals Board rejected the application as being out of time.
In the meantime, as the applicant was about to finish serving the prison sentence imposed in 2005, he was transferred on 14 August 2007 to Bruges Prison with a view to implementation of the ministerial deportation order. He remained there until 27 March 2010, when he was transferred to Merksplas Prison.
During his time in Bruges Prison the applicant was visited on an almost daily basis by his wife and/or his children. The authorities of Merksplas Prison, to which he was subsequently transferred and where he remained until 11 July 2010, informed the applicant that they did not have a record of the number of visits he had received.
In parallel with its decision of 7 July 2010 refusing the applicant’s request for regularisation on exceptional grounds (see paragraph 29 above), the Aliens Office on 7 July 2010 issued an order for him to leave the country, together with an order for his detention. These orders, made on the basis of section 7(1)(1) of the Aliens Act, were served on the applicant on 11 July 2010.
Also on 7 July 2010 it was decided that the applicant should be transferred on 13 July to the Merksplas closed facility for illegal aliens with a view to his removal to Georgia.
On 16 July 2010 the Georgian embassy in Brussels issued a travel document valid until 16 August 2010.
On the same day the applicant lodged a request for a stay of execution under the ordinary procedure, together with an application to set aside, directed specifically against the above-mentioned order to leave the country of 7 July 2010.
On 30 July 2010, two days after the indication by the Court of an interim measure (see paragraph 87 below), an order was made for the applicant’s release and he was given until 30 August 2010 to leave the country voluntarily.
In a letter dated 30 August 2010 counsel for the applicant applied for an extension of the time-limit for enforcement of the order to leave the country. The time-limit was initially extended until 13 November 2010 and was subsequently extended several times until 19 February 2011.
On 18 February 2012 the Aliens Office issued an order to leave the country “with immediate effect” pursuant to the ministerial deportation order of 16 August 2007.
The above-mentioned request and application were rejected by the Aliens Appeals Board in a judgment of 29 May 2015 on the ground that the applicant had not attended the hearing or been represented.
In the meantime, on 23 July 2010, the applicant applied to the Court for interim measures under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. Relying on Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Convention, he alleged that if he were removed to Georgia he would no longer have access to the health care he required and that, in view of his very short life expectancy, he would die even sooner, far away from his family.
On 28 July 2010 the Court indicated to the Belgian Government that it was desirable, in the interests of the parties and the proper conduct of the proceedings before the Court, to suspend enforcement of the order for the applicant to leave the country issued on 7 July 2010 “pending the outcome of the proceedings before the Aliens Appeals Board”.
The applicant was arrested on several occasions between 2012 and 2015 for shoplifting.
In addition, in July 2013 the Aliens Office was contacted by the Luxembourg police and customs cooperation centre, which reported that the applicant was in detention in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
In May 2014 a warrant was issued for the applicant’s arrest for theft. The applicant was detained in Bruges Prison and released a few days later.
Two notarised deeds of sale dated 24 March and 5 August 2015 record the transfer by the applicant, represented by E.B., to a certain Aleksandre Paposhvili, of a plot of building land for a sum of 30,000 euros (EUR) and a plot of farmland for a sum of EUR 5,000. Both plots are located in the village of Kalauri in the Gurjaani region of Georgia.
In order to be allowed to remain in Belgium for more than three months, aliens must normally obtain permission before arriving in the country. Section 9(2) of the Aliens Act provides:
“... Except where an international treaty, statute or royal decree otherwise provides, such permission [to remain in the Kingdom beyond the period laid down in section 6, namely for more than three months] shall be requested by the aliens concerned at the Belgian diplomatic mission or consulate responsible for their place of permanent residence or their temporary residence abroad.”
Aliens whose residence status in Belgium is unlawful or precarious, and who wish to obtain long-term leave to remain without having to return to their country of origin, may apply directly in Belgium if they can claim exceptional circumstances. According to established case-law and practice, regularisation of residence status may be granted on a caseby-case basis under section 9bis (former section 9(3)) of the Aliens Act. Section 9bis(1) reads as follows:
“In exceptional circumstances, and provided that the alien concerned is in possession of identity papers, leave to remain may be requested from the mayor of the municipality in which he or she is resident, who forwards the request to the Minister or his or her representative. Where the Minister or his or her representative grants leave to remain, the residence permit shall be issued in Belgium.
...”
The Act does not specify either the exceptional circumstances on the basis of which the request may be made from within Belgium or the substantive grounds on which leave to remain may be granted. It is for the Aliens Office to assess the circumstances alleged by the alien concerned in each individual case. It begins by examining the exceptional circumstances invoked, in order to determine whether the request is admissible. If this is the case, it rules subsequently on the substantive grounds relied on by the alien concerned in support of the request for leave to remain.
Section 9ter of the Aliens Act provides for the possibility of granting leave to remain on medical grounds. The first paragraph, as inserted by the Act of 15 September 2006, amended by the Act of 7 June 2009 and replaced by the Act of 29 December 2010, provided as follows at the material time:
“1.  Aliens resident in Belgium who provide proof of identity in accordance with paragraph 2 and who are suffering from an illness entailing a real risk to their life or physical well-being or a real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment if no appropriate treatment exists in their country of origin or previous country of residence may apply to the Minister or his or her representative for leave to remain in the Kingdom.
The request must be made by registered letter to the Minister or his or her representative and must include the actual address of the alien concerned in Belgium.
The alien concerned must submit the request together with all the relevant information concerning his or her illness and the availability and accessibility of appropriate treatment in the country of origin or the previous country of residence.
He or she shall submit a standard medical certificate as provided for by royal decree approved by the Cabinet. The medical certificate shall indicate the illness, its degree of seriousness and the treatment considered necessary.
The assessment of the risk referred to in the first sub-paragraph, the possibilities for treatment, the accessibility of such treatment in the country of origin or of previous residence, together with the assessment of the illness, its seriousness and the treatment considered necessary, as indicated in the medical certificate, shall be carried out by a medical officer or a doctor appointed by the Minister or his or her representative, who shall issue an opinion in this regard. The doctor in question may, if he or she deems necessary, examine the individual concerned and seek additional expert opinions.”
The procedure for examining requests for regularisation takes place in two stages. The first stage involves an examination by an official of the Aliens Office of the admissibility of the request, with particular regard to the information that must be included on the medical certificate (indication of the illness, its seriousness and the treatment considered necessary). In that connection the Aliens Appeals Board has stated that “[the legislature’s] aim of clarifying the procedure would be thwarted if [the Aliens Office] were required to carry out an in-depth examination of each medical certificate produced and the accompanying documents in order to ascertain the nature of the illness, its seriousness and the treatment considered necessary, given that the [official responsible] is neither a medical officer nor another doctor appointed for the purpose” (see, in particular, Aliens Appeals Board, judgment no. 69.508 of 28 October 2011). The second stage, which concerns only those requests deemed to be admissible, consists of a comprehensive review by the Aliens Office of the individual’s state of health and a substantive assessment of the factors enumerated in the legislation, on the basis of the opinion of a medical officer or another doctor appointed for the purpose.
It is clear from the drafting history of section 9ter that the question whether appropriate and sufficiently accessible treatment exists in the receiving country is examined on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the requesting party’s individual situation, assessed within the confines of the Court’s case-law (explanatory report, Doc. Parl., 2005-06, no. 51 2478/1, p. 35).
If the request is held to be well-founded a one-year residence permit is issued to the person concerned. The residence permit must be renewed each year. Five years after the lodging of the request, the person concerned acquires permanent residence status and is issued with a residence permit of unlimited duration.
Under paragraph 4 of section 9ter of the Aliens Act, aliens are excluded from the scope of that section where there are substantial grounds for believing that they have committed any of the acts referred to in section 55/4 of the Act, which provides:
“An alien shall be excluded from the scope of subsidiary protection where there are substantial reasons for believing:
(a)  that he or she has committed a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity as defined in the international instruments on the punishment of such crimes;
(b)  that he or she has committed acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations as set forth in the Preamble and in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations;
(c)  that he or she has committed a serious crime.
The first sub-paragraph shall apply to persons who instigate the aforementioned crimes or acts or participate in them in any other manner.”
It emerges from the drafting history of section 9ter that a seriously ill alien who is excluded from the scope of that section on one of the grounds referred to in section 55/4 will not be removed if his or her state of health is so serious that removal would constitute a breach of Article 3 of the Convention (explanatory report, cited above, p. 36).
The case-law concerning the removal of seriously ill aliens has evolved recently. This case-law concerns the application of section 9ter, paragraph 1, to aliens who have not been excluded a priori from the scope of that provision. The change in the case-law occurred in response to a change in the practice of the Aliens Office following the introduction by an Act of 8 January 2012 of an admissibility filtering mechanism for “section 9ter requests”, consisting in confining the application of section 9ter to situations falling within the ambit of Article 3 of the Convention as interpreted by the Court in its judgment in N. v. the United Kingdom (cited above).
The Aliens Appeals Board responded by observing that section 9ter of the Act was not limited to systematically requiring the existence of a risk “to the life” of the applicant, since it made provision, in addition to that risk, for two other situations, namely those entailing a real risk to physical wellbeing and those entailing a real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment (Aliens Appeals Board, judgments nos. 92.258, 92.308 and 92.309 of 27 November 2012). It further held that an immediate threat to life was likewise not an absolute precondition in the Court’s case-law for a violation of Article 3, given that other “exceptional” humanitarian circumstances within the meaning of the Court’s judgment in D. v. the United Kingdom (cited above) could act as a bar to removal (Aliens Appeals Board, judgments no. 92.393 of 29 November 2012 and no. 93.227 of 10 December 2012). Accordingly, all the circumstances of the case had to be taken into consideration.
On 19 June 2013 a Dutch-speaking Division of the Conseil d’État echoed this interpretation of section 9ter, paragraph 1. It held that, irrespective of the scope of application of Article 3 of the Convention, section 9ter was clear and applied to situations going beyond a direct threat to the life of the applicant or the existence of a critical condition (Conseil d’État, judgment no. 223.961 of 19 June 2013). In judgments dated 28 November 2013 the same Division expressly found that the Aliens Appeals Board had erred in finding that Article 3 of the Convention could apply to situations other than those involving a serious, critical or terminal condition. However, that error did not mean that the Board’s interpretation of section 9ter, paragraph 1, had been incorrect, as the provision in question went further than Article 3 of the Convention and covered a real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in the country of origin (Conseil d’État, judgments nos. 225.632 and 225.633 of 28 November 2013). On 29 January 2014 the same Division specified that in so far as section 9ter, paragraph 1, referred to a real risk to life or physical well-being, it corresponded to Article 3 of the Convention (Conseil d’État, judgment no. 226.251 of 29 January 2014).
In the meantime, on 19 November 2013, a French-speaking Division of the Conseil d’État had adopted a completely different approach. According to that Division, the legislature had clearly sought to confine the benefit of section 9ter to aliens who were so “seriously ill” that their removal would amount to a violation of Article 3 of the Convention, and to ensure that the assessment in question was carried out in accordance with the Court’s case-law as established in the case of N. v. the United Kingdom, cited above. The fact that section 9ter covered three specific situations did not mean that its scope of application differed from that of Article 3. The three categories of illness concerned, where they attained a minimum level of severity – which had to be high – were apt to satisfy the requirements of Article 3. The Conseil d’État went on to quash the Aliens Appeals Board’s judgments of 27 November 2012 (see paragraph 102 above) on the grounds that they had unduly extended the scope of section 9ter (Conseil d’État, judgments nos. 225.522 and 225.523 of 19 November 2013).
The divergence in the case-law of the Conseil d’État was resolved on 16 October 2014 when the French-speaking Division adopted the same interpretation as the Dutch-speaking Division. Referring to the Opinion of Advocate General Bot of the Court of Justice of the European Union (“the CJEU”) in the case of M’Bodj (C-542/13, see paragraph 121 below), which was pending at the time, to the effect that section 9ter of the Aliens Act afforded protection going beyond the subsidiary protection provided for by Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on minimum standards for the qualification and status of third country nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need international protection and the content of the protection granted (“the Qualification Directive”), the Division proposed an “autonomous” interpretation of section 9ter, paragraph 1, in so far as that provision concerned situations of inhuman or degrading treatment on account of the lack of appropriate treatment in the receiving country (Conseil d’État, judgment no. 228.778 of 16 October 2014).
Following the clarification of the case-law of the Conseil d’État, the Aliens Appeals Board harmonised its own case-law in five judgments given by the full Board on 12 December 2014 (Aliens Appeals Board, judgments nos. 135.035, 135.037, 135.038, 135.039 and 135.041 of 12 December 2014).
This “autonomous” interpretation of section 9ter represents the current state of Belgian positive law. The above-mentioned judgments of the Aliens Appeals Board (see paragraph 106 above) contemplate two scenarios in which the issuing of a residence permit may be justified because of illness. The first scenario concerns aliens who are currently suffering from a lifethreatening illness or a condition posing a current threat to their physical integrity; the alleged risk to life or physical integrity must be imminent and the alien concerned must be unfit to travel as a result. The second concerns aliens who risk being subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment if no appropriate treatment for their illness or condition exists in the receiving country. In this case, although it does not pose an imminent threat to life, the illness or condition in question must nevertheless attain a certain degree of seriousness.
The removal of aliens from Belgium is governed primarily by the provisions of section 7 of the Aliens Act, which at the material time read as follows:
“Without prejudice to more favourable provisions contained in an international treaty, the Minister or his or her representative may order an alien who is not authorised or has not been given permission to remain for more than three months or to settle in the Kingdom to leave the country by a set date:
(1)  if the person concerned is resident in the Kingdom without being in possession of the documents required under section 2;
(2)  if he or she has remained in the Kingdom beyond the time-limit laid down in accordance with section 6, or is unable to provide evidence that this time-limit has not been exceeded;
(3)  if his or her conduct is deemed to pose a potential threat to public order or national security; ...
In such cases the Minister or his or her representative may remove the person concerned immediately if they deem it necessary.
The alien concerned may be detained for this purpose for the time strictly necessary to enforce the measure. The length of such detention may not exceed two months.
Nevertheless, the Minister or his or her representative may extend the period of detention by two months where the steps necessary to remove the alien have been taken within seven working days of his or her placement in detention and have been prosecuted with all due diligence, and where the alien’s physical removal within a reasonable period remains possible.
After one extension has been granted, the decision referred to in the preceding paragraph may be taken only by the Minister.
After five months in detention the alien concerned must be released.
Where the protection of public order or national security so requires, the period of detention may be extended by successive one-month periods after the time-limit referred to in the preceding paragraph has expired; however, the total period of detention may not on this account exceed eight months.”
According to the case-law of the Conseil d’État, the examination of the medical situation of an alien facing removal whose request for leave to remain has been rejected should be carried out, as applicable, at the time of enforcement of the removal measure rather than at the time of its issuance (Conseil d’État, judgment no. 11.427 of 9 July 2015).
The provisions of the Aliens Act relating to the removal of aliens on account of their personal conduct, and to re-entry bans, read as follows:
“Without prejudice to more favourable provisions laid down in an international treaty or to section 21, the Minister may deport aliens who are not settled in the Kingdom if they have breached public order or national security or have failed to comply with the statutory conditions of their residence. Where, under the terms of an international treaty, no such measure may be taken until the alien concerned has been questioned, the opinion of the Aliens Advisory Board must be sought before a deportation order is issued. The other cases in which a deportation order may be issued only after consultation of the Aliens Advisory Board shall be determined by royal decree approved by the Cabinet.
Without prejudice to section 21, paragraphs 1 and 2, aliens who are settled in the Kingdom or have long-term residence status and who have committed a serious breach of public order or national security may be expelled by the Crown, after consultation of the Aliens Advisory Board. The expulsion order must be discussed by the Cabinet if the measure is based on the individual’s political activities.
Deportation and expulsion orders must be based exclusively on the personal conduct of the alien concerned. The fact that he or she has made lawful use of the freedom to manifest opinions or the freedom of peaceful assembly or of association cannot serve as grounds for such an order.”
“1.  The duration of the re-entry ban shall be determined in the light of all the particular circumstances of each case.
The removal order shall be accompanied by a re-entry ban of no more than three years’ duration, in the following cases:
(1) where no time has been allowed for voluntary departure; or
(2) where a previous removal order has not been enforced.
The maximum three-year period referred to in the second sub-paragraph shall be increased to a maximum of five years where the third-country national has used fraud or other unlawful means in order to obtain or preserve his or her right of residence.
The removal order may be accompanied by a re-entry ban of more than five years where the third-country national presents a serious threat to public order or national security.
The Minister or his or her representative shall refrain from imposing a re-entry ban where the residence of a third-country national is terminated in accordance with section 61/3, third paragraph, or 61/4, second paragraph, without prejudice to the second sub-paragraph of paragraph 1(2), provided that the person concerned does not pose a threat to public order or national security.
The Minister or his or her representative may decide not to impose a re-entry ban in individual cases on humanitarian grounds.
The re-entry ban shall enter into force on the date of notification. It must not infringe the right to international protection as defined in sections 9ter, 48/3 and 48/4.”
The Aliens Appeals Board is an administrative court established by the Act of 15 September 2006 reforming the Conseil d’État and setting up an Aliens Appeals Board. The duties, jurisdiction, composition and functioning of the Aliens Appeals Board are governed by the provisions of Part I bis of the Aliens Act as inserted by the aforementioned Act of 15 September 2006. The procedure before the Aliens Appeals Board is laid down by a royal decree of 21 December 2006.
The jurisdiction of the Aliens Appeals Board is twofold. Firstly, in proceedings concerning decisions of the Commissioner General for Refugees and Stateless Persons relating to the granting of refugee status and the various categories of subsidiary protection, the Board has full jurisdiction and the appeal has automatic suspensive effect. The Aliens Appeals Board may admit new evidence and all the issues of fact and law are transferred to it. In such cases it may uphold, set aside or amend the decision. Secondly, the decisions of the Aliens Office concerning residence and removal may be appealed against by way of an application to set aside for failure to comply with essential procedural requirements or with statutory formalities required on pain of nullity, or on the grounds that the Aliens Office exceeded or abused its powers.
The application to set aside does not automatically suspend enforcement of the measure complained of. However, the Aliens Act provides that it may be accompanied by a request for a stay of execution of the measure, either under the extremely urgent procedure, which itself automatically suspends enforcement of the measure, or under the “ordinary” procedure.
At the time of the events in the present case, requests for a stay of execution were governed by the provisions of section 39/82 of the Aliens Act, which provided as follows:
“1.  Where a decision by an administrative authority is subject to an application to set aside under section 39/2, the Board shall have sole jurisdiction to order a stay of execution.
A stay of execution shall be ordered, once evidence has been heard from the parties or they have been duly convened, by means of a reasoned decision of the President of the division hearing the application or the aliens appeals judge whom he or she designates for the purpose.
In cases of extreme urgency a stay of execution may be ordered on an interim basis without evidence having been heard from some or any of the parties.
Applicants who request a stay of execution must opt for either the extremely urgent procedure or the ordinary procedure. They may not, simultaneously or consecutively, either seek a second time to have the third sub-paragraph applied or re-apply for a stay of execution in the application referred to in paragraph 3, on pain of inadmissibility.
By way of derogation from the fourth sub-paragraph and without prejudice to paragraph 3, the rejection of a request for a stay of execution under the extremely urgent procedure shall not prevent the applicant from subsequently requesting a stay of execution under the ordinary procedure, where the application under the extremely urgent procedure was rejected on the grounds that the extreme urgency of the situation was not sufficiently established.
A stay of execution may be ordered only if the grounds relied on are sufficiently serious to warrant setting aside the impugned decision, and if immediate enforcement of the decision is liable to cause serious, virtually irreparable damage.
Judgments ordering a stay of execution may be recorded or amended at the request of the parties.
Except in cases of extreme urgency the request for a stay of execution and the application to set aside must be submitted in a single document.
The title of the application should specify whether an application to set aside is being lodged or a request for a stay of execution together with an application to set aside. Failure to comply with this formality will result in the application being treated solely as an application to set aside.
Once the application to set aside has been lodged any subsequent request for a stay of execution shall be inadmissible, without prejudice to the possibility for the applicant to lodge, in the manner referred to above, a fresh application to set aside accompanied by a request for a stay of execution, if the time-limit for appeals has not expired.
The application shall include a statement of the grounds and facts which, in the applicant’s view, justify a stay of execution or an order for interim measures, as applicable.
Any order for a stay of execution or other interim measures issued prior to the lodging of the application to set aside the decision shall be immediately lifted by the Division President who issued it or by the aliens appeals judge designated by him or her, if the judge observes that no application to set aside setting out the grounds for such measures has been lodged within the time-limit specified by the procedural regulations.
The Division President or the aliens appeals judge designated by him or her shall rule on the request for a stay of execution within thirty days. If a stay of execution is ordered a ruling shall be given on the application to set aside within four months of delivery of the judicial decision.
If the alien in question is the subject of a removal order or an order refusing admission which is to be enforced imminently, and has not yet lodged a request for a stay of execution, he or she may request a stay of execution of the decision under the extremely urgent procedure. If he or she lodged a request under the extremely urgent procedure in accordance with the present provision no later than five days, but no earlier than three working days, following notification of the decision, the request shall be examined within forty-eight hours of its receipt by the Board. If the Division President or the aliens appeals judge hearing the case does not give a decision within that time, the First President or the President shall be informed and shall take the necessary action to ensure that a decision is given within seventy-two hours of the request being received. He or she may also examine the case and take the decision. If no stay of execution is granted the measure shall again become enforceable.
...”
If the person concerned opted for the “ordinary” procedure in requesting a stay of execution, he or she could apply for interim measures during the proceedings, as a matter of extreme urgency if necessary, in accordance with section 39/84 of the Act.
For a request for a stay of execution or for interim measures to be granted as a matter of extreme urgency, the enforcement of the removal measure had to be imminent (section 39/82, paragraph 4, second subparagraph, and section 39/85, first sub-paragraph, of the Aliens Act). The Aliens Appeals Board took the view that, for the danger to be imminent, the alien in question had to be subject to a coercive measure aimed at securing his or her departure from the country, that is to say, to an order for his or her detention in a closed facility with a view to removal (see, among many other authorities, judgment no. 456 of 27 June 2007 and judgment no. 7512 of 20 February 2008).
The Aliens Act was amended by the Act of 10 April 2014 laying down miscellaneous provisions concerning the procedure before the Aliens Appeals Board and the Conseil d’État. In particular, this Act reforms the procedure governing requests for a stay of execution under the extremely urgent procedure in order to take account of the Court’s judgment in M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece ([GC], no. 30696/09, ECHR 2011) and the subsequent rulings of the Aliens Appeals Board (see, in particular, the seven judgments of the full Board of 17 February 2011 (nos. 56.201 to 56.205, 56.207 and 56.208) and of the Constitutional Court (judgment no. 1/2014 of 16 January 2014 setting aside part of the Act of 15 March 2012 amending the Aliens Act, which introduced a fast-track procedure for asylum seekers from “safe” third countries).
Under the new provisions of sections 39/82 and 39/85, a request for a stay of execution under the extremely urgent procedure must be submitted within ten days, or five days if the impugned removal order is not the first issued against the person concerned. The criteria for determining extreme urgency remain unchanged. Removal must be imminent, a situation which applies first and foremost to persons in detention. However, the Act does not rule out the possibility that other situations may justify recourse to the extremely urgent procedure. Under the reformed provisions a risk of serious and irreparable harm is presumed where the alleged violation concerns rights from which no derogation is possible, such as those provided for by Articles 2, 3 and 4 of the Convention.
An administrative appeal on points of law may be lodged with the Conseil d’État against a judgment of the Aliens Appeals Board dismissing an application to set aside. The appeal does not have suspensive effect.
The issue of the threshold of severity which an illness must attain in order to justify the granting of a residence permit on medical grounds was recently raised before the CJEU. In the context of two cases – Mohamed M’Bodj v Belgian State (18 December 2014, Case C‑542/13) and Centre public d’action sociale d’Ottignies-Louvain-La-Neuve v Moussa Abdida (18 December 2014, Case C-562/13) – the CJEU was called upon to address the relationship between section 9ter of the Aliens Act and European Union (“EU”) law.
In M’Bodj (paragraphs 39-47), the CJEU held that the granting of leave to reside on medical grounds to persons who did not satisfy the essential requirements making them eligible for subsidiary protection under the Qualification Directive could not be regarded as a more favourable standard for the purposes of Article 3 of the Directive in the context of such subsidiary protection, and thus fell outside the scope of application of the Directive. Even taking into account the case-law established in N. v. the United Kingdom, according to which, in very exceptional cases concerning the expulsion of a seriously ill alien, humanitarian grounds could be invoked in order to trigger the protection of Article 3 of the Convention, the risk of deterioration in the health of a third-country national suffering from a serious illness as a result of the absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving country was not sufficient, according to the CJEU, to warrant that person being granted subsidiary protection unless the harm took the form of conduct on the part of a State or non-State third party.
In the case of Abdida (paragraphs 33 and 38-63), the CJEU held that while leave to reside on medical grounds did not come within the scope of the Qualification Directive, decisions refusing such leave were covered by Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals (the “Return Directive”). As a return decision, a decision refusing leave to reside on medical grounds was subject to observance of the safeguards provided for by the Return Directive and by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU. Article 19 § 2 of the Charter stated that no one could be removed to a State where there was a serious risk that he or she would be subjected to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Bearing in mind that under Article 52 § 3 of the Charter, the rights enshrined therein had, as a minimum, the same meaning and scope as the equivalent rights guaranteed by the Convention, the CJEU inferred from the case-law established in N. v. the United Kingdom that the decision to remove an alien suffering from a serious physical or mental illness to a country where the facilities for the treatment of the illness were inferior to those available in the returning State might raise an issue under Article 3 of the Convention in very exceptional cases, where the humanitarian grounds against removal were compelling. Those very exceptional cases were characterised, in the CJEU’s view, by the seriousness and the irreparable nature of the harm that might be caused by the removal of a third-country national to a country in which there was a serious risk that he or she would be subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment. The CJEU further held that remedies in respect of a decision refusing leave to reside on medical grounds must have suspensive effect, in accordance with the Strasbourg Court’s case-law. This implied that provision had to be made for the applicant’s basic needs to be met pending a ruling on his or her appeal in accordance with the Return Directive.
Basing its findings, inter alia, on the information referred to in the Chamber judgment (paragraphs 90-92), the European Committee of Social Rights assessed the conformity of the Georgian health-care system with Article 11 § 1 of the European Social Charter (Right to protection of health, Removal of the causes of ill-health) and adopted the following conclusions (Conclusions 2015, Georgia, Article 11 § 1):
“...
The Committee takes note of the information submitted by Georgia in response to the conclusion that it had not been established that there was a public health system providing universal coverage (Conclusions 2013, Georgia).
The Committee recalls that the health care system must be accessible to everyone. The right of access to care requires inter alia that the cost of health care should be borne, at least in part, by the community as a whole (Conclusions I (1969), Statement of Interpretation on Article 11) and the cost of health care must not represent an excessively heavy burden for the individual. Out-of-pocket payments should not be the main source of funding of the health system (Conclusions 2013, Georgia).
The report states that on 28 February 2013 a Universal Health Care Programme was launched for persons without medical insurance. The first phase of the programme ensured citizens with a basic medical package, including primary health care and emergency hospitalisation. Since 1 July 2013 the programme has been expanded to include more services of primary health care and emergency hospitalisation, emergency outpatient care, planned surgeries, treatment of oncological diseases and child delivery. According to recent data (April 2014), all citizens of Georgia are now provided with basic healthcare, approximately 3.4 million people in the framework of the Universal Health Care Programme, 560,000 people are beneficiaries of the State Health Insurance Programme and about 546,000 people have a private or corporate insurance.
The Committee notes that the Government has declared health care as a priority field, resulting in funding for state health care programmes almost doubling: from 365 million GEL in 2012 (€ 139 million) to 634 million GEL in 2013 (€ 241 million). State spending as a share of GDP has increased from 1.7% to 2.7% and as a share of the state budget from 5% to 9%.
However, the Government acknowledges that despite improvements the cost of medication remains high amounting to 35% of state expenditure on health care. The report does not provide information on out-of-pocket payments as a share of total spending on health care, but according to WHO data it was still between 60% and 70% in 2011 (compared to about 16% on average for EU-27). Very limited coverage of medication costs is now provided under the Universal Health Care Programme, for example for emergency care, chemotherapy and radiotherapy, but the general lack of coverage of medication costs is a major point of dissatisfaction among beneficiaries of the programme according to a recent evaluation (Universal Healthcare (UHC) Program Evaluation by the USAID Health System Strengthening Project, April 2014). The Committee notes the examples provided by the Government of coverage of certain medication costs under the State Health Insurance Programme.
The report states that as a result of deregulation measures the pharmaceutical market has become free and competitive, however no evidence is provided to show that the price of medication has become generally more accessible, especially for vulnerable groups and those with chronic conditions.
While the Committee considers that the Universal Health Care Programme is a positive step forward and that the role of out-of-pocket payments as a source of funding of the health system may have been reduced somewhat, it still considers that the high proportion of out-of-pocket payments for health care, and in particular the high medication costs, represent too high a burden for the individual effectively being an obstacle to universal access to health care. The situation is therefore not in conformity with the Charter.
Conclusion
The Committee concludes that the situation in Georgia is not in conformity with Article 11§1 of the Charter on the ground that out-of-pocket payments in general and medication costs in particular represent too high a burden for the individual effectively being an obstacle to universal access to health care.”