The case originated in an application (no. 29419/17) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Stjepan Jurišić (“the applicant”), on 10 April 2017.
The applicant was represented by Mr H. Čačić, a lawyer practising in Bjelovar. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 31 May 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Sesvetski Kraljevec.
The applicant and M.R. were in a relationship, which ended during M.R.’s pregnancy. On 1 November 2006 their son I.R. was born.
The applicant brought a civil action before the Daruvar Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Daruvaru) seeking establishment of his paternity of I.R. because M.R. had allegedly refused to register his name as the father. On 9 February 2007 the Daruvar Municipal Court issued a judgment establishing the applicant’s paternity of I.R.
On 15 May 2007 the applicant filed an application with the Daruvar Municipal Court requesting contact with his son every other weekend from Saturday at 10 a.m. to Sunday at 6 p.m. and for half of his holidays. He submitted that M.R. did not allow him to see their son regularly.
After hearing M.R. and obtaining the opinion of the Daruvar Social Welfare Centre (Centar za socijalnu skrb Daruvar  hereinafter “the centre”), on 19 June 2007 the Daruvar Municipal Court decided that contact between the applicant and his son should take place each Saturday and Sunday from 3 to 7 p.m. at M.R.’s home. The parties never appealed against that decision, which became final on 12 July 2007.
On 23 October 2009 the applicant applied for enforcement of the contact order of 19 June 2007, requesting that the mother allow him to see the child as stated in the order (see paragraph 8 above). He submitted that M.R. had continuously sought to prevent his contact with the child and that since August 2009 contact had stopped completely.
On 28 October 2009 the Daruvar Municipal Court issued an enforcement order.
Following several remittals of the case, on 21 October 2010 the Daruvar Municipal Court ultimately dismissed the applicant’s enforcement proposal since a new contact order had meanwhile been adopted (see paragraph 15 below).
On 20 April 2009 the applicant filed a fresh application with the Daruvar Municipal Court requesting an amendment of the contact order due to the child’s age and a change in circumstances. He proposed contact every Saturday and Sunday from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. M.R. disagreed, deeming the period excessively long and reiterating that the child suffered from allergies.
On 20 July 2009 the applicant filed a submission with the court describing difficulties in maintaining contact with the child.
In the resumed proceedings following remittal of the case, two doctors confirmed that, in view of the child’s medical condition, there were no reasons to restrict his contact with the applicant since either parent could provide the child with the necessary treatment.
On 14 May 2010 the Daruvar Municipal Court determined that contact between the applicant and the child should take place every first and third weekend of the month, from 6 p.m. on Friday until 6 p.m. on Sunday, for two weeks in July or August and for one week in December or January.
Following an appeal by M.R., on 11 October 2010 the Bjelovar County Court upheld the first-instance decision regarding the schedule of contact.
On 20 December 2010 the applicant applied for enforcement of the contact order of 14 May 2010 (see paragraph 15 above). He alleged that M.R. had refused to hand over the child to him on 5 and 19 November and 3 and 17 December 2010 without any explanation. He asked the court to order M.R. to allow him contact within three days or, alternatively, to order forcible removal of the child.
M.R. disputed the applicant’s allegations. She stated that the child had spent the weekend of 5 November 2010 with the applicant, and had returned home neglected and bruised. She reiterated that she was not preventing the applicant having contact, but that the child was very attached to her and found separation from her difficult, especially when the applicant arrived with the police, causing the child additional fear and trauma. She enclosed medical reports with the submissions, diagnosing the child’s reaction to stress and concluding that there were problems with his basic group of caregivers. The reports recommended therapy for both parents, as well as a gradual extension of contact with the father over several days.
On 21 January 2011 the Daruvar Municipal Court issued an enforcement order as requested by the applicant.
Following an appeal by M.R., on 7 July 2011 the Bjelovar County Court, Permanent Attendance in Virovitica (Stalna služba u Virovitici) quashed the enforcement order.
In submissions of 19 August 2011, the applicant alleged that he had had no information on the child’s whereabouts for the past two weeks and that M.R. and her parents had been scaring the child in his presence.
On 23 December 2011 the competent social welfare centre informed the court that it was imposing a measure of supervision of parental care (nadzor nad izvršenjem roditeljske skrbi) with a view to correcting the parents’ shortcomings. It also issued a written caution to M.R., who verbally accepted advice, but failed to cooperate with the centre’s professionals or the supervisor of the parental care measure (hereinafter “the case supervisor”).
On 25 January 2012 the Nova Gradiška Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Novoj Gradiški) issued an enforcement order instructing M.R. to allow the applicant contact with I.R. within fifteen days, stating that a fine of 5,000 Croatian kunas (HRK) would be imposed on her repeatedly until she complied with the court order. The court stressed that the child needed both parents for a normal and healthy development, observing that neither parent had complied with their parental duties or ensured that their child had a happy childhood. This decision was upheld on appeal.
On 20 June 2012 the applicant informed the court that he had been unable to spend time with I.R. on 1 June and 15 June 2012 because M.R. had refused to hand the child over to him. He therefore asked the court to fine her.
On 13 July 2012 the court again fined M.R. HRK 5,000 and threatened her with a further fine unless she complied with the court order and facilitated contact between the applicant and the child. This decision was upheld on appeal.
In a submission of 17 July 2012, the applicant requested coercive enforcement of the contact order with the assistance of the police.
Meanwhile, on 22 September 2011, M.R. instituted a third set of contact proceedings, in which the court decided that the applicant and the child should meet in the presence of the case supervisor at the social welfare centre from 1 to 3 p.m. on Fridays for one month (see paragraph 61 below). Consequently, on 5 November 2012 the Nova Gradiška Municipal Court postponed the enforcement until the above decision had been implemented. On 12 April 2013 the applicant asked the court to resume the enforcement because the above order had been implemented.
In the meantime, on 20 July 2012, the centre applied to the court to have M.R.’s right to live with I.R. revoked because she had consciously obstructed court decisions on the applicant’s contact with the child and because her unlawful behaviour was harmful to the child’s proper upbringing. The centre asked the court to impose the measure for one year and give the applicant responsibility for the child’s care and upbringing. The proceedings were first stayed pending the outcome of the third set of contact proceedings (see paragraph 27 above) and the centre ultimately withdrew its proposal on 6 October 2015.
On 15 April 2013, the Nova Gradiška Municipal Court again postponed the enforcement until the conclusion of the third set of contact proceedings (see paragraph 27 above). The applicant unsuccessfully appealed against that decision.
On 26 February 2015 M.R. paid the HRK 5,000 fine.
On 24 March 2015 the applicant urged the court to resume the enforcement proceedings, emphasising the need for urgency since he had not seen his son for over two years.
On 20 April 2015 the Municipal Court decided to resume the enforcement and ordered M.R. to allow the applicant contact with his son as stated in the court order of 14 May 2010 (see paragraph 15 above).
On 11 May 2015 the applicant notified the court that M.R. had again prevented him seeing the child on 1 May 2015. He asked the court to fine M.R. and carry out enforcement by taking away the child. Alternatively, he asked the court to threaten M.R. with imprisonment.
On 12 May 2015 the court set an enforcement date of 15 May 2015, stating that the child would be taken away from M.R. or any other person he was found with. On that date forcible removal of the child was attempted. An employee of the social welfare centre tried to take the child away from the mother, but the child became ill. An emergency medical team took him to be examined by a doctor and he was diagnosed with acute reaction to stress. The court asked the parties to meet the following day with the case supervisor in order to re-establish communication. It was also decided, in order to protect the health and interests of I.R., not to take him away as planned, stressing that this did not entail postponement of the enforcement.
On 25 May 2015 M.R. submitted a fresh application for postponement of the enforcement. The court dismissed it, pointing out that M.R. was responsible for the fact that I.R. had been exposed to stress at the previous enforcement attempt, in that she had had more than four years to prepare the child for contact with his father.
On 3 June 2015 the court set another enforcement date of 5 June 2015. The enforcement attempt failed due to the child’s strong negative reaction. The centre’s professional team concluded that it was not in his best interests to proceed with the forcible removal.
At a hearing held on 31 July 2015, a psychiatrist pointed out that coercion against I.R. might deepen his psychological trauma and that he might develop a neurotic disorder or, in the worst case scenario, psychosis.
On 13 July 2016 the court set another enforcement date of 18 July 2016, but M.R. and the child were not found at home that day.
On 20 July 2016 the court fined M.R. HRK 10,000 and threatened her with a further fine of HRK 20,000. It noted that she had not only been under an obligation to allow enforcement of the court decision, but also to prepare I.R. for meeting with the father  she had failed to do either. The court also warned M.R. that the next sanction might be imprisonment. She appealed against the decision and again unsuccessfully requested postponement of the enforcement.
Another enforcement attempt scheduled for 29 July 2016 was unsuccessful because of I.R.’s negative reaction.
On the same day the court fined M.R. HRK 10,000 and set another enforcement date of 16 August 2016. On the date in question M.R. and the child were not found at home.
On 24 August 2016 the Slavonski Brod County Court (Županijski sud u Slavonskom Brodu) allowed M.R.’s request and postponed the enforcement for six months, so that a detailed assessment of I.R., the applicant and M.R. could be completed. The court considered, based on medical reports, that enforcement could substantially jeopardise the interests of the child, who suffered from deep psychological trauma because of the intolerant relationship between his parents, and that psychological and physical consequences could arise from coercion. A constitutional complaint lodged by the applicant against this decision was declared inadmissible.
On 6 April 2017 the court invited the applicant and M.R. to inform it whether they had complied with the decision of the second-instance court. M.R. replied that she had not commenced any proceedings and that it was not her duty to start any treatment. She submitted a doctor’s report for each month starting from 12 June 2015 as evidence that she and I.R. had regularly been attending therapy.
On 10 May 2017 the applicant asked the court to refer the assessment of the child and the parents to the competent social welfare centre or, alternatively, a specialist psychologist.
On 6 October 2017 a hearing was held and on 10 and 20 November 2017 the Slavonski Brod Municipal Court asked a specialist institution about the possibility of an assessment of the family.
On 18 April 2018 the court decided to perform a psychological ad psychiatric evaluation of the parents and the child. The applicant advanced the costs of the expert evaluation, but M.R. informed the court that she and the child would not attend the scheduled examination because further expert assessments risked aggravating the child’s mental state.
On 10 October 2018 the court resumed the enforcement proceedings and scheduled another enforcement attempt for 2 November 2018, which was again unsuccessful due to the child’s vigorous refusal to go with the applicant.
Consequently, on 20 November 2018 the Municipal Court terminated the enforcement of the contact decision finding it unenforceable. It stressed that the child, through no fault of his own, has never developed his own attitude towards the applicant but that instead his impressions and opinions about his father were created on the basis of his mother’s opinions and statements. He was therefore completely estranged from his father and any separation from his mother would in these circumstances cause enormous stress for the child.
On an appeal by the applicant, on 29 January 2019 the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) quashed that decision and remitted the case for enforcement.
On 2 January 2019 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint against the County Court’s decision of 20 November 2018 terminating the enforcement proceedings (see paragraph 48 above). He complained about the length of the enforcement proceedings and the consequent violation of his right to family life.
On 3 April 2019 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) found a violation of the applicant’s right to a hearing within a reasonable time and his right to respect for family life, awarded him HRK 13,200 (approximately EUR 1,800) in compensation and ordered the competent Municipal Court to adopt a final decision in his case within six months.
On 10 April 2019 the Municipal Court again decided to perform a psychological and psychiatric expert evaluation but M.R. opposed the court’s decision. On the same date, the court asked the competent social welfare centre to take child-protection measures due to M.R.’s violation of the applicant’s contact rights with his child. The centre lodged another criminal complaint against M.R., but on 28 August 2019 the competent State Attorney’s Office refused to lodge an indictment against her.
The enforcement proceedings are still ongoing.
In the meantime, on 23 November 2015 the applicant had sought protection of his right to a hearing within a reasonable time in relation to the second set of enforcement proceedings. On 23 December 2015 the president of the Slavonski Brod Municipal Court granted his request and ordered that the proceedings be concluded within six months.
On 11 May 2017 the Slavonski Brod County Court allowed a claim by the applicant for compensation and awarded him HRK 2,000. It also ordered the first-instance court to conclude the enforcement proceedings in the shortest time possible but in any case within six months. On 7 June 2018 the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the County Court’s decision.
On 22 September 2011 M.R. filed a request with the Nova Gradiška Municipal Court to amend the decision on contact between the applicant and I.R. of 14 May 2010 (see paragraph 15 above). She requested that contact take place for two hours on Fridays, at her home in the presence of the case supervisor, or at the centre’s premises.
The applicant disagreed, claiming that M.R. was psychologically abusing the child by telling him that his father did not love him and that there was a “black hole at the father’s house”.
On 2 April 2012 the centre proposed that the applicant and his son meet, over the period of one month, for two hours a week at the centre’s premises in the presence of the case supervisor in order to strengthen their emotional bond. After that period, contact should resume in accordance with the court order of 14 May 2010 (see paragraph 15 above).
At a hearing held on 13 June 2012, M.R. submitted that the child refused to see the applicant. The applicant alleged that M.R. was preventing contact with his son. Employees of the centre additionally clarified their opinion by stating that the proposed one-month period would be sufficient to re-establish the emotional bond between the applicant and his son and would also allow the centre to assess their interaction.
On 26 June 2012 the case supervisor stated that contact between the applicant and his son had not been taking place because M.R. had presented certificates stating that the child was ill and claimed that the child was frightened, which was why she had not handed the child over to the applicant. The case supervisor stated that she had been present at one of the contact sessions and that the child had not been afraid of the father on that occasion.
On 26 June 2012 the Nova Gradiška Municipal Court accepted the centre’s proposal and decided that for a period of one month contact between the applicant and I.R. should take place for two hours a week at the centre’s premises and subsequently in accordance with the court order of 14 May 2010 (see paragraph 15 above).
Following an appeal by both parties, on 7 September 2012 the Slavonski Brod County Court upheld the part of the order concerning the first month of contact and quashed the remainder, instructing the firstinstance court to obtain an expert assessment of the parties and the child.
On 24 October 2012 the court ordered an expert assessment of the parties and the child.
At a hearing held on 7 January 2013 M.R. alleged that the child had spent a weekend with the applicant on five occasions in accordance with a previous court order, and that on those occasions he had returned home neglected and injured. The most recent contact session between the applicant and the child had taken place on 12 October 2012, and the applicant had arrived on 2 November 2012 with the intention of taking the child with him for the weekend, but the child had screamed and refused to go. In the initial one-month period two of the meetings scheduled at the centre’s premises had not taken place. The applicant denied that he had neglected or abused the child and claimed that it had been impossible to establish a relationship with him over the past two months. On 4 January 2013 a meeting had taken place after a psychologist had intervened because the child had initially refused to communicate with the applicant.
On 19 March 2013 the centre submitted an additional opinion proposing that meetings take place in accordance with the court order of 14 May 2010 (see paragraph 15 above), but that pickup and return of the child take place under supervision and that the contact sessions be supervised.
On 16 April 2013 the Nova Gradiška Municipal Court dismissed M.R.’s proposal and ordered that contact take place in accordance with the decision of the Daruvar Municipal Court of 14 May 2010 (see paragraph 15 above).
Following appeals by both parties, on 27 June 2013 the Slavonski Brod County Court quashed the decision and remitted the case for fresh consideration by a different judge.
In the resumed proceedings, on 4 November 2013 the Nova Gradiška Municipal Court decided that contact between the applicant and the child should take place every first and third Sunday of the month from 3.30 to 6.30 p.m. under supervision, until the conclusion of the proceedings.
On 8 November 2013 the applicant notified the court that he had accepted a job in Germany and that he would not be in a position to maintain contact every first and third weekend. He asked the court to schedule contact for four hours over three or four consecutive days in the period between 22 December 2013 and 7 January 2014. M.R. disagreed.
In the resumed proceedings, on 7 May 2014 the court decided to obtain an expert opinion by a psychiatrist and a psychologist.
On 27 June 2014 the experts submitted their findings. In relation to M.R. the psychiatrist observed that she was attempting to manipulate the child in order to prove her rights to the applicant. There was no reason to restrict contact between the applicant and his son as there was a justified suspicion that the mother was pressuring the child. The expert psychologist found that the boy’s statements about the applicant lacked adequate emotional background and that he seemed to have been taught what to say. He also displayed attention and behavioural disorders, was easily bored and had a short attention span. The psychologist also found no reason to restrict contact between the applicant and the child and observed that M.R. had had a strong influence on shaping the child’s image of the father.
On 29 December 2014 the court ordered that contact should take place during the first six weeks every other Friday afternoon at the centre’s premises, in the presence of the case supervisor. It also ordered that contact for the following three months should take place every first and third weekend of the month from Friday until Sunday night, as well as for fifteen days during the summer holidays and seven days during the winter holidays. It instructed the centre to consider the need to impose a measure of supervision of parental care in respect of I.R.
Following appeals lodged by both parties, on 4 March 2015 the Slavonski Brod County Court reversed the first-instance decision and dismissed M.R.’s request for an amendment of the decision of 14 May 2010. Contact was therefore to be resumed in accordance with that order (see paragraph 15 above).
On 3 November 2015 the applicant applied for custody of I.R. and sought that M.R. be deprived of her parental care. M.R. opposed the application.
At a hearing held on 14 April 2016, the previous case supervisor stated that M.R. had never displayed a positive attitude towards facilitating contact between the applicant and the child. The applicant stated that the most recent contact he had had with the child had been in November 2015.
On 24 January 2017 I.R. was interviewed by the centre and stated that he wanted nothing to do with the applicant and for him to leave him alone.
On 10 February 2017 the court appointed a lawyer employed by the centre as a special guardian for I.R.
At a hearing held on 27 April 2017, the special guardian stated that the child could not imagine separation from the mother and did not want to see the applicant.
On 1 June 2017 the court dismissed the applicant’s application for custody and his proposal to deprive M.R. of her parental care. Having determined that the relations between the parents were disrupted to the extent that it was impossible to establish normal communication and that they refused to cooperate or establish a common position and attitude towards the child, it observed that M.R. provided adequate care for the child, that the child had been traumatised by previous events and the applicant’s frequent calls to the police and that the child refused any contact with the applicant. The court emphasised that the applicant had submitted the application asking that the child live with him only because adequate communication had not been established between him and the child.
On 25 August 2017 the Zagreb Country Court quashed the firstinstance decision on appeal and remitted the case to the lower court.
In the resumed proceedings, on 12 September 2018, the Municipal Court dismissed the applicant’s application for custody and deprivation of M.R.’s parental care. The applicant did not appeal.
On 25 May 2015 M.R. again requested an amendment of the contact order, proposing that the applicant and the child see each other once a week at the centre’s premises, in the presence of the case supervisor and her for a period of four months. For the following four months, M.R. proposed that contact take place on Saturdays from 2 to 6 p.m. in the presence of the case supervisor. After this period of adjustment, the child would spend time with the applicant from 6 p.m. on Friday to 6 p.m. on Sunday. The applicant opposed that proposal.
During these proceedings M.R. requested the appointment of a special guardian for I.R. and apparently sought exclusion of the Nova Gradiška Social Welfare Centre from the case.
The proceedings were suspended pending the outcome of the parental care proceedings (see paragraph 81 above). They ultimately resumed and are ongoing.
On 28 April 2015 the Slavonski Brod Municipal Court found M.R. guilty of preventing and failing to comply with measures designed to protect children and minors, an offence under Article 215 of the 1997 Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon) in that she had prevented the applicant having contact with I.R. in accordance with a final court decision in the period 21 October 2011 to 6 September 2012. She was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment, suspended for two years. Appeals lodged by both parties were dismissed.
On 6 November 2015 the applicant filed an indictment against M.R. accusing her of not letting him see I.R. in the period 1 April to 5 June 2015 and not preparing the child for their meetings, thereby failing to comply with decisions for the welfare of a child, an offence under Article 173 of the 2011 Criminal Code. The indictment was confirmed on 7 March 2016 and the proceedings are still ongoing.
On 24 May 2017 the Slavonski Brod Municipal State Attorney’s Office also lodged an indictment against M.R. under Article 173 of the Criminal Code, for obstructing contact between the applicant and his child between 4 December 2015 and 16 August 2016. The proceedings are still ongoing.
The relevant provisions of domestic law in force at the material time are set out in K.B. and Others v. Croatia (no. 36216/13, §§ 96 and 101-06, 14 March 2017), and Ribić v. Croatia (no. 27148/12, § 84, 2 April 2015).