The case originated in an application (no. 17142/18) lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vitaliy Vladimirovich Abalymov (“the applicant”), on 27 March 2018.
The applicant was represented by Mr E. Tokar, a lawyer practising in Samara. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 29 August 2018 notice of the complaints under Articles 8 and 14 was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. On the same date the President decided to grant the case priority under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
In addition to written observations by the Government and the applicant, third-party comments were received from the applicant’s former wife Z., who had been granted leave to intervene by the President of the Section;
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The case concerns a child-residence dispute.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Samara.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2002 the applicant’s wife, Z., gave birth to a daughter, K. In 2015 she gave birth to twins: C., a girl, and S., a boy. The family lived in the town of Samara where the children’s paternal and maternal grandparents and other close relatives also lived. While the parents were at work the children were taken care of by two nannies.
In August 2016 Z. left the family home and moved to the town of Kaluga, about 1,200 km by road away from Samara. The children remained to live with the applicant.
On 27 March 2017 Z. filed for divorce and asked for a residence order under which the children would live with her. The applicant lodged a counterclaim, asking for a residence order under which the children would live with him.
On 4 May 2017 Z. took C. and S. together with her to Kaluga while the applicant was at work. K. continued living with the applicant.
During a hearing before the Sovetskiy District Court of Samara the judge questioned K., who stated that she wished to live with her father and that she wanted C. and S., with whom she was very close, to live with them. She further stated that after her mother’s sudden departure in August 2016 she had telephoned the children once a week and had come to visit them once a month for two or three days each time. The children had visited her in Kaluga twice: once for three days and once for four days. It was her father and the nannies who had been taking everyday care of the children.
The judges also questioned Z.’s father and her friend who both stated that Z. had left the applicant because he did not earn enough money. The two nannies stated to the judge that the children were more attached to their father than to their mother. Z. had always worked late hours and had had frequent business trips. By contrast, the applicant had come home at about 3 p.m. to take care of the children. Lastly, the mother of K.’s friend stated that she had seen K. crying because she had felt that her mother had abandoned her and because she had missed her brother and sister.
On 19 May 2017 K. was examined by a psychologist who found that she had a strong emotional bond with her father; her emotional bond with her mother was weaker. She wished to live with her father.
On 29 May 2017 court-appointed expert psychologists found that S. did not have a strong attachment to any of his parents. The most dear and significant persons for him were his elder sister and his nanny from Samara. C. suffered from her mother’s distant attitude to her and felt a need for her father’s care. When asked about her parents, she talked about her father without mentioning her mother. She also adored her elder sister. K. had a strong negative attitude towards her mother: she felt betrayed and therefore distrusted her. She had a strong attachment to her father and her younger brother and sister. The experts also found that to reduce the psychological stress experienced by the children due to their parents’ separation, it was necessary to maintain the environment to which they were used.
The childcare authorities of Samara recommended that the children should live with their father, taking into account K.’s wishes, the very close personal bond between the three children and the fact that they had always lived in Samara and it was important not to disturb their established lifestyle.
On 6 July 2017 the Sovetskiy District Court granted the applicant’s application for a residence order in his favour and dismissed a similar application by Z. It noted that both parents had high incomes and comfortable living conditions, but Z. had no real estate. It also noted that Z.’s work required her to take frequent and long business trips. After the parents’ separation, the three children had lived with their father, who had taken everyday care of them, assisted by two nannies who had permanently worked for the family from the children’s birth. The children’s grandparents and all other close relatives lived in Samara. K. attended school there and it followed from a reference note submitted by the school that it was her father who attended the school meetings and helped K. with her homework. The court also referred to the reports by psychological experts and the childcare authorities of Samara, and to K.’s wish to live with her father. The court found that it would be against the children’s best interests to separate them or to take them away from their established home in Samara. The court also held that there was no evidence of a risk that living with their father might cause the children any physical or psychological harm or undermine their moral development. The fact that S. and C. had started to attend a preschool facility after their removal to Kaluga was insufficient to outweigh the other considerations relating to the best interests of all three children. The opinion of the childcare authorities of Kaluga submitted by Z. was inadmissible in evidence because they had no competence to give an opinion in the present case.
According to the applicant, he came to Kaluga many times but Z. prevented him from seeing the children and refused to comply with the residence order in his favour. On 31 August 2017 the applicant came to Kaluga again and took S. with him back to Samara. Z. prevented him from taking away C. who remained to live with her mother in Kaluga.
On 9 October 2017 the Samara Regional Court quashed the judgment of 6 July 2017 and held that a residence order in respect of S. and C. should be granted to their mother, while a residence order in respect of K. should be granted to her father. It held, firstly, that the District Court had acted with excessive formalism when it had rejected the report by the childcare authorities of Kaluga as inadmissible in evidence. Secondly, the District Court had disregarded Z.’s arguments that she had comfortable living conditions; the fact that Z. had no real estate was irrelevant. The evidence in the case file suggested that both parents were equally capable of meeting the children’s material and emotional needs. Thirdly, the District Court had noted no evidence of a risk that living with their father might cause the children any physical or psychological harm or undermine their moral development. The case file showed that no such risk would exist either if the children were to live with the mother. Furthermore, the Regional Court held as follows:
“Under principle 6 of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child proclaimed by the UN General Assembly’s resolution 1386 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, the child, for the full and harmonious development of his personality, needs love and understanding. He shall, wherever possible, grow up in the care and under the responsibility of his parents, and, in any case, in an atmosphere of affection and of moral and material security; a child of tender years shall not, save in exceptional circumstances, be separated from his mother. Society and the public authorities shall have the duty to extend particular care to children without a family and to those without adequate means of support. Payment of State and other assistance towards the maintenance of children of large families is desirable.
The District Court had granted a residence order in respect of the children to their father without having established or mentioned any exceptional circumstances justifying [S.’s and C.’s] separation from their mother.
The Regional Court does not see any such circumstances either.
Given the circumstances mentioned above, the Regional Court concludes that it is necessary to grant a residence order in respect of [S. and C.] to their mother.”
Lastly, taking into account K.’s wish to live with her father and the fact that Z., respecting that wish, had withdrawn her application for a residence order in her favour in respect of K., the Regional Court held that a residence order in respect of K. should be granted to her father.
On 22 October 2017 the applicant returned S. to his mother.
The applicant lodged a cassation appeal. He complained, in particular, that the Regional Court had not taken into account the findings made by the psychological experts and the childcare authorities, and in particular the finding that, given the strong emotional bond between the three children, their separation from each other was contrary to their best interests. Nor had the Regional Court given any consideration to the fact that during two out of five years of their life, C. and S. had lived separately from their mother: in 2015 while Z. had lived and worked in Volgograd and then again since August 2016 after Z. had moved to Kaluga. By contrast, they had always lived together with their father and elder sister. The applicant also stated that after their removal to Kaluga C. and S. had often begged him to take them home to Samara and said that they wanted to live with him and their elder sister. He had the impression that the children were neglected by Z., who was always at work, and by their new nanny.
The applicant’s cassation appeal was dismissed on 9 February 2018 by a judge of the Samara Regional Court. The judge summed up the reasoning of the appellate judgment as follows:
“The appellate court quashed the first-instance judgment because it disagreed with its findings. It held that the material in the case file showed that both the mother and the father had created equally good environments for the children’s upbringing and had provided them with all that was necessary for their physical and moral development. There were no obstacles to the children’s residence with their mother and no risk that their residence with the mother might harm their physical or psychological health or their moral development. Taking into account principle 6 of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child proclaimed by the UN General Assembly’s resolution 1386 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, according to which a child of tender years was not, save in exceptional circumstances, to be separated from his mother, and in the absence of information about such circumstances, the appellate court found that it was necessary to give a residence order in respect of [S. and C.] to their mother.”
The judge further held that the arguments advanced by the applicant in his cassation appeal did not disclose any exceptional circumstances justifying the children’s separation from their mother, who wished to take care of them. She continued:
“That the elder daughter K. lives with her father and that the younger children are strongly attached to her does not make the younger children’s residence with their mother in another town impossible, given that the mother is renting a comfortable flat where she has created material conditions suitable for their residence there together.”
Lastly, the judge found that the applicant’s allegations of neglect did not contain sufficient information for a finding that the children’s residence with their mother could be harmful for their physical or psychological health or moral development. If the applicant possessed such information, he could lodge a new application for a residence order in his favour.
A further cassation appeal by the applicant was rejected on 21 May 2018 by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation.
In March 2018 Z. changed her telephone number, closed her socialnetwork accounts and moved away from Kaluga together with S. and C. She did not give their new address or other contact details to the applicant or to her elder daughter. The applicant applied to the police. On 23 July 2018 the police informed the applicant that Z. and the twins had been located in Nizhniy Novgorod but Z. had objected to disclosing their address to the applicant.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law, see Petrov and X v. Russia (no. 23608/16, §§ 58-61, 23 October 2018).