The case originated in an application (no. 15978/09) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Igor Viktorovych Yakushev (“the applicant”), on 7 March 2009.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Kristenko a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently, Mr I. Lishchyna.
On 9 December 2013 notice of the complaint under Article 8 of the Convention concerning the dismissal of the applicant’s claim challenging his paternity was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Malyn, Zhytomyr Region.
On 17 November 1993 M. gave birth to a baby girl, K. Given that the applicant had had relations with M. at the relevant time, on 2 December 1993 he accepted paternity of K. by submitting the relevant declaration to the authorities.
On 23 March 2000 the applicant married M. They divorced in 2006.
In July 2006 the applicant instituted proceedings in the Malyn District Court against M., challenging the paternity of K. The applicant claimed that, even though he had been married to another woman at the relevant time, he had had relations with M. and he had been sure that he was the father of the child and so accepted the paternity. However, in 2005 he had reason to doubt his paternity.
On 24 March 2008 the District Court found for the applicant, relying on a genetic expert’s opinion which excluded the possibility of the applicant being K.’s biological father. The court noted that the applicant had a right to challenge his paternity given that there was no evidence in the file to suggest that he had known that he was not the father of the child when accepting paternity of K.
M. appealed, stating that from January 1993 she and the applicant had lived together without being married and that she had never had any doubts about the applicant’s paternity of K. She argued, inter alia, that the genetic expert’s opinion was not reliable.
On 29 May 2008 the Zhytomyr Regional Court of Appeal quashed the first-instance court’s decision and held that, under Article 56 of the Family and Marriage Code, the applicant had not had a right to challenge his paternity because at the time that he accepted paternity of K., he was aware that he was not K.’s father. In support of that finding the Court of Appeal noted that before K.’s birth, the applicant and M. had not been married, they had not lived together (noting, in particular, that between February and April 1993 the applicant lived in another town), and the applicant had been married to another woman at the relevant time.
The applicant appealed on a point of law, contending that there were no grounds for the Court of Appeal to find that at the material time he was aware that he was not the biological father of the child. No such evidence was available in the file and the Regional Court of Appeal had exceeded its powers in drawing such a conclusion.
On 9 September 2008 the Supreme Court of Ukraine rejected the appeal by the applicant as unfounded.
Article 56 § 2 of the Marriage and Family Code of Ukraine, in force at the material time, provided that a person who was registered as a child’s father on the basis of his own declaration (or a joint declaration submitted with the child’s mother) did not have a right to challenge his paternity if, at the time of that declaration, he had been aware that he was not the child’s father.