The case originated in an application (no. 23763/18) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Bulgarian nationals, X (“the first applicant”) and Y (“the second applicant”), on 11 May 2018. The President of the Section decided not to have their names disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Ekimdzhiev and Ms K. Boncheva, lawyers practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms I. StanchevaChinova, from the Ministry of Justice.
On 12 October 2018 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The first applicant was born in 1978. The second applicant, who is the first applicant’s son, was born in 2010. The first applicant brought the application on behalf of both applicants. Both applicants live in Pleven.
The first applicant and V.D., a well-known local businessman, lived together as a couple from 2009 onwards. In 2010 they had a child together, the second applicant. In 2012 the couple had another child.
On 6 December 2012 the first applicant and V.D. separated. The first applicant left the flat where she lived with V.D. and the children, and went to live with her parents in their apartment, taking the younger child with her.
The first applicant’s version of the events regarding the run-up to the separation and the period thereafter differs from that of V.D. This is reflected in the paragraphs below.
According to the first applicant, V.D. subjected her to psychological, emotional and financial abuse the whole time that they lived together. After their separation V.D. systematically put in place obstacles to the two applicants’ living together and it appears that the first applicant had only limited contact with her child. He either did not bring the child to her apartment as agreed, or made her wait for hours in the city for him to bring the child, which he did not always do.
According to V.D., he never objected to the two applicants’ spending time together, but was only ever concerned about the well-being of his elder child. V.D. repeatedly invited the first applicant to return to live with him, without success.
The first applicant visited a lawyer on 7 December 2012. According to a sworn statement made by that lawyer and submitted to the Court by the applicant’s representative, she had been upset and frightened because V.D. had taken away their elder child the previous day. He had threatened her by saying that she would not see the child if she were to go to court in that regard. Realising that V.D. would not let her live with the child, on 4 July 2013 the first applicant initiated judicial proceedings, seeking custody of the second applicant.
At the relevant time the second applicant lived with V.D. and the first applicant had contact with him only occasionally. In a written reply to the Pleven District Court of 27 July 2013, V.D. stated, among other things, that the first applicant had seen the child during the Christmas holidays, as well in February, June and July 2013.
On 18 September 2013 the Pleven District Court granted an application by the first applicant for interim measures, awarding her temporary custody while the proceedings were ongoing.
During the ensuing proceedings the Pleven District Court admitted two psychological expert reports into evidence. According to the two reports, the first applicant was calm and wellbalanced, and had calm conversations with her two children in her home. While living with V.D., she had felt subjugated and like a servant. The second applicant was attached to his father and was in the process of being alienated from his mother, but her involvement in the child’s life was of crucial importance for his development and well-being.
The Pleven District Court also admitted another report into evidence, a report by the social services, which referred to an incident which had occurred on 28 September 2013 outside the mother’s apartment, when V.D. had had to hand over the second applicant to the mother. The report stated that a social worker (it transpired during a court hearing that this was Y.P.) had been off work and absent from the city on that day when V.D had telephoned her telling her the child did not wish to stay with his mother. The social worker had then spoken to the first applicant on the phone, attempting to reason with her. However, the first applicant had not respected the wish of her child and neither had she listened to the social worker’s advice, but had behaved aggressively and impertinently on the phone. The report stated that, on the basis of that, it could be concluded that the first applicant’s parenting capacity was poor, that she was emotionally unbalanced, lacked tact and patience and was not capable of caring for and bringing up the second applicant.
During a hearing before the Pleven District Court on 9 October 2013, Y.P. confirmed that on the day after that incident V.D. had personally visited her at the premises of the social services and had related the details of the event to her. During another hearing before the same court seven days earlier, a police officer, who had reported to the scene on 28 September 2013 after a signal about a disturbance at the first applicant’s address, stated that he had not seen the first applicant behave rudely either to the child or to V.D. After speaking with the officer, the child had calmed down and had followed him to the mother’s apartment where he had stayed peacefully.
Having heard the parties and witnesses and considered the reports, the Pleven District Court granted the first applicant custody on 27 December 2013. The court determined that there should be extensive contact between the second applicant and V.D. – the child was to spend two weeks every month with him. V.D. was also ordered to pay financial maintenance in the amount of about 60 euros (EUR) monthly for the second applicant’s upkeep.
Following appeals by both the first applicant and V.D., on 30 May 2014 the Pleven Regional Court upheld the lower court’s judgment as regards custody. However, the court limited V.D.’s contact rights to two weekends a month, two hours every Wednesday, and a month during the summer.
The Pleven Regional Court considered a report by social services in which they had been called upon to comment on whether there had been any developments in the situation after October 2013. The report, drawn up by a social worker called S.S., listed at length the circumstances as related by the two parents regarding the whole period after their separation in December 2012. In addition, it pointed briefly to two instances, on 28 September 2013 and 19 January 2014, when the child had been reluctant to go with the mother. After the father had complained to the social services about it, they had met with the child together with a psychologist and the child had said that he had been hit by his grandfather and locked alone in a room. The report concluded that the father was in a position to provide the children with a higher standard of living, and that although the mother was attempting to create a calm environment in which to bring up the second applicant, the important adult in his life was his father. It was advisable not to change the second applicant’s habitual place of residence, which was with his father, and to give V.D. custody of the child (see also para 38 below).
The court further referred to the report provided before the first-instance court (see paragraph 14 above) and found that the social services’ statements in it were not confirmed by the rest of the evidence gathered. It observed that a single telephone conversation could not serve as a basis for a conclusion that the mother was unstable and could not care for her child. This was even more the case, given that the social worker in question had not been personally present at the scene on 28 September 2013.
The court then found that it could not be said that one parent had better parenting skills than the other. It was crucial not to allow the process of parental alienation of the mother, which had already started, to develop further. The problems associated with handing over the child to the mother were not unsurmountable. It was understandable and only natural for the child to identify with the only dwelling he called home, his father’s apartment, where he had been born and where he had lived continuously ever since, as opposed to the apartment of his maternal grandparents, which he had visited only occasionally and had not grown to accept as his home.
The court held that, while moving to live with his mother would undeniably bring about certain adaptation difficulties in the second applicant’s life, they would not be the type of difficulties to negatively affect the relationship between mother and son, and were bound to ebb away with time. Moreover, the fact that the father possessed several properties and was in the process of converting a sanatorium into his primary residence, equipped with a swimming pool and a playground, should not be decisive in terms of his child-rearing capacity. The mother’s living conditions were acceptable for that purpose. The court concluded that it would be in both children’s best interests to live together on a permanent basis with one of the parents – in this case, with the first applicant.
On 27 November 2014 the Supreme Court of Cassation dismissed an appeal on points of law by V.D., and the judgment of the Pleven Regional Court became final on that date.
It appears from the findings of the domestic courts that, while the first applicant has held custody – as an interim measure since 18 September 2013 and on the basis of the judgments thereafter – she has continually experienced difficulties with the transfer of the second applicant to her (see paragraphs 30, 53 and 56 below) and, despite the courts’ rulings, the second applicant did not live with the first applicant for lengthy period of time (see paragraphs 18, 20, 21 above and paragraphs 24 and 51 below). She repeatedly put on notice the social services and the bailiff (see paragraphs 24, 34, 35 and 36 below), and the prosecution (see paragraph 29 below), complaining of being prevented from exercising her custodial rights despite the rulings by the courts. Apart from the helpful intervention of the police on two occasions, she continued to be dependent on the other parent’s good will concerning when the child would stay with her (see paragraphs 30, 37, 51, 54 and 55 below).
The first applicant obtained a writ of enforcement on 7 April 2015, and on 16 April 2015 she sought the bailiff’s assistance in implementing the final judgment of November 2014. On six occasions in April and May 2015 the bailiff attempted (unsuccessfully) to summon V.D. so that he could hand over the child to the mother. In particular, the summons officer who was sent to deliver the request for voluntary compliance to V.D. recorded on the summons that no one had answered the door and that, according to a neighbour, V.D. maintained no contact with his neighbours.
In February 2016 the first applicant once again asked the bailiff to enforce the judgment. That same month V.D. requested that the bailiff withdraw from the case. The bailiff withdrew on 14 July 2016, on the basis that he had common interests with V.D.
A new bailiff took over the case, and on 15 September 2016 he invited V.D. to voluntarily hand over the child to the first applicant. V.D. asked the bailiff to suspend the enforcement until 11 October 2016, as he intended to use resources provided by social services which were aimed at facilitating the child’s transfer to the mother.
The bailiff summoned V.D. to hand over the child to the first applicant on 18 October 2016; the handover was mandatory. On that date, after a psychologist and a representative from the child protection agency had talked to the second applicant, who refused to leave his father, the bailiff decided to postpone the handover, noting that additional efforts had to be made to enhance the trust between mother and child. He then instructed the parties to make the necessary efforts and meet – in institutional settings and with the assistance of a psychologist – in order to facilitate the prospective handover.
In March, August and November 2017 the first applicant asked the bailiff to schedule a new date for the handover, but to no avail. On 9 March 2018 the bailiff wrote to her asking if she had complied with his instructions of October 2016. After she replied that those instructions had been directed at the person against whom the judgment was being enforced, and not at her, the bailiff specified in June 2018 that both parents were concerned. According to the first applicant, that letter only reached her in February 2019.
From March 2015 onwards the first applicant complained to the prosecuting authorities on numerous occasions about V.D.’s obstructing the enforcement of the 2014 final judgment. Initially, the prosecution service repeatedly refused to open criminal proceedings.
Thereafter, investigations were closed and reopened several times. In April 2016 the Pleven District Court set aside the latest decision by a prosecutor to terminate such an investigation. In particular, the court found that as the competent civil court had decided the question of custody in a final decision, it was unacceptable for anyone else thereafter – be it the other parent, the prosecution service or the child himself – to take a stance on this issue. The position of a person who had to comply with a judicial decision and yet kept avoiding his obligations was untenable. The situation undoubtedly represented repeated, intentional, demonstrative failures by V.D to act in accordance with the judgment. Moreover, V.D. had not denied those failures, but had instead considered them justified on the basis that they were beneficial for the child. Nothing in the file suggested that V.D. had made any attempt to return the child to the mother, and the prosecution service had wrongly considered that such inadequate conduct could have been prompted by concern for the child’s well-being.
On 18 July 2016 V.D. was charged, but ultimately on 30 March 2018 the prosecution service terminated the proceedings for lack of an offence. The first applicant was notified of the decision terminating the proceedings on 12 April 2018 and did not appeal against it.
On two occasions when V.D. had to hand the second applicant over to the mother at her apartment – on 28 September 2013 and 19 January 2014 – it appears that the child refused to stay with his mother and was calmed down and accepted to stay with her only after the intervention of the police, whom she had called for help. Two days after the first incident, the social worker Y.P., who was not present at the incident, drew up a report in which she recommended that the second applicant live with V.D., as separating the two of them would negatively affect the child’s fragile psychological state. She also wrote that it was not in the second applicant’s interests to live with his mother, who was irritable, emotionally unstable, and lacked patience and parenting ability (see paragraphs 14 and 15 above).
In January 2014 the first applicant complained to the director of the local Directorate for Social Assistance (“the Directorate”) and the Sofia branch of the State Agency for Child Protection of Y.P.’s inappropriate conduct in the context of her professional duties. In February 2014 the Directorate’s head recommended that the first applicant make efforts to improve her communication with V.D., which would facilitate relations among all those concerned. Social worker Y.P. requested to be taken out of the case, following the first applicant’s complaints about her, and that request was approved by the Directorate (see also paragraph 48 below).
In August 2014 the first applicant sought assistance from the central Directorate in Sofia, so that she could take care of her two children without stress and permanent disturbance. She complained that V.D. had not allowed her to meet with the second applicant between December 2012 and June 2013, and had proposed that she give up her custody rights in favour of him, in exchange for financial support for their second child. As she had refused, he had threatened to cause problems for her for the next fourteen years. Furthermore, on one occasion V.D. had agreed to collect the second applicant for contact on 4 August 2014 instead of 1 August 2014, but then had demanded to collect the child on 1 August. Several days later a bailiff had fined the first applicant EUR 125 for not complying with the court’s decision on contact between the second applicant and V.D.
The first applicant also complained that V.D. had established personal relations with some officials from social services. One of them, S.S., had kept telling her that she was expected to comply with V.D.’s expectations. She also referred to the report drawn up by S.S. in March 2014 (see paragraph 18 above), and asked that he be taken off her case.
In April 2015 the first applicant wrote to the Child Protection Unit (“the CPU”) of the Directorate, describing that she had been unable to meet with the second applicant since 13 March 2015, as a result of V.D.’s obstruction. The CPU forwarded her complaint to the prosecution service, which refused to open an investigation. The first applicant collected the child from V.D.’s home on 13 May 2015, and the father retained the child again between 10 and 30 June 2015, against the mother’s will. In July 2015 she again complained that V.D. had not handed the child over to her.
In August 2016 the first applicant wrote to the Directorate, signalling that for about four years, for reasons outside her control, she had not been able to live with her child. The Directorate replied that she was well acquainted with the reasons why her elder child did not wish to live with her, and there were no grounds for changing the social worker who was dealing with her case, S.S. Thereafter, the first applicant informed a specialised foundation which provided social services that as long as S.S. was in charge of her case, she was opposed to meeting the child at the foundation’s premises.
In January 2014 V.D complained to the social services about the child’s unwillingness to go with his mother on two occasions, respectively on 28 September 2013 and 19 January 2014 (see paragraphs 14, 15 and 18 above). On 6 February 2014 the head of the Directorate replied to him that social services had followed up on his complaint and on 27 January 2014 had visited the first applicant’s dwelling where both she and her father had vehemently denied ever mistreating the second applicant. Social services had met with the child two days later. It was evident that the child was suffering as a result of his parents’ separation and had difficulties adapting to the new rule at his grandfather’s home. As a result, social services had written to the first applicant recommending to her that she make an effort to improve her communication with V.D. and with the children. Additionally, she had been invited to seek psychological help for overcoming the conflicts with V.D. (see paragraph 33 above).
In April 2015, and again in July 2015, V.D. turned to the Directorate, requesting that measures be implemented to preserve the second applicant’s health and well-being. In particular, he asked for the first applicant to be instructed to always meet the second applicant in the presence of a social worker and/or a psychologist, given the anxiety she caused the child. Between April and October 2015 V.D. took the child to a psychologist five times. On 21 July 2015 the Directorate drew up a record of the case, noting, among other things, that the child consistently refused to go and live with his mother and displayed fear and emotional trauma as a result of the negative attitude towards him displayed by his mother and grandmother. The child needed to work with a psychologist in order to overcome the crisis in his relationship with his mother. Both parents were directed to individually use the services of a psychologist, with a view to having meetings at the social services premises and handing over the child to the mother.
Thereafter, four meetings were held at the foundation’s premises on consecutive days, starting on 29 July 2015, always in the presence of specialised professionals who produced a report at the end. Both the first applicant and V.D. took part in those meetings, while the second applicant attended three of them. The conclusion was that, while the child was happy to spend time in the company of his mother, he was categorically opposed to leaving the premises with only her.
In February 2016 the Directorate directed V.D. and the second applicant to attend regular preparatory counselling sessions provided by the foundation over a period of three months, with a view to facilitating the child’s acceptance of his mother.
After the first applicant repeatedly asked the Directorate for help, in March 2016 the Directorate replied that the child was firmly opposed to living with her. It said that in order to overcome this opposition, the authorities had been arranging counselling sessions for the child and the father since February 2016. For optimal results, it was necessary that the first applicant also attend such sessions, and she would have to make a specific application for this.
A report of 18 May 2016 prepared by the foundation noted that both parents had expressed willingness to receive assistance in relation to handing the child over to the mother. Another report by the foundation recorded that after 25 April 2016 individual meetings with each parent had taken place. The report concluded by giving a recommendation that the relevant work continue.
The foundation’s records noted that a meeting between the two applicants had taken place at the foundation’s premises in July 2016. V.D. had waited outside the room and the child had asked three times whether his father was waiting for him.
In October 2016 the foundation drew up a final report, noting that the necessary preparatory measures which had been envisaged in the context of working with the second applicant and his parents with a view to encouraging him to accept living with his mother had not been carried out. The child did not harbour negative emotions towards his mother, but continued to refuse to live with her. When foundation staff had advised V.D. to motivate the child to go and live with his mother, he had replied that he would act in accordance with the child’s wishes.
In February 2017 the Directorate wrote to V.D. informing him that, as the first applicant had not agreed to attend the preparatory counselling sessions, it would be impossible to work towards building an emotional closeness between the two applicants.
In June 2015 V.D. discovered a haematoma on the second applicant’s cheek, which the child explained was the result of his maternal grandmother slapping him because he had insulted her. V.D. immediately initiated proceedings concerning domestic violence. The proceedings ended with a court decision prohibiting the grandmother from approaching the child for the following six months. On 25 June 2015 she moved out of the apartment which she shared with the first applicant and left the country.
In 2016 the social worker Y.P. brought tort proceedings against the first applicant, seeking compensation for non-pecuniary damage, as she had been harmed by the first applicant’s complaints to the authorities about her professional conduct. In 2017 the relevant court rejected the claim on the merits, having considered several psychological reports and heard numerous witnesses (see paragraph 33 above).
In the meantime, as regards the second applicant, in May 2015 V.D. had initiated proceedings for a change of custody.
On 30 June 2015 the Pleven District Court granted an application by V.D. for interim measures and awarded him temporary custody; the first applicant was given contact rights.
On 14 October 2015, ruling on the merits, the Pleven District Court rejected V.D.’s application for a change of custody. The court observed that it was undisputed that the second applicant had been living with his father before the latter had brought these proceedings. In particular, between March and May 2015 V.D. had retained the child in his home despite custody having been given to the first applicant. No proof had been presented before the court, either orally or in writing, to confirm V.D.’s submissions that he and the first applicant had reached an agreement for the second applicant to live with his father. Further, there had been several complaints by the first applicant to the prosecution service in connection with her inability to have contact with the child as determined by the courts. The second applicant was happy spending time with his mother and younger sibling, and the first applicant was not preventing his contact with his father. However, the child only saw his mother at the premises of the foundation providing social services, and not in the comfort of her own home, which suggested that V.D. had not made efforts to encourage the child to stay with his mother. Continued restrictions to the second applicant’s contact with his mother would lead to his being alienated from her, which was not in his best interests. It was also important for him to live with his younger sibling, who was of a similar age.
Following an appeal by V.D., the Pleven Regional Court upheld the lower court’s decision in a final judgment of 1 February 2016.
The court observed that between December 2012 and November 2013 the second applicant had lived with V.D., and in November 2013 he had started living with the first applicant. Between December 2012 and November 2014 frequent arguments had erupted between the parents, particularly when V.D. had had to hand the child over to his mother. On such occasions the police had been called upon to intervene, as had social services.
After November 2014 the first applicant had continually complied with the court’s judgment by letting the second applicant see his father even more frequently than the court had determined. Between 16 March 2015 and 13 May 2015 the child had lived exclusively with his father, who had not handed him over to the mother during that period. The first applicant had complained about this to the CPU and the police, and neither authority had assisted her with collecting the child from the father.
The Pleven Regional Court further established that between 10 June 2015 and 14 January 2016 the second applicant had again lived with only his father. During that period the applicants had not had any meaningful contact, as they had only seen each other two or three times a month while V.D. had been collecting the younger child.
The court held that while earlier the second applicant had showed signs of unease when being handed over to his mother, this had grown into unwillingness on his part to follow her and live with her in her home. V.D. had been wrong to passively encourage the child’s resistance to going to stay with his mother. In the period before May 2015 V.D. had regularly failed to comply with the contact regime determined by the courts, by not returning the child to the mother at the set time and on the set day, which had negatively affected both the psychological state of the child and the effectiveness of the contact measures themselves.
V.D.’s overall conduct demonstrated that he had not made sufficient efforts to help the second applicant adapt to his mother’s environment. The disregard which V.D. had showed for the final judgment with which he had been obliged to comply was indicative of his lacking parenting capacity. While the second applicant undoubtedly felt ill at ease at his mother’s home, this was because of the incident when he had been hit by his grandmother, as well as his father’s conduct. The grandmother had since moved abroad, so there was no further danger of violence in the mother’s home. Moreover, the first applicant had demonstrated better parenting skills, and if the second applicant continued to be separated from her then there was a real risk that the relationship between the two would collapse. The consequences of such a development would be much graver for the child’s well-being than the stress associated with his being handed over to the mother.
The second applicant has been living with his father since 2016. According to the first applicant, she is still not able to live with her elder child or have regular contact with him.
According to V.D., the elder child has regular contact with his mother, both in person and over the phone, but refuses to live with her in the apartment of his maternal grandfather. He sees his younger brother frequently, almost every weekend, at V.D.’s apartment. The first applicant sees her elder child for a few minutes when she hands over the younger child to the father. V.D. regularly pays the financial maintenance ordered by the court.
In accordance with Article 404 of the 2007 Code of Civil Procedure (“the 2007 Code”), final judicial decisions can be subject to enforcement. Article 527 of the 2007 Code provides that if a party who is obliged to hand over a child pursuant to a final judicial decision relating to parental rights fails to do so, the bailiff can impose fines on him or her for every failure to comply with the judicial decision. In addition, the bailiff may request assistance from social services and municipal and police authorities. The bailiff can also take the child by force and hand him or her over to the parent in whose favour the decision was made.
Article 182 § 2 of the 1968 Criminal Code, in force at the time of the events, provides that a parent or another relative who prevents contact with a child or the enforcement of a court judgment on custody can be sentenced to probation, fined up to EUR 153 and, in severe cases, sentenced to up to six months’ imprisonment or a fine of up to EUR 1,533. As of April 2010 this is an offence which is subject to public prosecution, therefore only a prosecutor can initiate such proceedings.
In accordance with section 23 of the Child Protection Act, measures for protecting children in their family environment include, among other things: the provision of pedagogical, psychological and legal assistance to parents who exercise parental responsibility; the provision of appropriate social services, including counselling for the child; and social work aimed at facilitating contact between parents and children and overcoming conflict in their relationship.