The case concerns the right of a child to be heard in custody proceedings, as well as the need to appoint a special guardian ad litem to protect the child’s interests. The applicant relied on Article 8 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 2006 and lives in Rijeka. He was represented before the Court by his mother, A, and by Ms J. Biloš, a lawyer practising in Zagreb.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
By a judgment of 14 January 2010, the applicant’s parents’ marriage was dissolved. It was decided that the applicant would live with his mother, while contact sessions between him and his father, B, were to take place on the basis of a mutual agreement between the parents.
Following appeals by both parties, on 29 April 2010 the second-instance court quashed the divorce judgment of 14 January 2010 (see paragraph 5 above) and remitted the case, stating that it was necessary to determine the exact schedule of the contact sessions.
In the resumed proceedings, on 22 October 2010, the first-instance court gave judgment according to which contact sessions between B and the applicant were to take place on Wednesday afternoons, every other weekend including an overnight stay, every other public holiday, and during a part of the summer holidays. That judgment became final.
On 3 November 2011 supervision of both parents’ parental care (nadzor nad izvršenjem roditeljske skrbi) was imposed for a period of six months. That measure was subsequently prolonged at regular intervals.
In January 2012, A came to the X Social Care Centre (“the Centre”), stating that she suspected that B had sexually abused the applicant. She also lodged a criminal complaint in that connection (see paragraph 48 below).
In response, the head of the supervision measure made an unannounced visit to B’s house, where he found the applicant cheerful, not frightened, and showing affection to B. The father fully denied the mother’s allegations of abuse. The Centre also contacted the X Counselling centre and arranged an evaluation of the family. The Counselling centre subsequently interviewed A and B and held seven meetings with the applicant.
On 11 January 2012 A lodged an application for an interim measure to suspend contact between B and C. After holding a hearing, on 1 March 2012 the first-instance court accepted A’s proposal in order to protect the applicant’s best interests.  On appeal, the second-instance court amended that decision, limiting the duration of the suspension of contact until the end of June 2012. This measure was ultimately prolonged until the final conclusion of the proceedings concerning the alleged sexual abuse.
On 10 July 2012 the first-instance court ordered a psychological and psychiatric expert evaluation involving the applicant and both of his parents in order to establish whether B had sexually or otherwise abused C.
On 18 October 2012 the X Polyclinic delivered its opinion to the first-instance court concluding that there had been no signs of sexual abuse by B. It also observed that C was growing up in disrupted circumstances following the divorce of his parents and that he had been burdened with A’s negative attitudes towards his father. In addition to other aspects of the mother’s inappropriate behaviour (isolation, ignorance, manipulation), in the experts’ opinion, the facts of the case indicated emotional abuse of the applicant by his mother and it was recommended that family and legal protection measures be taken to protect the applicant from possible further emotional abuse by A. A objected to the findings of the expert opinion, claiming that its assessment had not been conducted according to the relevant court order (see paragraph 12 above).
On 5 December 2012 the first-instance court rejected A’s application for suspension of contact between B and C, as established by the judgment of 22 October 2010 (see paragraph 7 above). That decision was quashed on appeal, the second-instance court stating that the first-instance court had failed to reply to the objections raised by A to the findings of the X Polyclinic’s expert opinion.
On 29 January 2013 the Centre issued a warning to A, pointing out her mistakes and shortcomings in the upbringing of and care for the applicant due to her lack of cooperation and disregard of his best interests.
On 19 June 2013 the first-instance court ordered an additional multidisciplinary psychological and psychiatric expert opinion in order to clarify the objections raised by A.
On 3 September 2013, the expert witnesses of the X Polyclinic clarified their previous findings, confirming that there had been no suspicion of abuse by the father, while the mother’s actions had been dangerous for the child and his future development. On 7 November 2013 the experts made additional observations regarding the objections raised by A, stating that the expert assessment had been conducted according to the court order and reiterated that there had been no sexual abuse of C.
At the hearing held on 17 December 2013, A again applied for suspension of contact between B and C.  On 30 September 2014 the first-instance court rejected her application because it had been established that B had not abused the applicant. On 7 January 2015 the second-instance court dismissed an appeal lodged by A.
Meanwhile, on 28 November 2012, B brought a petition to amend the custody decision concerning the applicant, referring to the findings of the expert opinion dated 18 October 2012 that the mother had been emotionally abusing the applicant (see paragraph 13 above).
On 15 November 2013 a psychiatric and psychological evaluation was ordered.
On 13 June 2014 the first-instance court received the experts’ opinions, recommending that the applicant live with his father and have regular contact with his mother. The relevant parts of the experts’ opinions read as follows:
“There is no doubt that [the applicant] is in a symbiotic relationship with his mother, and that such a relationship is a result of the mother’s inappropriate parental behaviour. At the present stage of [the applicant’s] psycho-sexual development (latency), the symbiotic relationship between him and his mother is not appropriate for [the applicant’s] normal psychophysical development. Therefore, the regressive behaviour showed by [the applicant], which was visible during the evaluation, is not surprising. The consequences of the symbiotic relationship could be detrimental to the psychological health of [the applicant], who is already showing [symptoms of] psychological dysfunction. The symbiosis between [the applicant] and his mother should be resolved. The current dynamics of family relationship ... offers only one solution, namely that [the applicant’s care and custody] be entrusted to his father. Since the mother shows an inability to perceive her parenting behaviour as harmful, the continuation of [the applicant’s] life with his mother would only exacerbate his poor mental health, whereas he already manifests inadequate psychological functioning with regard to his age as well as ... adjustment disorders, on the basis of the evaluation of the specialist of paediatric psychiatry, Dr. K., which were manifested during this evaluation as strong intra-psychological tension, irritability, psycho-motor disorder, emotional lability and short anger episodes that reached the level of agitation.
At the present stage of the psycho-physical development of the child, it is not important which parent is more engaged in his upbringing and care; it is important for both parents to participate for the purpose of further psychosexual development of the child. Therefore, it is important for [the applicant] while a minor to have a continuous relationship with both his mother and father.”
In view of the above, the question is: what is the most appropriate measure of protection for a child in the developmental stage of latency, who remains in an inappropriate symbiotic relationship with his mother, and the father nevertheless proves to be the parent who is able to better protect the interests of the child (as perceived by all institutions, including this expert evaluation). Abrupt separation from his mother threatens disintegration and a developmental crash. Gradual separation opens the possibility for the mother, driven by her frustration, immaturity and fears, to increase the pressure on [the applicant]. It seems that the unresolved symbiotic relationship with the mother, for which she rather than the child bears responsibility, may only be interrupted in the future ‘violently’ – either by an adult or by the child himself, again accompanied by a developmental crash (for example conflict with the symbiotic parent in the upcoming adolescence and ‘chain dissipation’ which carries the risk of developing a disorder typical of the developmental stage of adolescence: defiance, rebellion, emotional or behavioural disorder, shifting dependence on other objects – dysfunctional peer groups or psychoactive agents; or the opposite – by regressing to the psychotic level of functioning ... Therefore, as the suspicion of sexual abuse by the father is multiply unjustified, as the mother has isolated the child from both his father and all other family members, as the mother-child symbiotic relationship may only be interrupted ‘violently’, as the symbiotic relationship with the mother and her functional deviations pose the main developmental risk for [the applicant], in our view the most appropriate measure of protection of [the applicant] would be to entrust his care in the future to his father, who stands out as a more adequate parent for the further psychophysical development of the child. We emphasise that the relationship between [the applicant] and his mother must remain continuous; we therefore suggest regular meetings between the two. Over time, when the situation finally stabilises, when the child ceases to be a ‘patch’ in the dysfunctional parental relationship, when he is convinced that he has both his mum and dad – his developmental potential could be released.”
At the hearing held on 11 March 2015, A submitted the findings of a psychologist, J.H., whom she had privately hired. They stated that, prior to enforcing any measure, it would be necessary for both parents to undergo psychotherapy and to gradually establish communication and an emotional bond between B and the applicant, taking the child’s needs into consideration in the process.
On 3 June 2015 the first-instance court gave judgment, ordering that the father have custody of the applicant and ordering a schedule for contact with the mother. The relevant part of that judgment reads as follows:
“The Court entirely accepted as competent and complete the findings and opinions of the expert witnesses, whose claims did not contradict the conclusions of the experts involved in the relationship between the parties, according to which it is considered that the parents of the minor [applicant] do not have a minimum joint performance, or minimum parental cooperation in relation to their shared child. The minor [applicant] is more burdened by his mother’s negative attitudes towards his father, than with his father’s negative attitudes towards the mother and he follows the instructions of this mother. The ‘symbiotic attachment of the mother’ to the child is being encouraged by the [mother], suggesting that the [mother] does not allow access to any other person that could endanger this symbiosis; therefore, instead of becoming ever more mature and independent, [the applicant] shows regressive developmental tendencies and still uses baby talk. Therefore, the father stands out as the parent who protects the child’s interest better than the mother, and taking into consideration that the suspicion of abuse by the father has proven unjustified, it is in the interest and for the benefit of [the applicant for his care] to be entrusted to his father, who stands out as a more adequate parent for the further psychophysical development of the child and who could establish better parental co-operation.
The court considers that the evidence in the case show that [the applicant] had been emotionally abused by his mother, and that [his mother] has been focusing more on resolving the mutual conflict with [his father] rather than on meeting the needs of [the applicant], in particular developing a close relationship between him and his father.
During the proceedings, the court issued two interim measures in order to re-establish contact between the father and [the applicant], and although the meetings had initially started taking place, they were eventually discontinued because, as the [mother] stated, [the applicant] did not want to see his father, although the authorities, who had continuously attempted to help the parents, established that it was the mother who showed inappropriate parental behaviour expressing her negative attitudes towards the father, as well as isolating, ignoring and manipulating the child.
Therefore, the court concludes that the father proves to be the parent who is able to better protect the interests of the child, accept expert suggestions and help, cooperate with the authorities and who is guided by the child’s best interests rather than by his own.”
The first-instance court also issued a provisional measure, ordering that the applicant was to live with his father until the final conclusion of the court proceedings.
On 2 October 2015 the second-instance court dismissed A’s appeal against the above judgment. The applicant then lodged a constitutional complaint, which was dismissed by the Constitutional Court on 27 April 2017.
In the meantime, on 2 July 2015, during a conversation with a lawyer from the Centre, A stated that she would not act in accordance with the judgment of 3 June 2015 (see paragraph 23 above). She was warned of the consequences of non-compliance with that judgment.
On 8 July 2015 A stated at the police station that she refused to hand over the child to his abusive father.
On 30 December 2015 B lodged an application for enforcement of the judgment of 3 June 2015 (see paragraph 23 above).
On 15 January 2016 the first-instance court issued an enforcement order, ordering A to immediately hand over the applicant to B.
An enforcement attempt scheduled for 11 March 2016 was unsuccessful because the applicant and A were not found at their address.
On 30 March 2016 A was fined 10,000 Croatian kunas (HRK) for failing to act in accordance with the enforcement order.
On 8 April 2016, A and B were invited to the Centre to attempt to reach an agreement. Both parents expressed their willingness to cooperate and B subsequently informed the court bailiff that he temporarily waived enforcement. Enforcement was ultimately continued since A had failed to respond to further calls by the Centre for the purpose of arranging contact sessions.
On 8 April 2016 A applied for postponement of the enforcement, claiming that she had not been aware of a previous enforcement attempt and that she had been served the enforcement order only on 7 April 2016. She proposed that enforcement be postponed until the Constitutional Court had decided on C’s constitutional complaint (see paragraph 25 above). Her application was dismissed.
On 15 June 2016 the judgment of 3 June 2015 (see paragraph 23 above) was enforced at the playground of the applicant’s school during his football training, in the presence of court bailiffs, police officers and representatives of the Centre. After a short conversation with his father, the applicant agreed to go home with him. Later that day, the applicant ran away from B’s home and went back to his mother.
On 16 June 2016 the first-instance court issued a ruling declaring the enforcement final and rejected an appeal lodged by A.
A did not lodge a constitutional complaints against any of the decisions issued in the enforcement proceedings.
It would appear that B again applied for enforcement of the judgment of 3 June 2015 (see paragraph 23 above), but that those enforcement proceedings were stayed pending the outcome of the third set of custody proceedings (see paragraph 39 below).
On 21 June 2016 A was summoned to appear at the Centre, where she stated that on the evening following the enforcement the applicant had come to her of his own motion, visibly frightened, and that she had taken him to a children’s hospital for examination.
On 21 September 2016, A lodged a civil action against B, requesting amendment of the judgment of 3 June 2015 (see paragraph 23 above) and applying for an interim measure to order that the applicant’s temporary residence be set with her.
According to an expert opinion issued in May 2017, it was recommended that the applicant live with his mother for a period of six months, during which time he and B were to undergo psychotherapeutic treatment in order to resolve their conflicts. It was also stated that, should the mother continue to obstruct the applicant’s contact with his father, it would be best for the applicant to be temporarily separated from both his parents.
On 8 September 2017 the first-instance court issued an interim measure, by which the applicant was temporarily to live with A, whereas B was to be allowed supervised contact.
During the proceedings, both parents and the applicant underwent a combined psychological and psychiatric evaluation. As a result, on 24 January 2018 the Centre issued a “measure of supervision of personal relations” (mjera nadzora nad ostvarivanjem osobnih odnosa) between B and C, for a period of six months, subsequently renewing it once. During that period, the applicant had supervised contact with his father once a week for two hours.
These proceedings were suspended until the final conclusion of the proceeding concerning the applicant’s temporary placement outside the family (see paragraph 44 below). They are still ongoing.
Relying on the recommendation of the expert opinion from May 2017 (see paragraph 40 above), on 1 March 2019 the Centre applied to the court to have A’s right to live with the applicant revoked and for him to be temporarily placed outside the family in a competent care institution for a period of one year, while ensuring his contact with both parents. In the centre’s opinion, the mother’s behaviour and her inappropriate and negative attitude towards the father had caused the applicant’s further alienation from the latter and refusal to have closer contact with him. In the Centre’s opinion, the mother’s actions had amounted to emotional abuse of the child.
The mother opposed the Centre’s proposal, and so did the applicant’s specially-appointed guardian ad litem, claiming that such an action was not in his best interest.
On 12 April 2019 the Rijeka Municipal Court dismissed the Centre’s application, finding no reason for the placement of the applicant in a children’s home. The applicant, who was 13 years old, had lived with his mother since birth, had been severely traumatised by the enforcement of the court judgment ordering him to live with his father (see paragraph 34 above) and strongly opposed placement in a children’s home. In any event, the court noted that the proposed children’s home had no available places and that B and the applicant were still undergoing the psychotherapeutic treatment recommended by experts (see paragraph 40 above).
Following an appeal by the Centre, on 9 August 2019 the Zagreb County Court upheld the first-instance decision.
On 11 January 2012, A reported her suspicions that B had sexually abused the applicant to the police (see paragraph 9 above). Following an investigation, on 19 March 2014 the State Attorney’s Office dismissed A’s complaint, finding that there had been no reasonable suspicion that B had committed the criminal offence he was accused of. A subsequent application on the part of A to have investigative actions in respect of B conducted was dismissed.
In another set of proceedings, based on the results of the investigations carried out and in particular the opinion of the combined expert evaluations and the suspicion that A had emotionally abused the applicant (see paragraphs 13 above), on 12 September 2014 an indictment for the criminal offence of violation of a child’s rights was issued against A.  These proceedings are ongoing.
On 7 July 2015, B brought criminal charges against A for the criminal offence of failing to implement a decision on the protection of the child’s well-being and an indictment against A was issued on 20 October 2015. The indictment was confirmed on 6 October 2017 and those proceedings are ongoing.
The relevant provisions of the Family Act 2003 (Obiteljski zakon, Official Gazette no. 163/03 with subsequent amendments), which was in force between 22 July 2003 and 31 October 2015, read as follows:
Section 89
“(1)  A child is entitled to seek protection of his or her rights before the relevant authorities, which must inform the social-care centre [Centar za socijalnu skrb] thereof.
(2)  The child is entitled to a special guardian ad litem in cases specified by this Act.
(3)  The special guardian shall be appointed by the social-care centre in cases where another authority is deciding on the infringement of the child’s right, and by the court when the social-care centre is competent to decide on a right of the child.
(4)  The special guardian shall submit a report on the representation of the child at the request of, and within the time-limit set forth by, the authority that appointed him or her.
(5)  In proceedings involving decisions on the child’s right or interest the child is entitled to be informed in an appropriate way of the relevant circumstances of the case, obtain advice and express his or her views, and to be informed of the possible consequences of [those] views. The [child’s] views shall be given due weight in accordance with his or her age and maturity.”
Section 167
“In order to protect certain personal and pecuniary rights and interests the social-care centre shall appoint a special guardian ad litem ...
... in other cases where the interests of the child conflict with those of the parents.”
The relevant provisions of the Family Act 2015 (Obiteljski zakon, Official Gazette no. 103/15), which came into force on 1 November 2015, reads as follows:
Section 86
“2.  ... In all proceedings involving decisions on the child’s right or interest the child is entitled to be informed in an appropriate way of the relevant circumstances of the case, obtain advice and express his or her views, and to be informed of the possible consequences of [those] views. The [child’s] views shall be given due weight in accordance with his or her age and maturity.”
Section 360
“(1) In proceedings concerning personal or proprietary rights and interests of the child, the court will enable the child to express his or her opinion, unless the child declines.
(2) The court shall enable the child to express his or her opinion in an appropriate place and in the presence of a professional, if it considers that necessary in the circumstances of the case.
(3) In an exception to paragraph 2 of this section, in the case of a child younger than 14 the court shall enable his or her opinion to be expressed by way of a special guardian ad litem or another professional person.
(4) The [competent] court is not under an obligation to obtain a child’s opinion in cases where there are particularly important reasons, which shall be explained in the decision.
(5) Every child under paragraph 1 of this section needs to be informed of the subject, evolution and possible outcome of the proceedings in a manner appropriate to his or her age and maturity, in so far as that does not present a danger to the development, education or health of the child.
(6) The obligation provided in paragraph 5 of this section is incumbent on the special guardian ad litem, the court or an expert from the [competent social-care authority], depending on the circumstances of the case, which the court shall take into account.”
Section 536
“(1) If it is impossible to reach an agreement in matters concerning the personal rights of the child, which raise the issue of with which parent ... a child will live, ...the court may of its own motion or following a proposal by the child or a parent decide on the matter by an interim measure.
...
(4) If the interests of the child and the parents are in conflict, the child under paragraph 1 of this section shall be represented by a special guardian ad litem appointed by the [relevant] social-care centre....
(5) In proceedings as those under paragraph 1 ... of this section, the court shall enable the child to express his or her opinion in accordance with section 360 of this Act. ...”
The relevant international law has been summarised in M. and M. v. Croatia, no. 10161/13, §§ 94-99, 102, ECHR 2015 (extracts).