The case concerns the alleged breach of Article 8 of the Convention on account of the annulment of the applicant’s Russian citizenship and the subsequent decision to remove him from Russian territory.
The applicant was born in 1977 in Tajikistan. In 2007 he moved to Russia, where he was arrested in 2018 and placed in a temporary detention centre for foreigners for his failure to comply with domestic authorities’ decision prescribing him to leave the country. He was represented by Mr Y. Mylnikov, a lawyer practising in Velikiy Novgorod.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Government to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant was born in Tajikistan, which at the time was one of the Soviet Republics. He had three brothers and two sisters.
In 2001 he married Ms M., who gave birth to their two children, A. and D. They were born in 2001 and 2003 respectively.
On an unspecified date in 2007 the applicant, together with his wife and children, went to Russia and settled there.
On 7 April 2008 he received a residence permit for a term of three years.
On 16 May 2008 he applied to the Novgorod Regional Department of the Federal Migration Service for Russian citizenship under the simplified naturalisation procedure applicable to former citizens of the USSR. In the section of the application form entitled “Close relatives (husband (wife), parents, children, brothers and sisters)” he mentioned his wife, parents, children and a brother. According to the applicant, he did not mention his two other brothers and two sisters because a duty officer had told him that it was not necessary to list all of his relatives.
On 15 July 2008 the applicant was granted Russian citizenship.
On unspecified dates later the Novgorod Regional Department of the Federal Migration Service granted Russian citizenship to his wife and two children.
The applicant and his wife had two more children, N., born in 2009, and S., born in 2016.
The applicant worked in the agricultural sector and owned the apartment where he lived with his family.
On 28 September 2017 the Novgorod Regional Department of the Ministry of the Interior (“the DMI”, which replaced the Federal Migration Service) applied to the Novgorod District Court of the Novgorod Region (“the District Court”) to have it established as a legal fact that the applicant had submitted false information about his siblings when applying for Russian citizenship in 2008. Such a finding was required for the annulment of the applicant’s Russian citizenship.
On 20 November 2017 the District Court allowed the application on the grounds that the omission was not disputed by the applicant. The court dismissed his arguments that the officer on duty had advised him not to list all of his relatives; that the missing information was not important; that he did not intend to mislead the authorities; and that he had strong ties with Russia. The first argument was found to be unsubstantiated by evidence and the others were considered to be irrelevant to the subject matter of the case.
The applicant challenged that decision by way of an appeal and cassation appeals before the Novgorod Regional Court (“the Regional Court”) and the Supreme Court of Russia. Those courts dismissed the appeals on 14 March, 1 June and 17 August 2018 respectively, endorsing the District Court’s reasoning.
On 5 April 2018, referring to the finding of the domestic courts that the applicant had submitted false (incomplete) information about his relatives, the DMI annulled his Russian citizenship, his “internal passport” (a citizen’s identity document for use in Russia) and “travel passport” (a citizen’s identity document for use abroad). As a result, the applicant was left without any valid identity documents.
On an unspecified date in 2018 the applicant challenged the compatibility of section 22 of the Russian Citizenship Act (see paragraph 33 below) with the Russian Constitution. He claimed that it arbitrarily provided for the annulment of Russian citizenship without taking into account a person’s individual circumstances. The applicant further noted that Russian law did not stipulate any time-limit for the annulment of citizenship.
On 15 January 2019 the Constitutional Court refused to examine his complaint on the merits. It held that the application of the impugned section of the Russian Citizenship Act could only result in the automatic annulment of Russian citizenship if it had been established that a person did not meet the conditions required for obtaining citizenship. It also noted that the wording of the impugned section did not absolve the authorities from taking into account surrounding circumstances, such as the time elapsed since the decision granting Russian citizenship. According to the court, to hold otherwise would be contrary to the principles of the rule of law and justice or the requirements of necessary and proportionate interference with human rights. Lastly, the court mentioned that the decision to annul a person’s citizenship could be challenged in court and was thus subject to its scrutiny.
On 12 April 2018 the Novgorod Regional Department of the Federal Security Service drew up a decision imposing on the applicant a thirtyfiveyear entry ban preventing him from entering Russia until April 2053. It was stated that he posed a threat to national security and public order. He was informed of that decision on 14 June 2018.
On an unspecified date he challenged the entry ban before the Regional Court, which dismissed his appeal on 29 November 2018. The court found that the entry ban had been issued by the competent authority on the grounds that he posed a threat to Russia’s national security. Without disclosing the information underlying that conclusion, the court held that the impugned measure was appropriate in the applicant’s situation. The court noted that he could settle in any country, including Tajikistan. There was no risk to his life there. His family could follow him or stay in Russia. If that happened, he could support them from abroad.
The applicant appealed against the Regional Court’s decision to the Supreme Court of Russia. The appeal was dismissed on 17 April 2019 on the grounds that the Regional Court when examining the case had not breached substantive or procedural rules of domestic law in a manner that could affect the outcome of the proceedings.
On 13 August 2018 the DMI informed the applicant of his obligation to leave Russian territory before 17 August 2018 given the entry ban imposed on him by the Federal Security Service. He did not comply with the order.
On 29 November 2018 a DMI officer drew up an administrative offence report in respect of the applicant for breaching the rules governing the stay of foreign nationals in Russia, specifically for his failure to comply with the DMI’s order to leave the country. The case was transferred to the District Court for examination on the merits.
On the same day, 29 November 2018, that court, taking into account the annulment of the applicant’s Russian citizenship, the imposition of the entry ban on him and his failure to comply with the order to leave Russia, found him guilty of an administrative offence under Article 18.8 § 1.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”), namely “a breach by a foreigner or stateless person of the rules for entry into Russia or staying in the country”. It imposed a fine on him in the amount of RUB 2,000 (EUR 29) and ordered his forcible administrative removal from Russia.
The court imposed the minimum fine provided for by domestic law because the applicant had never committed other administrative offences and had dependent minor children. It did not however see any circumstances which would prevent it from applying administrative removal as a sanction. The court dismissed the applicant’s argument concerning the adverse effect of the removal on his family situation, stating that a foreigner could not be exempt from compliance with Russian law on the grounds that his relatives were Russian nationals.
The applicant was immediately placed in a temporary detention centre for foreigners pending his administrative removal. He appealed against the court’s decision, arguing that his removal would be in breach of Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention.
On 11 December 2018 the Novgorod Regional Court upheld the decision in question. It stated that there was no evidence that the applicant’s removal from Russia would be in breach of Article 3 of the Convention. It also held that Article 8 of the Convention did not prevent States from controlling the entry and stay of foreigners in their territory. Furthermore, according to the court, that Article did not impose on the State an obligation to respect the choice of residence of spouses or to allow family reunification in its territory.
On 10 December 2018 the Court granted the applicant’s request for interim measures under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court in connection with his complaints under Articles 3 and 8 and indicated to the Russian Government not to remove him to Tajikistan for the duration of the proceedings before the Court.
On 19 December 2018 the District Court ordered that the proceedings concerning the applicant’s removal be stayed for the duration of the proceedings before the Court. The applicant continued to be detained in custody. On unspecified dates he appealed against his detention.
On 21 December 2018 and on 22 May 2019 the Regional Court and the Supreme Court of Russia respectively dismissed the applicant’s appeals.
On an unspecified date in 2019 the applicant challenged the lawfulness of his continued detention in custody, but on 27 September 2019 the District Court declared that it was lawful.
Section 22 of the Act in its relevant part reads as follows:
“1. A decision granting Russian citizenship ... shall be annulled if it is established that it has been taken on the basis of falsified documents or false information knowingly submitted by the applicant, or if the applicant refuses to take the oath.
The submission of falsified documents or knowingly false information must be established by a court...”
Section 54 of the Regulation, as in force at the material time, specified the procedure for annulment of a decision on Russian citizenship. The relevant part it reads as follows:
“... The form of the annulment decision (заключение об отмене решения по вопросам гражданства Российской Федерации) shall comply with the form approved by the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation or by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation. It must contain information about the legal basis for the [impugned decision on Russian citizenship]; information about the court’s decision establishing a legal fact of the use of falsified documents or false information knowingly submitted by the applicant to acquire or terminate his or her Russian citizenship; a description of the circumstances established by a court; and reference to the relevant section of the Russian Citizenship Act which serves as a legal basis for the annulment of a previously taken decision on Russian citizenship.”
Presidential Decree no. 398 of 17 June 2020 amended section 54 of the Regulation. It provided that a decision to annul citizenship had to be reasoned and had to describe the circumstances which had been taken into consideration by the competent authority. The relevant part of the amended provision in its relevant part reads as follows:
“... [The annulment decision] ... shall be reasoned. It must contain information about the legal basis for the [impugned decision on Russian citizenship], as well as information about a legal basis for the annulment of the decision on Russian citizenship accompanied by a description of the circumstances which led to its adoption.”
For a summary of domestic provisions concerning residence permits for foreign nationals, administrative removal of foreign nationals and refusal of entry into Russian Federation see Liu v. Russia (no. 2) (no. 29157/09, §§ 45-52, 26 July 2011). For a summary of domestic provisions regarding Russian citizenship, Russian passports, the Federal Migration Service and administrative liability for certain offences see Alpeyeva and Dzhalagoniya v. Russia (nos. 7549/09 and 33330/11, §§ 56, 59, 62-64 and 70-72, 12 June 2018).
In its inadmissibility decision of 21 April 2011 (no. 554-O-O) the Constitutional Court dismissed a complaint lodged by a person, who claimed that section 22 of the Russian Citizenship Act was incompatible with the Russian Constitution. The court concluded that the impugned provision was not arbitrary because it was only applicable in cases where individuals did not satisfy the conditions required for obtaining Russian citizenship.
On 25 October 2016 the Constitutional Court by other inadmissibility decision dismissed a similar complaint lodged by a person, who was stripped of Russian citizenship for failing to mention his two minor children in his application for Russian citizenship. The court repeated the arguments used in its decision of 21 April 2011.
On 15 January, 12 and 28 February 2019 the Constitutional Court in the same manner dismissed several more similar complaints, including that of the applicant (see paragraphs 18 and 19 above). In addition to its previous reasoning, the court stated that the competent authorities should take into account surrounding circumstances, such as the time elapsed since the decision granting Russian citizenship for their decision to comply with the requirements of necessary and proportionate interference with human rights.
The principal Council of Europe document concerning nationality is the European Convention on Nationality (ETS No. 166), which was adopted on 6 November 1997 and came into force on 1 March 2000. It has been ratified by twenty-one member States of the Council of Europe. Russia signed this Convention on 6 November 1997 but has not ratified it.
Article 7 of that Convention (“Loss of nationality ex lege or at the initiative of a State Party”) in the relevant part read as follows:
“1.  A State Party may not provide in its internal law for the loss of its nationality ex lege or at the initiative of the State Party except in the following cases:
...
b)  acquisition of the nationality of the State Party by means of fraudulent conduct, false information or concealment of any relevant fact attributable to the applicant; ...”
The Explanatory report to the European Convention on Nationality in the relevant part reads as follows:
“58.  Article 7 consists of an exhaustive list of cases where nationality may be lost automatically by operation of law (ex lege) or at the initiative of a State Party. In these limited cases, and subject to certain conditions, a State Party may withdraw its nationality. The provision is formulated in a negative way in order to emphasise that the automatic loss of nationality or a loss of nationality at the initiative of a State Party cannot take place unless it concerns one of the cases provided for under this article. However, a State Party may allow persons to retain its nationality even in such cases. Article 7 does not refer to cases in which there have been administrative errors which are not considered in the country in question to constitute cases of loss of nationality.
...
Fraudulent conduct, false information or concealment of any relevant fact has to be the result of a deliberate act or omission by the applicant which was a significant factor in the acquisition of nationality. For example, if a person acquires the nationality of the State Party on condition that the nationality of origin would subsequently be renounced and the person voluntarily did not do so, the State Party would be entitled to provide for the loss of its nationality. Moreover, for the purpose of this Convention, “concealment of any relevant fact” means concealment of a relevant condition which would prevent the acquisition of nationality by the person concerned (such as bigamy). “Relevant” in this context refers to facts (such as concealment of another nationality, or concealment of a conviction for a serious offence) which, had they been known before the nationality was granted, would have resulted in a decision refusing to grant such nationality.
The wording of this sub-paragraph is also intended to cover the acquisition of nationality by false pretences (false or incomplete information or other deceitful action, notably by means of non-authentic or untrue certificates), threats, bribery and other similar dishonest actions.
63  In cases where the acquisition of nationality has been the result of the improper conduct specified in sub-paragraph b, States are free either to revoke the nationality (loss) or to consider that the person never acquired their nationality (void ab initio).”