The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 22 January 1997, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention. It originated in two applications (nos. 23184/94 and 23185/94) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Commission under Article 25 on 15 December 1993 by two Turkish citizens, Mrs Keje Selçuk and Mr İsmet Asker.

The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby Turkey recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Articles 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 13, 14 and 18 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 § 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicants stated that they wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyers who would represent them (Rule 30).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr F. Gölcüklü, the elected judge of Turkish nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)). On 21 February 1997, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr R. Macdonald, Mr A.N. Loizou, Mr G. Mifsud Bonnici, Mr J. Makarczyk, Mr P. Jambrek, Mr U. Lōhmus and Mr E. Levits (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 5).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government of Turkey (“the Government”), the applicants’ lawyers and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 § 1 and 38). Pursuant to the orders made in consequence and to the Government’s request for a postponement of the hearing and the Government’s and applicants’ requests for extensions of the time-limit for the filing of memorials, the Registrar received the Government’s and the applicants’ memorials on 28 October 1997.
On 13 November 1997 the Commission produced certain documents from the file on the proceedings before it, as requested by the Registrar on the President’s instructions.
Subsequently Mr R. Bernhardt replaced as President of the Chamber Mr Ryssdal, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 21 §§ 4 (b) and 6).
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 26 January 1998. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.

There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Bratza, Ms Reidy and Mr Özmen. 
Subsequently Sir John Freeland, substitute judge, replaced as a full member of the Chamber Mr Macdonald, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 22 § 1).
Introduction
The first applicant, Mrs Keje Selçuk, was born in 1939. She is a widow and the mother of five children. The second applicant, Mr İsmet Asker, was born in 1933. He is married to Mrs Fatma Asker and has seven children.
Until June 1993 both applicants, who are Turkish citizens of Kurdish origin, lived in the village of İslamköy, but they have since moved to Diyarbakır.

9.  Since approximately 1985, serious disturbances have raged in the south-east of Turkey between the security forces and the members of the PKK (Workers’ Party of Kurdistan). This confrontation has so far, according to the most recent figures provided by the Government, claimed the lives of 4,036 civilians and 3,884 members of the security forces.
At the time of the Court’s consideration of the case, ten of the eleven provinces of south-eastern Turkey had since 1987 been subjected to emergency rule.
İslamköy, a scattered community of about 150 households, is situated in a mountainous region in the Kulp district, in the province of Diyarbakır in south-east Turkey, within the state of emergency region and near to a road that was used by members of the PKK.
The facts in this case are disputed.
The applicants complain that soldiers from Kulp, under the command of Recep Cömert, the Commanding Officer of the Kulp gendarmerie (“CO”), deliberately burned their homes in İslamköy on 16 June 1993 and, ten days later, returned to burn the mill partly owned by Mrs Selçuk.
They state that, some months earlier, the villagers had been warned by security forces that certain of their houses would be destroyed, on the grounds that they were allegedly used by the PKK, if the villagers did not leave İslamköy, although they subsequently came to believe that this threat had been retracted.
Nonetheless, according to the applicants, on the morning of 16 June 1993 a large number of soldiers came to İslamköy, under the command of CO Cömert, whom they knew as “Recep” because he had come to the village on a number of previous occasions.
The soldiers went first to the house of Mr and Mrs Asker, which they forcibly entered and searched, telling the Askers to remove their possessions. However, while the latter were inside, trying to save their furniture and belongings, they realised that the soldiers had set fire to the house. Mr Asker told the Commission’s delegates (see paragraph 26 below) that, had he and his wife not been able to escape through a door to the barn at the back of the house, they would have been asphyxiated. Villagers who attempted to extinguish the fire were prevented from doing so by the soldiers. The house, barn and all of Mr Asker’s property, including his food stocks and poplar trees, were destroyed.

14.  The security forces then went to Mrs Selçuk’s house. They ejected her and some neighbours’ children who were staying with her, poured petrol on the house and set fire to it. Villagers were again prevented from assisting and CO Cömert pushed Mrs Selçuk, leading her to understand that she should leave the village. She stayed that night in a neighbour’s house in İslamköy and the following day went to live with her daughter in Diyarbakır. 
Approximately ten days later, on or about 25 June 1993, the soldiers returned to the village and burned down the mill co-owned by Mrs Selçuk and three others. Three other houses were set on fire in the village, two of them destroyed. Mrs Selçuk’s brother-in-law, Mr Nesih Selçuk, telephoned her in Diyarbakır with the news.
Mr and Mrs Asker left İslamköy on or about 25 June 1993; they saw the smoke from the fires as they were leaving. They went initially to Kulp, where Mr Asker lodged a petition with the District Governor, setting out the losses caused by the security forces and naming “Recep” as the commanding officer. The District Governor apparently accepted the petition and referred it to the police, but Mr Asker never received a response to it.
The headman (muhtar) of İslamköy at the time, Mr Sait Memiş, also allegedly informed the District Governor approximately ten days after the incident that the houses had been burnt, although he attributed the burning to the PKK.
In his evidence to the Commission’s delegates (see paragraph 26 below), CO Cömert explained that he had been stationed as commander of the Central Kulp gendarmerie between 15 July 1991 and 3 August 1993. He had visited İslamköy on three occasions and knew Mr Asker and most of the other inhabitants. He did not, however, visit the village during the month of June 1993 and he had received no reports of any houses being burnt there at that time. When asked why he thought the applicants had named him, he told the delegates that untrue allegations of this type had been made against him in the past in newspapers and a book.
The Government contended that the applicants’ complaints were concocted by others and that they were acting under the influence of the PKK and/or with a view to obtaining money.

They submitted that the applicants’ homes and possessions were destroyed by the PKK, which purported to replace the State in the region, as a punishment and a warning, since the villagers generally had good relations with the security forces. The two applicants in particular were law-abiding citizens with no history of anti-governmental activity. At the time of the events in question, Mr Asker’s son was doing his military service, an activity which the PKK urged the people in the region to avoid, and Mrs Selçuk had one son in the army and another in the civil service. 
The Government questioned whether Mrs Selçuk’s mill was burned at all, but if it was, denied that this was done by security forces.
They further disputed that Mr Asker lodged any petition with the Kulp District Governor, since he could not produce any acknowledgment of receipt and no such petition was registered in the records.
Following the communication of the applications by the Commission to the Government on 15 April 1994, it appears that the Ministry of Justice (International Law and External Relations General Directorate) contacted the Principal Public Prosecutor’s office in Diyarbakır, which in turn wrote to the Public Prosecutor’s office in Kulp on 4 May 1994, enquiring whether the applicants had made any complaint and requesting that an investigation be initiated if they had not.
Since no petitions from the applicants could be traced, the Kulp public prosecutor opened investigation file 1994/57. On 11 May 1994, he requested the Kulp gendarmerie to ascertain the applicants’ whereabouts and to invite them to come and see him as soon as possible and on 18 May 1994 he wrote to the District Governor asking whether any petition had been filed by Mr Asker. By letter dated 26 May 1994, Gendarme Captain Ali Ergulmez replied, on behalf of the District Governor, that an examination of the records disclosed that no complaint had been filed by Mr Asker.
Mr Asker made a statement to the public prosecutor on 20 June 1994 and Mrs Selçuk made one on 21 June 1994.
On 18 August 1994, the public prosecutor sent a request to the district gendarmerie commander for information to be given promptly as to whether an operation led by CO Cömert had been carried out at İslamköy on 16 June 1993 and whether the applicants’ houses had been burned by those units.

No reply to this enquiry was included with the documents from the investigation file provided to the Commission. Similarly, it appeared from that file that no statements were taken from the alleged perpetrators of the burning or from other villagers who might have witnessed events. 
On 30 November 1994, the public prosecutor, Mr Erdal Yatmis, issued a decision of non-jurisdiction, stating that the matter concerned allegations of damage to property occurring in the winter months of 1993 during an intensive clash between the security forces and the PKK, and that since the security forces were involved in the course of their administrative duties, jurisdiction lay with the Administrative Council (see paragraph 44 below). Pursuant to this decision, the file was transferred to the Kulp District Governor on 30 November 1995.
The Commission conducted an investigation with the assistance of the parties and accepted documentary evidence, including written witness statements and copies of the duty log of Kulp gendarmerie for the periods in question. Three delegates of the Commission heard the oral evidence of ten witnesses, including the applicants, Mr Asker’s wife and Mrs Selçuk’s brother-in-law, and five other former inhabitants of İslamköy or its neighbouring hamlets (Necmettin Korkmaz, Tevfik Karaaslan, Sait Memiş, Celal Şeker and Şah Şimşek), and CO Cömert, in Ankara in February 1996. Four of the witnesses whose presence had been requested failed to attend the hearings, including the public prosecutors from Lice and Kulp (see paragraph 25 above). In addition, despite repeated requests from the Commission’s secretariat and delegates, the Government failed to provide the complete set of records relating to the activities of the security forces in the Kulp district in June 1993.
In relation to the oral evidence, the Commission was aware of the difficulties attached to assessing evidence obtained orally through interpreters (in some cases via Kurdish and Turkish into English). It therefore paid careful attention to the meaning and significance which should be attributed to the statements of witnesses appearing before its delegates. In respect of both written and oral evidence, the Commission was aware that the cultural context of the applicants and the witnesses made it inevitable that dates and other details (in particular, numerical details) lacked precision and did not consider that this by itself impinged upon the credibility of the testimony.

The Commission’s findings of fact can be summarised as follows.
Early in the morning of 16 June 1993, a large force of gendarmes arrived in the village of İslamköy. A number of them, under the apparent command of CO Cömert, went to Mr Asker’s house. The house was set on fire, causing the destruction of the property and most of its contents. Mr and Mrs Asker ran inside the house in an attempt to save their possessions: this occurred either while the gendarmes were setting fire to the house by pouring petrol onto it, or just before; it was not established that the house was set on fire while the Askers were inside. Villagers came to see what was happening and were prevented from trying to put out the fire.
A number of gendarmes, including CO Cömert, then proceeded to Mrs Selçuk’s house. Despite her protests, petrol was poured on her house, which was set on fire, by, or under the orders of, CO Cömert. Villagers, including two of those who gave evidence to the Commission’s delegates, were prevented from putting out the fire. Mrs Selçuk’s house and its contents were completely destroyed.
Mr and Mrs Asker left the village briefly and returned about ten days later. Mrs Selçuk spent the night or several nights in the village and then left to stay in Diyarbakır with her daughter.
On or about 26 June 1993, a force of gendarmes arrived in İslamköy; they were seen on the road nearby and in the village itself. The mill belonging to Mrs Selçuk and others, which stood on a creek in İslamköy, was set on fire and destroyed. CO Cömert was seen with the gendarmes at the mill when this occurred.
Mr Asker complained about the destruction of his home to the District Governor in Kulp, presenting a petition. No steps were taken in response to this.
Following these events, Mrs Selçuk and Mr and Mrs Asker moved to live permanently in Diyarbakır. İslamköy was abandoned completely by the end of 1994 due to increased PKK activity.
Article 125 of the Turkish Constitution provides as follows:
“All acts or decisions of the administration are subject to judicial review...

The administration shall be liable to indemnify any damage caused by its own acts and measures.” 
The above provision is not subject to any restrictions even in a state of emergency or war. The latter requirement of the provision does not necessarily require proof of the existence of any fault on the part of the administration, whose responsibility is of an absolute, objective nature, based on a concept of collective liability and referred to as the theory of “social risk”. Thus the administration may indemnify people who have suffered damage from acts committed by unknown or terrorist authors when the State may be said to have failed in its duty to maintain public order and safety, or in its duty to safeguard individual life and property.
The principle of administrative liability is reflected in the additional section 1 of Law no. 2935 of 25 October 1983 on the State of Emergency, which provides:
“... actions for compensation in relation to the exercise of the powers conferred by this Law are to be brought against the administration before the administrative courts.”
The Turkish Criminal Code makes it a criminal offence:
– to deprive an individual unlawfully of his or her liberty (Article 179 generally, Article 181 in respect of civil servants),
– to oblige an individual through force or threats to commit or not to commit an act (Article 188),
– to issue threats (Article 191),
– to make an unlawful search of an individual’s home (Articles 193 and 194),
– to commit arson (Articles 369, 370, 371, 372), or aggravated arson if human life is endangered (Article 382),
– to commit arson unintentionally by carelessness, negligence or inexperience (Article 383), or 
– to damage another’s property intentionally (Articles 526 et seq.).
For all these offences complaints may be lodged, pursuant to Articles 151 and 153 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, with the public prosecutor or the local administrative authorities. The public prosecutor and the police have a duty to investigate crimes reported to them, the former deciding whether a prosecution should be initiated, pursuant to Article 148 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. A complainant may appeal against the decision of the public prosecutor not to institute criminal proceedings.

38.  If the suspected authors of the contested acts are military personnel, they may also be prosecuted for causing extensive damage, endangering human lives or damaging property, if they have not followed orders in conformity with Articles 86 and 87 of the Military Code. Proceedings in these circumstances may be initiated by the persons concerned (non-military) before the competent authority under the Code of Criminal Procedure, or before the suspected persons’ hierarchical superior (sections 93 and 95 of Law no. 353 on the Constitution and Procedure of Military Courts).
If the alleged author of a crime is an agent of the State, permission to prosecute must be obtained from local administrative councils (the Executive Committee of the Provincial Assembly). The local council decisions may be appealed to the Supreme Administrative Court; a refusal to prosecute is subject to an automatic appeal of this kind.
Any illegal act by civil servants, be it a crime or a tort, which causes material or moral damage may be the subject of a claim for compensation before the ordinary civil courts.
Proceedings against the administration may be brought before the administrative courts, whose proceedings are in writing.
Damage caused by terrorist violence may be compensated out of the Aid and Social Solidarity Fund.
Extensive powers have been granted to the regional governor of the state of emergency by decrees enacted under Law no. 2935 on the State of Emergency (25 October 1983), especially Decree no. 285, as amended by Decrees nos. 424 and 425, and Decree no. 430.
Decree no. 285 modifies the application of Law no. 3713 of 1981 on the prevention of terrorism, in those areas which are subject to the state of emergency, with the effect that the decision to prosecute members of the security forces is removed from the public prosecutor and conferred on local administrative councils. According to the Commission, these councils are made up of civil servants and have been criticised for their lack of legal knowledge, as well as for being easily influenced by the regional governor or provincial governors who also head the security forces.

45.  Article 8 of Decree no. 430 of 16 December 1990 provides as follows:
“No criminal, financial or legal responsibility may be claimed against the state of emergency regional governor or a provincial governor within a state of emergency region in respect of their decisions or acts connected with the exercise of the powers entrusted to them by this decree, and no application shall be made to any judicial authority to this end. This is without prejudice to the rights of individuals to claim indemnity from the State for damage suffered by them without justification.”
According to the applicants, this Article grants impunity to the governors and reinforces the powers of the regional governor to order the permanent or temporary evacuation of villages, to impose residence restrictions and to enforce the transfer of people to other areas. Damage caused in the context of the fight against terrorism would be “with justification” and therefore immune from suit.
In their applications (nos. 23184/94 and 23185/94) to the Commission introduced on 15 December 1993, the applicants, relying on Articles 3, 5, 6, 8, 13, 14 and 18 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, complained that their homes had been burnt by State security forces on or about 16 June 1993 and that they had therefore been forced to leave their village. The first applicant also complained that a mill partly owned by her was destroyed by security forces on or about 26 June 1993. The second applicant claimed in addition that his life had been endangered during the attack on his house, in violation of Article 2 of the Convention.
The Commission declared Mrs Selçuk’s application admissible on 3 April 1995 and that of Mr Asker admissible on 28 November 1994. It joined the two applications on 8 March 1996. In its report of 28 November 1996 (Article 31), it expressed the following opinion:
(a)	that there had been a violation of Article 8 of the Convention (unanimously);
(b)	that there had been a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 (unanimously);
(c)	that there had been a violation of Article 3 of the Convention (by twenty-seven votes to one);
(d)	that there had been no violation of Article 2 in respect of the second applicant (unanimously);

(e)	that there had been no violation of Article 5 § 1 (unanimously);
(f)	that there had been a violation of Article 6 § 1 (by twenty-six votes to two);
(g)	that there had been a violation of Article 13 (by twenty-six votes to two);
(h)	that there had been no violation of Article 14 (unanimously);
(i)	that there had been no violation of Article 18 (unanimously).
The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the two separate opinions contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
The Government, in their memorial, and at the hearing, asked the Court to find that the applications should have been declared inadmissible on the grounds that they were not validly brought and that domestic remedies had not been exhausted, or, in the alternative, that there had been no violation of the Convention in the present case since the evidence heard by the delegation of the Commission had not substantiated the applicants’ allegations.
The applicants, for their part, asked the Court to find violations of Articles 3, 6, 8, 13, 14 and 18 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, and to award them just satisfaction under Article 50 of the Convention.