The applicant complained, in particular, that the noise and other nuisances caused by the everyday activities of the police station and the temporary detention facilities in the basement of his apartment building violated his right to respect for his private life and his home, in breach of Article 8 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in the city of Kostomuksha. The applicant was represented by Ms Tatiana Leonova, a lawyer who, at the relevant time, practised in the city of Kostomuksha. On 28 August 2008 the applicant’s request for legal aid was granted. On 9 January 2009 the applicant’s representative died.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
Between 10 February 1995 and 7 May 2008, the applicant lived with his family in an apartment building at 7 Gornyakov Street in Kostomuksha. A basement floor of that building was occupied by the local police station and by the cells for temporary detention of persons arrested by the police. The applicant complained to the local authorities about the noise and filth caused by the activities of the police station and asked them to relocate it from his apartment building to another place. In the letter of 14 March 1996 the Head of the local police department apologised to the applicant for the disturbance caused to him and his family. He further accepted that the police station was located in a residential building not designated for such purpose; he however stated that the issues raised in the applicant’s complaint could not be resolved and the relocation of the police station was not foreseen any time soon owing to the lack of a suitable vacant building. On 5 April 1996, he sent another letter to the applicant stating, in particular, as follows:
“... the relocation [of the police station] is not possible owing to the lack of any specially-equipped vacant building. Your complaint has been taken into account, and preventive measures have been taken in respect of the entrance doors ...”
 In his new complaint of 8 April 1996 to the Head of the local police department, the applicant stated:
“...I request the restoration of normal living conditions at 7 Gornyakov Street.
On 7 April 1996 at 10.30 p.m. men could be heard shouting and yelling in the temporary detention cells. Cursing and demands to call the prosecutor, as well as banging on the cell doors continued [until 3 a.m.]. I was unable to sleep and had to go to work in a poor psychological state.
On 8 April 1996 at 6.45 a.m. the exhaust fumes from a police vehicle parked with its engine running started entering the flat through a tilted window, so I had to close it completely. The vehicle was parked in this manner at least until 7.45 a.m., when I left for work.
On the same day at 7.15 a.m. the first visitors came to the police station; they were standing under the window of my flat, cursing, smoking and talking...”
On 25 May 2000 the applicant and his neighbours submitted a collective complaint to the Mayor of the city and the Head of the city council. They received no reply.
On 17 July 2000 the applicant lodged a complaint in court against the Head of the local government and the Head of the city council demanding the relocation of the police station. In his complaint he requested the court, inter alia, as follows:
“...to order the Mayor and the Head of the city council to resolve the issue of the relocation of the police station from the apartment building located at 7 Gornyakov Street; to remove the police station car park; to refurbish the adjacent yard and the entry ways of the building; [and] to pay [the applicant] 50,000 roubles (RUB) in respect of non-pecuniary damage ...”
On 29 September 2000 the Kostomuksha City Court of the Republic of Kareliya partly allowed his claims, holding as follows:
“... the detainees’ shouting, banging and other noise which had been constantly emanating from the detention cells had interfered with [the applicant’s] right to peaceful rest in his home ... as for the allegation of violation of the right to health and a clean environment [the applicant] did not provide any evidence in support of this claim ... [The applicant’s] request to remove the police station car park cannot be allowed because he is not a party to the agreement in question ...”
The court ordered, in so far as relevant:
“...the Heads of the city council and the police station must find a solution for relocating the police station and the temporary detention facilities within a year ...”
The court also dismissed the applicant’s claim for non-pecuniary damage. No appeal was brought against the judgment and it became enforceable. On 13 November 2000 the court issued a writ of execution.
On 4 April 2002 the bailiffs’ service instituted enforcement proceedings.
On 30 May 2002 the head of the local government requested the court to stay the enforcement proceedings owing to the lack of funding.
On 21 June 2002 the Kostomuksha City Court allowed his request and stayed the enforcement proceedings until 31 December 2003. The applicant was not notified of this judgment.
On 12 March 2004 the head of the local police department informed the bailiff, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“...The agreement on relocation has been reached and the project documentation has been forwarded to [the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Kareliya] with a view to drawing up a budget proposal for the redevelopment of the building ...”
On an unspecified date the applicant received a letter from the bailiffs’ service dated 15 June 2004 informing him that the enforcement proceedings had been discontinued.
On 7 June 2005 the enforcement proceedings were resumed, after the bailiffs’ service reported that the police station had not in fact been relocated from the applicant’s building. The heads of the city council and the police department were ordered by the bailiff’s service to comply with the court’s judgment by 24 June 2005.
On 21 November 2005 the enforcement proceedings were discontinued by decision of the bailiff on the ground that the judgment “had been enforced”.
The applicant challenged that decision before a court. On 26 December 2005 the Kostomuksha City Court held, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“...The writ of execution has been enforced de facto, the issue of relocation of the police station from the residential building has been resolved. The local administration proposed a vacant building and [the local] police department agreed to accept it ...”
On 29 December 2005 the applicant again complained to a court about the bailiffs’ failure to enforce the judgment. On 16 January 2006 the Kostomuksha City Court returned the complaint to the applicant without examination on the merits, having ruled that it had already been examined by the court and the relevant decision had been given.
On 17 February 2006 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Kareliya upheld both judicial acts (of 26 December 2005 and 16 January 2006) on appeal.
Between 16 and 20 February 2006 the regional consumer protection agency conducted a housing inspection of the applicant’s building. In respect of the applicant’s flat it found as follows:
“[The applicant’s] flat is located on the first floor of the apartment building, immediately above the police station. Part of the yard adjacent to the building serves as a designated area with “Police parking only” signs installed on it. Some [of the police cars] are parked immediately next to the walls of the residential building... [whereas] according to the current regulations such parking cannot be closer than 10 meters ... Part of the designated area is used for waste disposal. The rubbish bins and the designated waste collection area are absent... [and] some twenty filled bin bags are stockpiled within the limits of the designated police area. The air ventilation systems of the flat and of the police station are interconnected ... The entrance to the building is equipped with an exhaust vent which is connected to a temporary detention cell. Some of the detainees can spread infectious diseases (tuberculosis, syphilis and scabies) and it is impossible to rule out the spreading of these diseases in the absence of proper disinfection ... Litter is piled up immediately underneath the windows of the flat, where a vehicle is also parked with its engine running. According [to the applicant], the vehicles are usually parked like that, with engines working for hours, especially in winter. What appear to be banging noises from below the flat (the police station) were heard during the inspection... The court found during the examination of [the applicant’s complaint] that the police station has no soundproofing, and it is impossible to have it installed ...”
The inspector also recorded statements from the applicant’s four neighbours, who all confirmed the applicant’s allegations. The inspector concluded that a violation of Regulation 9.1 of the sanitary and epidemiological norms and regulations concerning residential buildings (“SanPiN 2.1.2.1002-00” (СанПиН 2.1.2.1002-00)) had taken place in the building where the applicant lived.
In April 2004 the Head of the local administration asked the Minister of the Interior of the Russian Federation to assist the regional ministry of the interior in obtaining the necessary financial resources to construct a new police station in Kostomuksha.
On 1 December 2006 the local administration approved a plan delimiting the boundaries of the municipal plot of land designated for the construction of the new police station.
On 29 December 2006 the Head of the Republic of Kareliya approved a list of projects and objects, including the police station, the construction of which would be financed from a regional budget in 2007.
On 16 February 2007 the local administration instructed the police station to record information concerning the plot of land in the State land registry and to obtain a building permit following the approval of the project and the corresponding budgetary documentation.
On 25 January 2008 the Head of the Republic of Kareliya approved a list of construction projects and objects for 2008, which also included preparing the project and budget documentation for the construction of the police station.
No other information was submitted to the Court concerning the progress of these works and/or the actual relocation of the police station from the applicant’s house.
On 4 April 2008 the applicant sold his flat, allegedly below the market price, and bought a new flat, having taken out loans from the bank and his family. In early May 2008 the applicant relocated to that new flat.
Regulation 9.1 of the Sanitary Regulations and Rules Concerning Residential Buildings and Spaces no. 2.1.2.1002-00 (in force between 1 January 2001 and 20 June 2010) provided, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“9.1. It is prohibited:
- to use residential buildings for purposes not envisaged in [their] construction project[s];
- to keep and use substances and objects which cause air pollution in residential buildings and places designated for public use;
- to carry out works or perform other acts that cause elevated noise pollution, vibrations, air pollution or otherwise disturb living conditions of persons in the adjacent living places;
- to pile up garbage, to litter and cause inundation in basements and technical usage rooms, stairways and stair landings, attics and other places designated for public use...”