The case originated in an application (no. 27473/06) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mustafa Sezgin Tanrıkulu (“the applicant”), on 4 May 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr Ü. Kılınç, a lawyer practising in Strasbourg. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the unlawful interception of his communications by the authorities had breached his rights under Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention.
On 2 May 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant, who was born in 1963, is a member of the Turkish Parliament and lives in Ankara. At the time of the events giving rise to the present application he was the president of the Diyarbakır Bar Association.
On 2 June 2005 the daily newspaper Hürriyet reported statements by a senior intelligence officer, who claimed that the National Intelligence Agency of Turkey (“MİT”) had been intercepting the telephone conversations and email correspondence of a number of people on the basis of approximately ninety court decisions over the previous ten years. The intelligence officer stated that the surveillance had been continuous until March 2005, when the MİT had stopped it in order to wait for the entry into force of the new Criminal Code. However, when a bomb attack had occurred in March in Kuşadası, killing a police superintendent, the MİT had gone to the Sixth Division of the Diyarbakır Assize Court (“the Diyarbakır Assize Court”) to seek permission for the interception of communications.
In a decision dated 6 May 2005, relying on Article 22 of the Constitution and sections 2, 4, 11 and 16 of Law no. 4422, the Diyarbakır Assize Court had granted the MİT permission to monitor and examine all electronic communications in order to identify and arrest terrorist suspects with international connections as well as to collect evidence and to prevent crime by having early intelligence of it. The MİT had obtained permission to intercept all domestic or international telephone calls and communications provided between 8 April and 30 May 2005 by national telecommunications company Türk Telekom, private mobile network operators and Internet providers and to obtain information contained in SMS, MMS, GPRS and fax communications, as well as caller IDs, correspondents’ IP addresses and all other communication-related information.
On 6 June 2005, after reading the article, the applicant filed a criminal complaint with the Diyarbakır Principal Public Prosecutor’s Office against the judge, S.T., who had delivered the Assize Court decision in question, the public prosecutor, the MİT agents who had sought permission to monitor and examine communications, and the MİT agents who had implemented the decision. Relying on a number of newspaper and online articles, the applicant alleged that S.T. had decided that the records of all domestic and international electronic communications between 8 April and 30 May 2005 should be given to the MİT by the telecommunications companies. The judge had made that decision in complete disregard of the legislation then in force and without carrying out any research or requiring proof. The impugned decision had been of a very general nature since it had not included the names of any suspects or indicated the date, location or address of people whose communications would be intercepted. As a consequence, any person, including himself, who had used a landline or mobile telephone to communicate between the above-mentioned dates, had been a victim of the impugned decision. The applicant maintained that the decision had violated his rights protected by Article 8 of the Convention and had also contravened Articles 20 and 23 of the Constitution, which protected private life and the freedom of communication respectively, since the accused had obtained records of his communications and restricted his freedom of communication without any justification. Lastly, the applicant contended that the implementation of the decision, which had been in contravention of section 2 of Law no. 4422, required the punishment of those responsible.
On 20 June 2005 the Diyarbakır Principal Public Prosecutor decided to disjoin the case concerning the MİT officials and to register it separately because the prosecution of MİT officials required the Prime Minister’s permission.
On 30 September 2005 the Diyarbakır Principal Public Prosecutor decided not to prosecute the MİT officials who had implemented the Diyarbakır Assize Court’s decision. He decided that the MİT officials had merely implemented the court’s decision when intercepting and examining communications and that the implementation of court decisions was required by law and did not constitute a crime. In any event, there was no evidence that the telecommunications companies had given any records to the MİT officials or that they had monitored communications over the Internet. The Public Prosecutor also referred to a decision by the Ankara Principal Public Prosecutor not to prosecute over the same issue (decision no. 2005/35575, 17 June 2005) in relation to a number of other complaints brought against the Diyarbakır Assize Court’s decision.
On 25 October 2005 the applicant filed an objection with the Siverek Assize Court against the above decision, alleging that the Diyarbakır Public Prosecutor had failed to carry out an investigation into his complaints concerning an alleged violation of his rights guaranteed by Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention.
On 30 November 2005 the Siverek Assize Court dismissed the applicant’s objection, holding that the Principal Public Prosecutor’s decision against prosecution had complied with the legislation since the MİT officials had implemented a court decision and had not committed any offence.
On 6 April 2006 the Ministry of Justice decided not to take an action against the public prosecutor and the judge as it found that their acts fell within judicial discretion. The Ministry considered that although the impugned interception decision had been in breach of the national and international legal norms, the aim was to locate the terrorists before they acted and to take the necessary security measures against them. For the Ministry, the decision did not display ‘ill-will’ towards any individual or institution and the complainants had failed to demonstrate that they had been affected by the impugned decision in any way. On an unspecified date the applicant filed an objection against this decision. On 31 October 2007 the Third Division of Ankara Administrative Court dismissed the objection.
The Court refers to Cevat Özel v. Turkey (no. 19602/06, §§ 16-19, 7 June 2016) concerning Article 21 of the Constitution with regard to freedom of communication. The relevant part of Article 125 of the Constitution concerning administrative liability provides as follows:
“All acts and decisions of the administration are subject to judicial review ...
The administration shall be liable to indemnify any damage caused by its own acts and measures.”
Section 2 of Law no. 4422 on the Prevention of Profit-Oriented Criminal Organisations, on the conditions and procedure for intercepting telecommunications, reads as follows:
“The signals, writings, photographs, images or voice recordings and other kinds of information received or sent through wired, wireless or other electromagnetic systems like telephone, fax and computer or simplex communication used by persons who are suspected of committing the crimes set down in this Law or of being accomplices or of aiding and abetting or harbouring the perpetrators in any way after the crime has been committed, can be intercepted or detected.
Decisions on the interception or detection of communications shall only be rendered if strong indications exist.
A decision on the interception or detection of communications cannot be rendered if the identification or seizure of the perpetrator or the obtaining of evidence is possible by another measure.
The above provisions shall be applied to all records, including but not limited to, the content of communications kept by each private or public communications institution.
A judge shall decide on the interception or detection or examination of records. In urgent situations, a public prosecutor is also authorised in that regard. Measures taken without the decision of a judge shall be submitted to a judge for decision within twenty-four hours. The measure shall be lifted immediately upon the termination of its permitted duration or after a decision by a judge against it.
A decision on the interception or detection of communications may be rendered for a maximum of three months. That duration may be extended a maximum of two times and cannot be longer than three months each time.
If a suspicion is removed during a period of the interception or detection of communications, the measure shall be lifted by a public prosecutor. In such situations, the data obtained by the measure in question shall be destroyed immediately, or at the latest within ten days, under the supervision of the prosecutor and that procedure shall be recorded.
If a public prosecutor or a law-enforcement officer assigned by him/her, asks someone who is employed by a communications institution or corporation, or who is authorised to render such a service, to carry out interception and recording and to install devices for that purpose, that request shall be carried out immediately. The time and date of the beginning and end of the procedure shall be recorded.”
Section 16 of the law provided that the scope of section 2 extended to offences described in the Law on the Fight against Terrorism (Law no. 3713).
At the relevant time, Law no. 4422 provided a statutory basis for authorising the interception of communications of people suspected of committing the crimes proscribed by that law. The measures provided for in the law had to be authorised in the course of a criminal investigation by a judge or, in exceptional cases, by a public prosecutor, whose decision had to be submitted to a competent judge for approval.
At the material time, the grounds and procedure for the authorisation and implementation of the measures set out in sections 2 to 10 of Law no. 4422 were regulated in the Regulation for the Implementation of Law no. 4422 on the Prevention of Profit-Oriented Criminal Organisations (“the Implementation Regulation”). The relevant parts of the Implementation Regulation read as follows:
“Requests and decisions on the interception of communications shall include the following points:
a) Where known, the identity of the person whose communications will be monitored or intercepted
...”
“The monitoring or interception [of communications] shall be authorised in respect of a specific person.
...”
Section 4 of Law no. 2937 (Law on Intelligence Services of the State and the National Intelligence Agency which entered into force on 1 January 1984) on the Functions of the National Intelligence Agency provides, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“(1) The functions of the MİT are:
a) To obtain national security intelligence about existing and possible future activities directed against the unity of the nation and the territorial integrity, existence, independence, and security of the Republic of Turkey as well as the other elements which form the constitutional order and national strength of the State and to communicate such intelligence to the President, Prime Minister, Chief of the General Staff, the Secretary General of the National Security Council and related public institutions,
b) To assist and provide for the intelligence-related needs of the President, Prime Minister, Chief of the General Staff, the Secretary General of the National Security Council and related ministers in the course of their duty to prepare and execute plans concerning the national security policy of the State,
c) To advise the Prime Minister and the National Security Council to direct the intelligence activities of State organisations and institutions,
d) To advise State organisations and institutions on technical matters concerning their intelligence and counter-intelligence activities and to assist in the facilitation of coordination amongst them,
e) To provide information and intelligence, which are deemed necessary for the Armed Forces, to the Office of the Chief of the General Staff, in accordance with an agreement,
f) To perform other duties allocated to it by the National Security Council,
g) To conduct counter-intelligence activities.”
Law no. 4422 was repealed by Law no. 5320 on the implementation and application of the Code of Criminal Procedure on 1 June 2005. The Implementation Regulation was repealed on 5 May 2007 by Regulation no. 2007/11968, enacted by the Council of Ministers. The relevant provisions of Law no. 4422 and the Implementation Regulation were replaced by provisions in the new Code of Criminal Procedure (“Law no. 5271”) (see Karabeyoğlu v. Turkey, no. 30083/10, §§ 39-45, 7 June 2016).
On 23 July 2005 Law no. 5397 was enacted, amending section 6 of Law no. 2937 with a view to providing a legal basis for MİT to carry out preventive secret surveillance measures before the commission of crimes. The explanatory memorandum on Law no. 5397 states, in so far as relevant:
“Private life and the right to freedom of communication, notions protected by the Constitution, shall only be restricted by the State before the commission of a crime under a law which is in accordance with European Union criteria and on the grounds set out in that law.
...
Intelligence is an indispensable tool in the fight against crime and criminals. Intelligence, since it is obtained by means of collecting and storing information, is closely related to private and family life. The interception of telecommunications before crimes are committed is related to the right to freedom of communication. Under this provision of the Constitution, the need to regulate the intelligence services in Turkey by law is compulsory.
...
Since the preventive interception of communications is not regulated in Turkey, the proposed law is aimed at closing that important loophole.
...
On the other hand, activities exercised by the intelligence services are not related to crime, rather they are directed at the systematic and regular collection and evaluation of information, within the powers specified in the codes which established them, to counter threats to the democratic rule of law with a view to maintaining national security.”
The explanatory memorandum on section 3 of Law no. 5397, which amended section 6 of Law no. 2937, reads, in so far as relevant:
“...
Furthermore, the amended paragraphs authorise the MİT to carry out the preventive interception of communications. Considering the fact that intelligence is an indispensable tool for the security of the State, and for the purpose of closing the loophole on the preventive interception of communications in accordance with European Union criteria and the fundamental principles enshrined in Article 22 of the Constitution and the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271), the interception of communications, including its conditions, duration and the authorities which may carry it out, has been regulated.”
Section 6(2) of Law no. 2937, after the amendment at the material time, reads as follows:
“For the purpose of performing the duties set out in section 4 of this Law and in the event of a serious threat against the fundamental values set out in the provisions of Article 2 of the Constitution and the democratic rule of law, a decision by a judge or, in cases where a delay would be detrimental, a written order by the Undersecretary or Deputy Undersecretary of the MİT, will be issued to locate, listen to or record electronic correspondence or examine mobile telephone records with a view to protecting national security, preventing acts of terrorism, espionage and the divulging of state secrets. The written order, given in cases where a delay would be detrimental, shall be submitted to a duty judge within 24 hours. The judge shall make a decision within 24 hours. The measure shall be suspended immediately if the judge does not confirm the written order or the authorisation period ends. In that case, the recordings shall be destroyed within ten days at the latest and a report shall be drawn up in this respect which shall be kept for presentation during further inspections. Those steps shall be taken by the centre which was set up in accordance with paragraph 10 of Provisional Section 7 of Law no. 2559 on the Duties and Powers of the Police. The interception of communications within the context of section 135 of Law no. 5271 of 4 December 2004 on the Code of Criminal Procedure shall also be conducted through this centre.
On 4 June 2008 the Court of Cassation gave a decision (E.2008/874 and K.2008/7160) in a matter concerning similar points of fact and law. It examined a judicial warrant that had authorised the Gendarmerie to carry out the preventive interception of the communications of everyone in Turkey. The interception warrant in that case had been given after the 2005 reforms and had had almost the same wording as the impugned decision in the instant case. The relevant part of the Court of Cassation’s judgment reads as follows:
“... irrespective of the motives behind it, a nationwide authorisation [for the preventive interception of communications] in which every person in Turkey was regarded as a suspect shall not be granted to any institution in Turkey, a democratic state based on the rule of law ...”