The application concerns an alleged infringement of the applicant’s right to respect for his family life, in so far as a court decision dismissed his request for the return of his infant child to Italy, where the applicant resides and where he and his wife lived when the child was born in March 2017. The Bucharest Court of Appeal refused to order the return on the grounds that the child could not be considered to have her habitual residence in that country.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Bresso, Italy. He was represented by Mr A. Grigoriu, a lawyer practising in Bucharest.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms O.F. Ezer, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant, who had been living and working in Italy since 2006, met X on social networks. At that time, X, who is a Romanian national, was living in Romania. They married in December 2016 and in February 2017 X moved to Italy to live with the applicant. In March 2017 their daughter Y was born in Italy. In accordance with the relevant legal provisions, the parents exercised jointly the parental authority over Y from her birth (Article 483 of the Romanian Civil Code). X and Y were issued residence cards by the Italian authorities. Y benefited from Italian medical insurance from birth.
X wanted to return to Romania with the child, but the applicant was opposed to the idea. The matter was a source of frequent conflict between the couple. The applicant warned X that he would rather give up the child for adoption in Italy than have her raised in her grandparents’ home in Romania.
On 22 May 2017 the applicant made an offer to buy a flat in Italy and paid a deposit of 1,000 euros (EUR) to secure the transaction.
On 9 August 2017, X took Y to Romania without the applicant’s consent. They travelled by car, with the help of an acquaintance who had come specifically from Romania to pick them up.
On the same day, the applicant contacted the Italian police, because he feared that X had unlawfully removed the child to Romania. On 8 September 2017, relying on the Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (“the Hague Convention” – see paragraph 24 below), the police forwarded the applicant’s complaint to the Italian Ministry of Justice, which contacted the Romanian Ministry of Justice in order to enquire about the child’s whereabouts.
On 18 January 2018 the Romanian Ministry of Justice located X and Y in Romania and informed X about the applicant’s request for the return of the child.
On 17 November 2017 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the prosecutor’s office attached to the Reghin District Court against X, whom he accused of unlawful deprivation of liberty. On 12 February 2018 the prosecutor decided not to bring a criminal prosecution in the case (clasarea) on the grounds that, on the one hand, X had no intention to harm the child – the alleged victim of the crime – and, on the other hand, she had not prohibited the applicant from visiting the child in her home.
On 8 February 2018 the applicant lodged an action with the Bucharest County Court under the provisions of the Hague Convention, seeking the return of his child to Italy.
On 3 April 2018 the County Court allowed the request. It found that the child’s habitual residence was in Italy and that X had decided unilaterally to change that, in violation of the applicant’s parental rights. The court found no indication that the return of the child to Italy would cause her irreparable harm in the sense of Article 13 of the Hague Convention. It also dismissed as unfounded X’s allegations that the applicant would have neglected his parental responsibilities.
X and the public prosecutor appealed and on 14 June 2018 the Bucharest Court of Appeal quashed the decision and dismissed the applicant’s request for the return of the child to Italy.
The Court of Appeal considered that the County Court had wrongly applied the provisions of Article 3 of the Hague Convention to the facts of the case. Relying on the findings of the Court of Justice of the European Union (hereinafter, “the CJEU”) in the Barbara Mercredi judgment (see paragraph 28 below), the court found that at the relevant time the child’s habitual residence had not been in Italy, but in Romania. In this connection, it observed that the couple had had their permanent residence in Romania both when the child had been conceived and when they had married. The court noted that at the time when the marriage had been concluded and Y had been born, the applicant and his wife had been living in a flat rented temporarily in Italy, their lawful residence being still in Romania at that time.
Furthermore, the parents had not been in agreement about changing their residence permanently to Italy. In the court’s view, the mere fact that the applicant worked in Italy (since January 2016, according to the evidence submitted to the file), lived in Italy (with X and Y also registered as living with him) and had expressed the intention to buy property there (which eventually he had not done), could not change that fact.
The appellate court further observed that X did not speak Italian and had not worked in Italy. In addition, when she had taken Y, who had been only five months old, to Romania, she had still been breastfeeding her. The court was not persuaded that the mere fact that Y had been born in Italy changed her place of residence.
On 30 August 2017 X lodged an action with the Sighetul Marmaţiei District Court, seeking a divorce and custody of the child.
The case was heard by the Sighetul Marmaţiei District Court. The applicant, through his lawyer, announced that his permanent residence was within the geographical jurisdiction of that court. His father’s family lived in that area.
On 7 May 2018 the court pronounced the couple’s divorce, awarded X sole parental responsibility for the child and set Y’s place of residence with her mother. The court found as follows:
“The exchange of messages [between the parties] shows that [the applicant] exhibited an attitude of hatred [towards X], as he threatened that he would first bring the girl back to Italy and [had said] then ‘I will deal with [X’s family] and [I] promise you will never see the girl again’.
...
The evidence administered in the present case shows that only the mother is invested in raising the child, who has lived with her since birth ... [The applicant] affirmed repeatedly that he would rather give the child up for adoption than allow her to be raised by her mother and did not contribute in any way to her upbringing; for these reasons the court grants exclusive parental authority to the mother.”
On 8 May 2019 the Maramureş County Court rendered the final decision in the case. It upheld the County Court’s ruling in respect of the parental authority and the child’s residence.
The relevant provisions of Law no. 369/2004 on the enforcement of the Hague Convention are presented in Ferrari v. Romania (no. 1714/10, §§ 25-28, 28 April 2015, and Blaga v. Romania, no. 54443/10, § 50, 1 July 2014).
The relevant provisions of the international instruments applicable in the present case are presented in X v. Latvia ([GC] no. 27853/09, §§ 34-42, ECHR 2013).
The Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (“the Hague Convention”) was ratified by Romania by Law no. 100/1992. The relevant parts of that Convention read as follows:
Article 3
“The removal or the retention of a child is to be considered wrongful where –
a) it is in breach of rights of custody attributed to a person, an institution or any other body, either jointly or alone, under the law of the State in which the child was habitually resident immediately before the removal or retention; and
b) at the time of removal or retention those rights were actually exercised, either jointly or alone, or would have been so exercised but for the removal or retention.
The rights of custody mentioned in sub-paragraph a) above, may arise in particular by operation of law or by reason of a judicial or administrative decision, or by reason of an agreement having legal effect under the law of that State.”
Article 4
“The Convention shall apply to any child who was habitually resident in a Contracting State immediately before any breach of custody or access rights. The Convention shall cease to apply when the child attains the age of 16 years.”
Article 5
“For the purposes of this Convention –
a) ‘rights of custody’ shall include rights relating to the care of the person of the child and, in particular, the right to determine the child’s place of residence;
b) ‘rights of access’ shall include the right to take a child for a limited period of time to a place other than the child’s habitual residence.”
Article 12
“Where a child has been wrongfully removed or retained in terms of Article 3 and, at the date of the commencement of the proceedings before the judicial or administrative authority of the Contracting State where the child is, a period of less than one year has elapsed from the date of the wrongful removal or retention, the authority concerned shall order the return of the child forthwith.
The judicial or administrative authority, even where the proceedings have been commenced after the expiration of the period of one year referred to in the preceding paragraph, shall also order the return of the child, unless it is demonstrated that the child is now settled in its new environment.
Where the judicial or administrative authority in the requested State has reason to believe that the child has been taken to another State, it may stay the proceedings or dismiss the application for the return of the child.”
Article 13
“Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding Article, the judicial or administrative authority of the requested State is not bound to order the return of the child if the person, institution or other body which opposes its return establishes that -
(a) the person, institution or other body having the care of the person of the child was not actually exercising the custody rights at the time of removal or retention, or had consented to or subsequently acquiesced in the removal or retention; or
(b) there is a grave risk that his or her return would expose the child to physical or psychological harm or otherwise place the child in an intolerable situation.
The judicial or administrative authority may also refuse to order the return of the child if it finds that the child objects to being returned and has attained an age and degree of maturity at which it is appropriate to take account of its views.
In considering the circumstances referred to in this Article, the judicial and administrative authorities shall take into account the information relating to the social background of the child provided by the Central Authority or other competent authority of the child’s habitual residence.”
The Explanatory Report on the Hague Convention prepared by Elisa Pérez-Vera (“the Explanatory Report”) defines as follows the notion of “the best interests of the child”:
“21.  ... the legal standard ‘the best interests of the child’ is at first view of such vagueness that it seems to resemble more closely a sociological paradigm than a concrete juridical standard.
... [the philosophy of the Hague Convention] can be defined as follows: the struggle against the great increase in international child abductions must always be inspired by the desire to protect children and should be based upon an interpretation of their true interests. ... the right not to be removed or retained in the name of more or less arguable rights concerning its person is one of the most objective examples of what constitutes the interests of the child.
... the true victim of the ’childnapping’ is the child himself, who suffers from the sudden upsetting of his stability, the traumatic loss of contact with the parent who has been in charge of his upbringing, the uncertainty and frustration which come with the necessity to adapt to a strange language, unfamiliar cultural conditions and unknown teachers and relatives.
It is thus legitimate to assert that the two objects of the Convention – the one preventive, the other designed to secure the immediate reintegration of the child into its habitual environment – both correspond to a specific idea of what constitutes the ’best interests of the child’. However ... it has to be admitted that the removal of the child can sometimes be justified by objective reasons which have to do either with its person, or with the environment with which it is most closely connected. Therefore the Convention recognizes the need for certain exceptions to the general obligations assumed by States to secure the prompt return of children who have been unlawfully removed or retained.”
The Explanatory Report defines as follows the notion of the child’s “habitual residence” and “wrongful removal”:
“64.  ... the duty to return a child arises only if its removal or retention is considered wrongful in terms of the Convention. Now, in laying down the conditions which have to be met for any unilateral change in the status quo to be regarded as wrongful, [this Article] indirectly brings into clear focus those relationships which the Convention seeks to protect. Those relationships are based upon the existence of two facts, firstly, the existence of rights of custody attributed by the State of the child’s habitual residence and, secondly, the actual exercise of such custody prior to the child’s removal. Let us examine more closely the import of these conditions.
...
... the notion of habitual residence [is] a well-established concept in the Hague Conference, which regards it as a question of pure fact, differing in that respect from domicile.
...
The first source referred to in Article 3 is law, where it is stated that custody ’may arise ... by operation of law’. That leads us to stress one of the characteristics of this Convention, namely its application to the protection of custody rights which were exercised prior to any decision thereon. This is important, since one cannot forget that, in terms of statistics, the number of cases in which a child is removed prior to a decision on its custody are quite frequent. Moreover, the possibility of the dispossessed parent being able to recover the child in such circumstances, except within the Convention’s framework, is practically non-existent, unless he in his turn resorts to force, a course of action which is always harmful to the child.
...
... from the Convention’s standpoint, the removal of a child by one of the joint holders without the consent of the other, is equally wrongful, and this wrongfulness derives in this particular case, not from some action in breach of a particular law, but from the fact that such action has disregarded the rights of the other parent which are also protected by law, and has interfered with their normal exercise. The Convention’s true nature is revealed most clearly in these situations: it is not concerned with establishing the person to whom custody of the child will belong at some point in the future, nor with the situations in which it may prove necessary to modify a decision awarding joint custody on the basis of facts which have subsequently changed. It seeks, more simply, to prevent a later decision on the matter being influenced by a change of circumstances brought about through unilateral action by one of the parties.”
Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 of 27 November 2003 concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility (known as “the Brussels II bis Regulation”) reads, in particular, as follows:
Article 3 General jurisdiction
“1. In matters relating to divorce, legal separation or marriage annulment, jurisdiction shall lie with the courts of the Member State
(a) in whose territory:
- the spouses are habitually resident, or
- the spouses were last habitually resident, insofar as one of them still resides there, or
- the respondent is habitually resident, or
- in the event of a joint application, either of the spouses is habitually resident, or
- the applicant is habitually resident if he or she resided there for at least a year immediately before the application was made, or
- the applicant is habitually resident if he or she resided there for at least six months immediately before the application was made and is either a national of the Member State in question or, in the case of the United Kingdom and Ireland, has his or her ‘domicile’ there;
(b) of the nationality of both spouses or, in the case of the United Kingdom and Ireland, of the ‘domicile’ of both spouses.”
Article 10 Jurisdiction in cases of child abduction
“In case of wrongful removal or retention of the child, the courts of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention shall retain their jurisdiction until the child has acquired a habitual residence in another Member State and:
(a) each person, institution or other body having rights of custody has acquiesced in the removal or retention;
or
(b) the child has resided in that other Member State for a period of at least one year after the person, institution or other body having rights of custody has had or should have had knowledge of the whereabouts of the child and the child is settled in his or her new environment and at least one of the following conditions is met:
(i) within one year after the holder of rights of custody has had or should have had knowledge of the whereabouts of the child, no request for return has been lodged before the competent authorities of the Member State where the child has been removed or is being retained;
(ii) a request for return lodged by the holder of rights of custody has been withdrawn and no new request has been lodged within the time limit set in paragraph (i);
(iii) a case before the court in the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention has been closed pursuant to Article 11(7);
(iv) a judgment on custody that does not entail the return of the child has been issued by the courts of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention.”
Article 11 Return of the child
“1. Where a person, institution or other body having rights of custody applies to the competent authorities in a Member State to deliver a judgment on the basis of the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (hereinafter ‘the 1980 Hague Convention’), in order to obtain the return of a child that has been wrongfully removed or retained in a Member State other than the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention, paragraphs 2 to 8 shall apply.”
In the Barbara Mercredi judgment (22 December 2010, C-497/10 PPU, ECLI:EU:C:2010:829) the Court of Justice of the European Union (hereinafter “the CJEU”), interpreted the concept of “habitual residence” as follows:
“21.  That relationship [between Ms. Mercredi and Mr Chaffe] produced a daughter named Chloé, a French national, who was born on 11 August 2009. In the week following the birth of that child, Ms Mercredi and Mr Chaffe, whose relationship had not been stable for some time and who were no longer living together after Mr Chaffe had left the family home, separated.
On 7 October 2009, when Chloé was two months old, Ms Mercredi and her daughter left England for the island of Réunion, where they arrived on the following day. The child’s father was not told beforehand of the departure of the mother and the child but he received a letter, on 10 October 2009, in which Ms Mercredi set out the reasons for that departure.
...
By its first question, the referring court seeks clarification, in essence, on how properly to interpret the concept of ‘habitual residence’ for the purposes of Articles 8 and 10 of the Regulation, in order to determine which court has jurisdiction to make orders on matters relating to rights of custody, in particular where, as in the case in the main proceedings, the dispute concerns an infant who is lawfully removed by her mother to a Member State other than that of her habitual residence and has been staying there only a few days when the court in the State of departure is seised.
...
It follows from all of the foregoing that the answer to the first question is that the concept of ‘habitual residence’, for the purposes of Articles 8 and 10 of the Regulation, must be interpreted as meaning that such residence corresponds to the place which reflects some degree of integration by the child in a social and family environment. To that end, where the situation concerned is that of an infant who has been staying with her mother only a few days in a Member State – other than that of her habitual residence – to which she has been removed, the factors which must be taken into consideration include, first, the duration, regularity, conditions and reasons for the stay in the territory of that Member State and for the mother’s move to that State and, second, with particular reference to the child’s age, the mother’s geographic and family origins and the family and social connections which the mother and child have with that Member State. It is for the national court to establish the habitual residence of the child, taking account of all the circumstances of fact specific to each individual case.
If the application of the abovementioned tests were, in the case in the main proceedings, to lead to the conclusion that the child’s habitual residence cannot be established, which court has jurisdiction would have to be determined on the basis of the criterion of the child’s presence, under Article 13 of the Regulation.”