The applicant complained under Article 3 of the Convention that the conditions of his detention in Vinnytsya Prison no. 1 (“Vinnytsya Prison”) had been inadequate, that he had been ill-treated on several occasions and that there had been no effective investigation into the matter. He also complained under Article 8 that, as a life prisoner, he had not been entitled to long-term family visits in prison until May 2014.
The applicant was born in 1975 and is serving a life sentence in Vinnytsya Prison. Having been granted legal aid, he was represented by Mr R. Kravets, a lawyer practising in Kyiv.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant was sentenced to life imprisonment and placed in Vinnytsya Prison in September 2004.
The parties submitted a list of cell numbers (nos. 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 29, 117, 103, 104, 111, 177, 179, 180, 181, 170, 194, 192, 110, 246, 219, 218, 223, 227, 155, 259 and 154), without specifying the period of the applicant’s detention in each cell, their size or the number of inmates held therein.
The cells were small, unheated and damp, with concrete floors, no ventilation, poor lighting and appalling sanitary conditions. Often the toilet was a mere hole with no flush in the close vicinity of the living area, permanently smelling of excrement. The constant artificial lighting in the cells prevented sleep, but was too dim for reading. There was no shower or sink in any of the cells. The applicant often had to wash dishes and his hands over the toilet hole. No soap, toothpaste or shaving accessories were provided. The applicant did not participate in any activities or have leisure time other than an hour’s exercise in an extremely small and dirty yard.
In protest against the poor conditions of detention, on 26 August 2008, 23 July 2009 and during January and February 2010 the applicant went on hunger strike, but this was ignored by the authorities.
The applicant sent the Court statements given by two fellow prisoners, P. (dated 12 May and 20 November 2010) and N. (dated 8 June 2011), generally supporting his description of the conditions of detention in Vinnytsya Prison.
He also sent the Court several short video recordings made in December 2012 and January 2013, consisting mainly of himself addressing the Court. Some of the recordings showed a small and dilapidated yard for outdoor exercise. There was nobody else in the yard apart from the applicant. He also filmed the food distribution routine on certain days, including on 31 December 2012 and 1 January 2013. On one of the videos, he complained to the guard that there was no meat, fruit or vegetables. The guard replied that there were extremely scarce quantities of onions and carrots but no other fruit or vegetables. On each occasion the applicant was given some bread, a spoonful of sugar and some porridge. Sometimes soup was also served.
In his reply to the Government’s observations (see paragraph 13 below) of 28 August 2019, the applicant admitted that the conditions of his detention, in cell no. 219 at the time, were indeed acceptable.
According to the information provided by the Government to the Court on 16 February 2012 in reply to a request for information, life prisoners were detained in maximum security cells designed to accommodate two to three inmates. The cells were equipped with metal beds, one or two benches or chairs, a wardrobe or cabinet, a clothes rail and a speaker for the public address system. The equipment and furniture were fixed to the floor and the wall. There was a toilet separated from the living area and a sink in each cell. The cells had a water supply, shower, sewage connection, central heating, ventilation, electric lighting and natural light. Each prisoner was provided with an individual bed, bedding and soap. Bedding was changed four times a month. Prisoners regularly received meat and fish of good quality. The quality of the food was verified daily by the medical staff. Life prisoners were entitled to an hour’s outdoor exercise per day.
In their observations dated 18 March 2019, the Government noted that at the material time the applicant was detained in cell no. 219, which measured 12 sq. m. According to a cell inspection report of 7 February 2019, the conditions of detention there were satisfactory. More precisely, there was electricity and water, and the sewage system was functioning properly. Furthermore, the cell was in a good state of repair and was equipped with a radiator.
The prison had sufficient supplies of soap and washing powder. As regards individual hygiene items, they were provided “at the expense of charities”. Prisoners could also purchase everything they needed in the prison shop.
The yards were equipped with benches and exercise bars, and were sufficiently sheltered from rainfall.
Prisoners were provided with three meals per day, in accordance with established nutrition standards. Those standards did not provide for the supply of fermented dairy products or fruit to detainees in the maximum security wing. There was a centralised supply of frozen poultry and fish.
The applicant did not announce that he was going on hunger strike.
During 2018 he did not lodge any complaints with the prison administration regarding the conditions of his detention or nutrition.
The applicant’s mother complained to the Vinnytsya city prosecutor’s office about the conditions of her son’s detention (“the prosecutor’s office”). She brought to their attention the video recordings made by him in December 2012 and January 2013 (see paragraph 10 above).
On 26 July 2013 the prosecutor’s office issued a report in that regard stating, in particular, that on 27 September 2010 the prison administration had declared the exercise yards (shown on the video recordings) unsuitable for outdoor activities. Accordingly, they were no longer in use. It was also noted in the report that between 2012 and 2013 ninety-seven cells had been renovated.
On 18 July 2013 an official from the prosecutor’s office collected written statements from four detainees concerning the allegations made by the applicant in his video recordings regarding, in particular, food in the prison. All four statements were virtually identical and asserted that on 30 and 31 December 2012 and 1 January 2013 there had been a “festive menu” in the prison which had included meat and salad. The detainees submitted that they were regularly served meat and fish, and that they had no complaints against the prison administration. It was stated in all four statements that the applicant was a troublemaker whose allegations had no basis.
In his application to the Court, the applicant submitted that while being taken to the court on that date there had been an attempt on his life by unidentified individuals. They had fled and the convoy officers, in order to cover up their incompetence, had drawn up a report stating that the applicant had tried to escape. The applicant also alleged that he had been severely beaten by the convoy officers. According to him, there had been no justification for the use of force against him as he had not done anything illegal and had been powerless, given that he had been blindfolded with his hands and legs shackled.
According to the Government, no force or measures of restraint other than handcuffs had been used on the applicant.
The applicant complained about the incident to various authorities, including the Vinnytsya Zamostyanskyy District Court, which was examining a criminal case against him at the material time (irrelevant for the present application). The judge enquired with the police what had happened.
The chief of the police unit in charge wrote to the judge that at about 2.30 p.m. on 25 September 2007, while walking from the convoy vehicle to the court, the applicant had made a sudden movement to try and break the convoy line. Three police officers “had taken effective measures to prevent an emergency situation and apprehend a criminal demonstrating active physical resistance trying to escape”. As a result, a rubber truncheon and handcuffs had been used on him.
The case file does not contain any information or documents regarding the judge’s reaction to the above-mentioned letter.
On 26 November 2007 the chief of the Vinnytsya regional police department responsible for the convoy of prisoners wrote to the applicant that “the use of blindfolds (обмежувачі зору) and wrist-and-leg shackles (кайдани металеві «КМ-4») [had been] confirmed, but that it did not run counter to the applicable legal provisions regulating the issues of security and convoy of detainees and prisoners”.
On 12 February 2009 the Leninskyy district prosecutor’s office issued a ruling refusing to institute criminal proceedings against the convoy officers who had accompanied the applicant on 25 September 2007, for lack of constituent elements of a criminal offence. The ruling referred, in particular, to a statement made by the applicant on 27 December 2007 that he had felt that his life was in danger and had tried to escape. He had also stated that the convoy officers had beaten him, put him in the vehicle and taken him back to the prison. The prosecutor’s office observed that the applicant had later refused to make any statements. The officers concerned had submitted that they had only applied “a handgrip and handcuffs” to him in reaction to his escape attempt. A medical examination carried out the same day did not reveal any injuries and found his health to be satisfactory.
On 18 June 2009 there was a general search of the prison. According to the applicant, a group of masked officers wearing black uniforms with no badges carried out the search of his cell (no. 241) and kicked and hit him numerous times with a rubber truncheon. According to the Government, no force was used on the applicant or other prisoners.
On 19 June 2009 it was mentioned on a national TV channel that there had been a demonstration near the prison to protest against the entry of a special forces unit there. Also on 19 June 2009 the Vinnytsya Human Rights Group, an NGO, informed the public of the alleged beating of prisoners in Vinnytsya Prison by masked officials of a special forces unit.
According to the applicant, he complained to various authorities of illtreatment, but his complaints were dismissed as unsubstantiated.
In one of the video recordings sent to the Court on 30 April 2013, the applicant stated that the video had been filmed on 10 December 2012. He showed what he alleged to be injuries inflicted on him by the prison administration on 29 November 2012: a bruise on his right shoulder near his armpit, and a bruise on the right side of his chest. The applicant also complained that he had not been provided with adequate medical care for an unhealed fractured rib sustained in 2007 and a shoulder sprain suffered on an unspecified date, and that he was not receiving proper dental care.
The applicant filmed the above-mentioned video as a public appeal to various authorities, human rights organisations and the media.
On 25 June 2013 the applicant’s mother sent it to the prosecution authorities. She complained, in particular, that her son had been systematically ill-treated in prison and that the video recordings proved that.
On 26 July 2013 the prosecutor’s office took written explanations from six life prisoners who had shared their cells with the applicant at various points. They stated that the applicant had told them of his intention to obtain a mobile telephone with a video camera, so that he could injure himself, film the injuries and accuse the prison administration of ill-treatment.
On 20 September 2013 an entry was made in the Unified Register of Pre-trial Investigations marking the beginning of an investigation into suspected abuse of power by State officials, on account of the applicant’s ill-treatment allegation.
On 3 October 2013 the prosecutor’s office drew up a crime-statement report (протокол прийняття заяви про вчинений злочин) documenting the applicant’s complaint. The report contained a number of questions and blank spaces filled in by the applicant in writing. The questions and answers were as follows:
“1. Circumstances of the event (date, time and place): “Since 2007 the [prison] staff members have been periodically using physical force on me, they have been ill-treating me.”
Was any pecuniary damage sustained...? – “None.”
Was there physical violence or a threat of such violence? What exactly happened? Were any objects used (such as a knife, gun, pepper spray, truncheon etc.)? ... – “Physical force was used.”
Was anybody injured? If so, did that person request a medical examination/assistance and what treatment was provided? – “Injuries were inflicted.”
Did you see the perpetrator? Would you be able to recognise him/her? – “Yes, I did.”
Is anybody suspected of the criminal offence? If so, on what grounds? Please provide any information about this person. – “Staff members of [Vinnytsya Prison].”
Were there any eyewitnesses to the crime? What do we know about them? – “Yes, there were.”
On the same day the applicant was questioned as a victim. He wrote that he was refusing to make a statement and that he needed a lawyer.
Later that day the prosecutor also questioned the prison staff, who denied coercing the applicant. They submitted that his attempts to obtain preferential treatment in prison had been unsuccessful and that he had therefore been behaving in a provocative manner to try and discredit the administration.
Also on that day the applicant underwent a medical examination, which revealed no injuries or acute conditions.
The following day the investigator contacted the Vinnytsya regional legal aid centre regarding the applicant’s wish to have a lawyer. The latter’s reply was that it was impossible to appoint a legal aid lawyer for the applicant because he had the status of a victim, but not of a suspect or accused. The investigator informed the applicant thereof and the latter submitted that he would engage a lawyer at his own expense. He did not however do so and informed the investigator that he was refusing to make a statement. As a result, on 7 October 2013 the investigator issued a report stating that, in such circumstances, it was impossible to question the applicant.
On 8 October 2013 the investigation was closed for lack of evidence of a criminal offence.
The applicant challenged that decision before the courts, but to no avail. His arguments were couched in broad terms: that he had been systematically ill-treated and that the video recordings proved that. Courts at two levels of jurisdiction dismissed his appeal as unfounded. They held that the investigation had made all reasonable efforts to establish the truth, whereas the applicant had refused to provide any help.
In early 2011 the applicant complained to the prosecution authorities that he had not been allowed to have long-term visits from his mother. On 9 February 2011 the Vinnytsya prosecutor’s office replied to him that he had received five short-term visits from his mother in 2010, which was the maximum permitted by law.
Life prisoners became entitled to long-term family visits on 7 May 2014 (see paragraph 51 below).
According to the information provided by the Government, in 2018 the applicant received seven short-term visits from his friends and sister and one long-term visit from his mother. The Government submitted that the applicant had not asked for more visits.
The relevant provision reads as follows:
Article 64. Life imprisonment
“Life imprisonment is imposed for particularly serious crimes and shall only be applied in the cases expressly provided for by this Code and where a court considers it impossible to apply a fixed-term sentence ...”
Article 110 of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences (“the Code”) provides that short-term visits in a prison may last up to four hours and long-term visits up to three days. Short-term visits may be made by relatives or others and must take place in the presence of a prison officer. Long-term visits may only be made by close relatives and take place in a specifically allocated private room.
Under Articles 138 to 140 of the Code, prisoners serving a fixedterm sentence were entitled to one short-term visit per month and one long-term family visit every three months. Following amendments on 7 September 2016, the above-mentioned provisions became the minimum visiting entitlement for fixed-term prisoners detained in the “enhanced control sector” (у дільниці посиленого контролю). Those detained in the “resocialisation sector” (у дільниці ресоціалізації) are entitled to one shortterm visit per month and one long-term family visit every two months. Lastly, fixed-term prisoners detained in the “social rehabilitation sector” (у дільниці соціальної реабілітації) have the right to as many short-term visits as they wish and to one long-term family visit per month.
Under Article 151 of the Code, convicted prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment were entitled to one short-term visit every six months. Following amendments on 16 February 2010, they became entitled to one short-term visit every three months.
Article 151 of the Code was later amended, with effect from 7 May 2014, to provide that prisoners serving a life sentence were entitled to one short-term visit per month and one long-term family visit every three months.
Following further amendments, which took effect on 7 September 2016, life prisoners are now entitled to one long-term family visit every two months.
The Council of Europe material concerning family visits to prisoners is quoted in Khoroshenko v. Russia ([GC], no. 41418/04, §§ 5867, ECHR 2015).
The relevant excerpts from the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 9 to 21 September 2009 (CPT/Inf (2011) 29) read as follows (footnotes omitted, original emphasis):
“92. As regards possibilities for contact with the outside world, the CPT considers that special efforts should be made to prevent the breakdown of family ties of prisoners serving life sentences. Ukrainian legislation continues to impose severe restrictions on the visiting entitlement of life-sentenced prisoners. This approach runs counter to the generally accepted principle that offenders, whatever the crimes for which they have been sentenced, are sent to prison as a punishment, not to receive punishment.
Lifers’ visits took place in secure booths with a glass partition, which allowed no physical contact between inmates and their visitors. In addition, some lifers at Colony No. 89 indicated that they remained handcuffed during visits. As the CPT has indicated in the past, to be handcuffed when receiving a visit could certainly be considered as degrading for both the prisoner concerned and his visitors. Further, life-sentenced prisoners had no access to a telephone.
The CPT calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to increase substantially the visit entitlement of life-sentenced prisoners. As a general rule, visits should take place in open conditions (e.g. around a table), visits through a partition being the exception. Further, life-sentenced prisoners should only be prohibited from receiving long-term visits on the basis of an individual risk assessment. In addition, staff must receive clear instructions that life-sentenced prisoners should not be kept in handcuffs during visits. Steps should also be taken to ensure that life-sentenced prisoners have access to a telephone.
...
More generally, during the 2009 visit, the delegation was informed of proposals to amend the legislation with a view to improving the situation of life-sentenced prisoners (e.g. increasing their visit entitlement, [...]). However, there was reportedly political resistance to these proposals. The CPT urges the Ukrainian authorities to pursue these legislative proposals without further delay.”