The case originated in an application (no. 3390/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Mirosław Zieliński (“the applicant”), on 14 January 2005.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that Article 3 of the Convention had been violated in that he had been detained in overcrowded and dirty cells, he was forced to share his cell with HIV and HCV-positive inmates and he had not received adequate medical care in prison. In addition, the applicant complained under Article 8 about the monitoring of his correspondence with the Court.
On 4 October 2007 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the complaints under Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant, Mr Mirosław Zieliński, is a Polish national who was born in 1953 and is currently detained in Włocławek Prison.
From 18 November 2004 until 24 July 2008 the applicant was detained in Łowicz Prison. It is not clear whether on the latter date he was released or transferred to another detention facility. He is currently detained in Włocławek Prison.
The applicant submitted that in Łowicz Prison he had been held in overcrowded and dirty cells. During the period of his detention in Łowicz, the applicant had occupied a total of seventeen cells, including cell no. 202 in wing II, in which he had been detained from 26 October 2007 until 24 July 2008.
The Government acknowledged that during almost the entire period of the applicant’s detention in Łowicz Prison the space per person in his cells had been inferior to 3 square metres. They submitted that the cells had been clean and that the applicant had had one shower per week and one hour of outdoor exercise per day.
The applicant also complained about the practice of mixing healthy prisoners with those who were infected with transmissible diseases, such as HIV or hepatitis C (HCV). Prisoners were not informed by the authorities about such state of affairs. On one occasion the applicant was told by his fellow cellmate that the latter was HIV-positive. To that effect the applicant submitted a statement dated 13 February 2008, in which a certain P.P., a person claiming to be an HIV-positive prisoner, certified that on 12 February 2008 he had been placed in the applicant’s cell no. 202 wing II. P.P. further stated that neither the applicant nor other inmates had been aware of his illness and that he, in fact, had been instructed by the prison administration not to reveal his HIV status.
The applicant complained that he had been exposed to the risk of contamination because he had shared his cell with infected persons and he had not been informed about it. He also had not been advised of the dangers relating to HIV and HCV and of the means of protection against it. Moreover, he submitted that from the moment when he had found out that his fellow cellmates were either infected or could potentially be infected, he feared for his well-being.
In 2001 the applicant suffered a fracture of the skull and underwent surgery in which a small part of his skull was removed. In addition, prior to his detention he had been hospitalised on several occasions because of his epilepsy, chronic ischemic heart disease (choroba wieńcowa) and thinning of the cervical cortex (zanik kory mózgowej). Prior to his detention in Łowicz Prison the applicant was under regular medical supervision; he received pharmacological treatment and had numerous medical check-ups. On 1 July 2004 he was tested for HIV and HCV. On 12 July 2004 he underwent coronary catheterisation (koronografia).
On 20 May 2004 the applicant was certified as “temporarily disabled” with a mild degree of disability (umiarkowany stopień niepełnosprawności). It was indicated that the applicant occasionally required the help of a third person in his daily life. The certificate was valid until 20 May 2007.
The parties did not furnish any medical reports or certificates related either to the period when the applicant was detained in Łowicz Prison or after his release.
The applicant lodged several complaints about overcrowding in Łowicz Prison. In reply the authorities acknowledged the existence of the problem and pointed to its systemic nature. On the other hand the applicant did not bring a civil action in tort to seek compensation for the alleged infringement of his personal rights on account of overcrowding and inadequate conditions of his detention.
The applicant instituted three sets of criminal proceedings against the prison administration and filed penitentiary complaints in relation to the alleged fact that from March until October 2006 and from March 2006 until February 2008 he had been forced to share his cell with inmates infected with HIV and HCV.
On 8 December 2006 the Łowicz District Prosecutor (Prokurator Rejonowy) discontinued the criminal inquiry into the allegations described above. It was established that, as a matter of law, namely because of medical secrecy and antidiscrimination laws, the prison administration had never been informed about prisoners’ health. In consequence, potentially ill prisoners were mixed with potentially healthy prisoners. The practice, however, could not be considered as criminal negligence on the part of the prison administration.
A similar decision was issued by the Łowicz District Prosecutor on 30 April 2007. On 26 September 2007 after the applicant’s interlocutory appeal the decision was upheld by the Łowicz District Court (Sąd Rejonowy). In addition to the reasoning presented in the prosecutor’s 2006 decision, the court relied on the submissions of the doctor in charge of the prison hospital, who had stated that mixing healthy prisoners with those who were HIV or HCV positive did not create any health risks to the prior group.
Lastly on 25 June 2008 the Łowicz District Prosecutor refused to open an inquiry into similar allegations related to the longer period from March 2006 until February 2008. On October 2008 the Łowicz District Court upheld that decision.
The applicant lodged at least eleven complaints with State authorities about the quality of medical care in Łowicz Prison. It appears that he also tried to institute criminal proceedings against the medical staff and administration of Łowicz Prison and applied for a prison break on health grounds.
The penitentiary authorities considered the applicant’s allegations groundless. It was found that the applicant had received good quality medical care and that he had been under the regular supervision of medical specialists. On the other hand, it was repeatedly stated that the applicant had been a difficult and vexatious patient who did not cooperate with prison doctors and did not follow their recommendations.
On 28 September 2006 the Łódź  (Sąd Okręgowy) rejected the applicant’s application for a prison break which he claimed to need in order to undergo surgery. The applicant wished to have an implant which would fill the bone gap created in his skull as a result of his 2001 surgery. The regional court considered the procedure which was sought by the applicant unnecessary in the light of the fact that he was under regular medical supervision and received adequate medical treatment.
On an unspecified date the applicant was convicted by a criminal court of the first-instance. He appealed against that judgment and informed the authorities that, despite being represented by a lawyer, he wished to be brought to the appellate hearing under escort from the remand centre in order to present his case in person.
On 15 March 2006 the  rejected the applicant’s request. The court reasoned that the applicant’s presence was unnecessary in the light of the fact that his legal-aid lawyer was under a duty to participate in the hearing and that the applicant had already presented his case to the appeal court in writing.
The applicant did not submit any further information about the course and the outcome of the proceedings in question.
The applicant’s first letter to the Court, which was dated 1 January 2005, was deposited by the applicant with the administration of Łowicz Prison on 3 January 2005 and was received by the Registry of the Court on 21 January 2005. The envelope of that letter bears a stamp reading “Censored Deliver to the addressee Date ... Judge” (Ocenzurowano Doręczyć adresatowi Data ... Sędzia). The date of 14 January 2005 has been written by hand on the dotted line. An illegible signature is visible under the heading “Judge”.
In his second letter to the Court, which was dated 7 February 2005, the applicant complained about the regular withholding and monitoring of his correspondence by the authorities. That letter was received by the Registry of the Court on 21 February 2005. The envelope of the letter in question bears a stamp and a signature identical to those described above. The date of 17 February 2005 has been written by hand on the dotted line.
The other letters which were sent by the applicant to the Court do not bear any similar stamps.
A detailed description of the relevant domestic law and practice concerning general rules governing the conditions of detention in Poland and domestic remedies available to detainees alleging that conditions of their detention were inadequate are set out in the Court’s pilot judgments given in the cases of Orchowski v. Poland (no. 17885/04) and Norbert Sikorski v. Poland (no. 17599/05) on 22 October 2009 (see §§ 75-85 and §§ 45-88 respectively). More recent developments are described in the Court’s decision in the case of Łatak v. Poland (no. 52070/08) on 12 October 2010 (see §§ 25-54).
The legal provisions concerning monitoring of detainees’ correspondence applicable at the material time and questions of practice are set out in paragraphs 65-66 of the judgment delivered by the Court on 4 May 2006 in Michta v. Poland , no. 13425/02.
Article 68 of the Constitution, in its relevant part, reads:
“1.  Everyone shall have a right to have his health protected.
Equal access to health care services, financed from public funds, shall be ensured by public authorities to citizens, irrespective of their material situation...”
Article 115 of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences (Kodeks karny wykonawczy) (“the Code”) provides:
“1.  A sentenced person shall receive medical care, medicines and sanitary articles free of charge.
...
Medical care is provided, above all, by health care establishments for persons serving a prison sentence.
Health care establishments outside the prison system shall cooperate with the prison medical services in providing medical care to sentenced persons if necessary, in particular
1)  to provide immediate medical care because of a danger to the life or health of a sentenced person;
2)  to carry out specialist medical examinations, treatment or rehabilitation of a sentenced person;
3)  to provide medical services to a sentenced person who has been granted prison leave or a temporary break in the execution of the sentence...”
On the basis of Article 115, paragraph 10 of the Code, the Minister of Justice issued the Ordinance of 31 October 2003 on the detailed rules, scope and procedure relating to the provision of medical services to persons in confinement by health care establishments for persons deprived of liberty (Rozporządzenie Ministra Sprawiedliwości w sprawie szczegółowych zasad, zakresu i trybu udzielania świadczeń zdrowotnych osobom pozbawionym wolności przez zakłady opieki zdrowotnej dla osób pozbawionych wolności – “the October 2003 Ordinance”). This Ordinance was in force from 17 December 2003 until 11 July 2010.
Under paragraph 1.1 of the October 2003 Ordinance, health care establishments for persons deprived of liberty provided, inter alia, medical examinations, treatment, preventive medical care, rehabilitation and nursing services to persons deprived of liberty.
Under paragraph 2 of this Ordinance a person deprived of liberty was subjected to preliminary and periodical medical examinations (badania wstępne i okresowe) and check-ups (badania kontrolne).
According to paragraph 3, a person deprived of liberty was to undergo preliminary medical examinations, namely questioning about his/her medical history (wywiad chorobowy) and a physical examination (badanie fizykalne) as soon as he/she was admitted to a detention establishment. Moreover, no later than fourteen days from the admission date, a person deprived of liberty was to have a chest x-ray and a dental examination.
In practice, a person deprived of liberty who was committed to a detention facility for the first time, was to be initially placed in a transitional cell in order to undergo the above mentioned preliminary medical examinations.
A prisoner who was merely transferred from another detention facility was not to be subjected to such a procedure (see Article 79 b §§1 and 2 of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences). Instead, he/she was to undergo a medical check up (questioning about his/her medical history and a physical examination) before being transferred to another detention facility or released (see paragraph 5 of the October 2003 Ordinance).
Moreover paragraph 3.5 of the October 2003 Ordinance authorised a prison doctor (lekarz więzienny) to prescribe medical tests other than those mentioned above if it was justified in the light of the health of the person deprived of liberty. Those tests, however, were not mandatory and could be performed only with a prisoner’s consent.
In practice, upon his/her admission to a detention facility or at any other moment during his/her detention, a person deprived of liberty could request to be tested free of charge for HCV, HIV or any other transmissible disease. A decision whether or not to grant such a request lay with a prison doctor and could be appealed.
According to the internal rules of the penitentiary medical service in force at the relevant time, a request for HCV testing was only to be granted if it was accompanied by a recommendation of a prison doctor. A prison doctor could refuse to support the prisoner’s request if, after questioning the prisoner about his/her medical history and risky behaviour, the test was considered unnecessary.
On the other hand, a request for HIV testing did not require an additional medical recommendation and was granted almost automatically. Such test was to be performed, at reasonable intervals, each time it was requested by a prisoner.
During the preliminary medical examinations a newly admitted prisoner was to receive counselling on risky behaviour and modes of HIV and HCV transmission. The prisoner was to be asked whether he/she wished to be tested for HIV and a note to that effect was to be made in his/her health record book (książka zdrowia).
The October 2003 Ordinance was replaced by a largely similar text of the Minister of Justice’s Ordinance of 23 December 2010 on the provision of medical services to persons in confinement by health care establishments for persons deprived of liberty (Rozporządzenie Ministra Sprawiedliwości z dnia 23 grudnia 2010 r. w sprawie udzielania świadczeń zdrowotnych osobom pozbawionym wolności przez zakłady opieki zdrowotnej dla osób pozbawionych wolności), which entered into force on 3 January 2011.
Other, currently binding, rules relevant to the provision of medical services to persons deprived of liberty are to be found, among others, in the Minister of Justice’s Ordinance of 2 February 2011 on types and the scope of medical documentation kept by health care establishments for persons deprived of liberty and on the manner of its processing (Rozporządzenie Ministra Sprawiedliwości z dnia 2 lutego 2011 r. w sprawie rodzajów i zakresu dokumentacji medycznej prowadzonej w zakładach opieki zdrowotnej dla osób pozbawionych wolności oraz sposobu jej przetwarzania), which entered into force on 10 March 2011.