The case originated in an application (no. 60974/00) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Rossiyskiy Electrotransport, also known as Roseltrans, a Russian open joint-stock company (“the applicant company”), on 14 August 2000.
The applicant company was represented by Mr A.A. Pavlov, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P.A. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant company alleged, in particular, that a judgment in its favour was quashed in supervisory review proceedings, in breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 27 May 2004, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant company and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the parties replied in writing to each other's observations.
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed First Section (Rule 52 § 1).
The applicant is a Russian open joint-stock company which was set up in  in 1994 by the Federal Ministry of State Property Management (“the Ministry”) in pursuance of a directive from the President of Russia and a Government decree. Its purpose was to hold shares of former state enterprises which produced electrical equipment for the railways. The applicant company's initial capital was formed by State property. Various individuals and private companies also became shareholders at a subsequent point.
On 14 November 1995, following a directive to that effect by the President of Russia, the Ministry adopted a resolution by which the applicant company was liquidated and a liquidation committee was appointed.
The applicant company, represented by its director general, joined proceedings brought by one of its minority shareholders before the Lyublinskiy District Court of Moscow seeking to have the Ministry's resolution of 14 November 1995 and a number of follow-up resolutions declared void.
The applicant company asked the District Court to issue an interim injunction prohibiting liquidation pending a trial and to strip the liquidation committee of its powers. On 29 October 1998 the District Court issued the injunction. It also prohibited the liquidation committee from acting on behalf of the applicant company in legal proceedings.
On 17 May 2000 the District Court found in favour of the applicant company and its co-plaintiffs. The court noted that the decision to liquidate the applicant company was one that could be taken only by a general assembly of its shareholders. The Ministry held less than 50% of the applicant company's shares at the material time, and its decision to liquidate the applicant company ran counter to the law. The court held that the resolution of 14 November 1995 and the follow-up resolutions were void and ordered the Ministry to annul them. The Ministry did not appeal and the judgment came into force on 28 May 2000.
Some time later the Ministry successfully applied for intervention in the proceedings by the  public prosecutor. On 10 April 2001 the prosecutor lodged an application for supervisory review (протест в порядке надзора) of the judgment of 17 May 2000, seeking to have it set aside.
On 10 May 2001, further to the prosecutor's request, the Presidium of the Moscow City Court, which was composed of five judges, reviewed the case. The court heard submissions from the acting public prosecutor of , who supported the request. The applicant company did not attend the hearing as it had not been informed that it was to be held.
Referring to the outcome of other proceedings before different courts in 19971999, the Presidium of the Moscow City Court stated that the Ministry had been the sole shareholder of the applicant company at the material time. It was thus empowered to take a decision on liquidating the applicant company in accordance with the relevant substantive law. The director general had no authority to bring proceedings on behalf of the applicant company, since his authority had been ended by the ministerial resolutions in dispute. The District Court should have ensured that the liquidation committee took part in the proceedings. Its failure to do so had made it impossible to establish all the facts which were relevant for the proper examination of the case.
The Presidium of the Moscow City Court granted the prosecutor's request, quashed the judgment of 17 May 2000 and ordered a fresh examination of the case by the Lyublinskiy District Court, with a different composition.
The applicant company was not served with either a copy of the prosecutor's request or a copy of the decision of 10 May 2001. It learned of those developments in October 2001.
Following jurisdictional changes the case was transferred to the Commercial Court of Moscow, which examined it on 25 March 2003. That court held that the fact that the proceedings had been brought by the applicant company, in the person of its director general, was consistent with the applicant company's regulations. The director general had never been relieved of his post through an established procedure. The dispute originated in the liquidation of the applicant company and concerned, inter alia, the lawfulness of the liquidation committee's appointment. That being the case, the applicant company could not be deprived of its right to a court and its action ought to be examined. The court further held that the Ministry had not been the sole shareholder of the applicant company and that it had had no authority under the legislation to liquidate the applicant company unilaterally.
By a decision of 25 March 2003, the Commercial Court of Moscow found for the applicant company and its co-plaintiffs. It declared void the resolution of 14 November 1995 and the follow-up resolutions and ordered the Ministry to annul them. The Ministry did not appeal and the judgment entered into force on 25 April 2003.
The Court's judgment in the case of Ryabykh v. Russia contains the following description of the relevant domestic law concerning supervisory review proceedings, which also applied in the present case (see Ryabykh v. Russia, no. 52854/99, §§ 31-42, ECHR 2003IX):
“Under the 1964 Code of Civil Procedure, which was in force at the material time, judgments became final as follows:
Article 208
Coming into force of judgments
'Court judgments shall become legally binding on the expiration of the time-limit for lodging a cassation appeal if no such appeal has been lodged. If the judgment is not quashed following a cassation appeal, it shall become legally binding when the higher court delivers its decision. ...'
The only further means of recourse was the special supervisory review procedure that enabled courts to reopen final judgments (пересмотр в порядке судебного надзора):
Article 319
Judgments, decisions and rulings amenable to supervisory review
'Final judgments, decisions and rulings of all Russian courts shall be amenable to supervisory review on an application lodged by the officials listed in Article 320 of the Code.'
The power of officials to lodge an application (протест) depended on their rank and territorial jurisdiction:
Article 320
Officials who may initiate supervisory review
'Applications may be lodged by:
The power to lodge such applications was discretionary, that is to say it was solely for the official concerned to decide whether or not a particular case warranted supervisory review.
Under Article 322 officials listed in Article 320 who considered that a case deserved closer examination could, in certain circumstances, obtain the case file in order to establish whether good grounds for lodging an application existed.
Article 323 of the Code empowered the relevant officials to stay the execution of the judgment, decision or ruling in question until the supervisory review proceedings had been completed.
Article 324 of the Code provided that the official concerned should draft the application and forward it – in sufficient copies for each of the parties – with the case file to the relevant court.
Article 325 read as follows:
'The parties ... shall be served copies of the application. If circumstances so require, the parties ... shall be informed of the time and place of the hearing.
The copies of the application shall be served on the parties by the court [examining the application]. The court shall give the parties sufficient time before the hearing to submit a written reply to the application and any additional material.'
Under Article 328 of the Code, proceedings on an application for supervisory review were normally oral and the parties were invited to make comments once the judge concerned had reported to the court.
Courts hearing applications for supervisory review had extensive jurisdiction in respect of final judgments:
Article 329
Powers of supervisory review courts
'The court that examines an application for supervisory review may:
The grounds for setting aside final judgments were as follows:
Article 330
Grounds for setting aside judgments on supervisory review
'...
There was no time-limit for lodging an application for supervisory review, and, in principle, such applications could be lodged at any time after a judgment had become final.”