.  The case originated in an application (no. 576/06) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Ms Varya Safaryan (“the applicant”), on 10 December 2005.
.  The applicant was represented by Mr H. Alumyan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia at the European Court of Human Rights.
.  The applicant alleged, in particular, that the authorities’ refusals of her requests to have her property divided and transferred to her children and register her title in respect of the pavilion built on the plot of land owned by her were in breach of the guarantees of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and Article 8 of the Convention.
.  On 20 October 2009 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1 of the Convention).
.  The applicant was born in 1934 and lives in Yerevan.
.  She owned a plot of land which measured 815 sq. m. and was situated in the centre of Yerevan. She also owned two houses and a garage situated on the plot. It appears that the applicant shared her household with her four children.
.  Before 1993 the applicant, without permission, built on her plot of land a pavilion (շվաքարան) measuring about 230 sq. m which she used as a venue for trade. The pavilion featured in the ownership certificate issued to the applicant on 30 November 1998 as a “half-ruined construction”.
.  On 1 August 2002 the Government adopted Decree no. 1151-N, approving the expropriation zones of the real estate situated within the administrative boundaries of the Kentron District of Yerevan to be taken for State needs, having a total area of 345,000 sq. m. It appears that the applicant’s plot of land fell within one such zone.
.  On 7 May 2004 the applicant applied to a notary office with a request to donate her property to her four children and seeking to make that transaction official.
.  The notary office refused this request, with reference to Government Decree no. 1151-N, stating that the applicant’s property was situated in an expropriation zone.
.  The applicant contested this refusal before the courts. It appears that on 14 June 2004 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan dismissed her claim. The applicant lodged an appeal.
.  On 28 July 2004 the Civil Court of Appeal granted the applicant’s claim and ordered the notary office to formalise the transaction. It found that the refusal was in violation of the law since the applicant’s request derived from Article 163 of the Civil Code. Besides, Government Decree no. 1151-N did not envisage any limitations on the type of transaction that the applicant sought to conclude. No appeal was lodged against this judgment, which entered into force.
.  On an unspecified date the applicant applied to the State Real Estate Registry (“SRER”), seeking to divide her property into four parts and to transfer ownership to her children. She also requested that her title be registered in respect of the pavilion.
.  It appears that on 23 February 2004 the SRER refused both requests. As regards the refusal of the second request, it appears that the SRER referred to Article 221 of the Civil Code and Government Decree no. 1748N.
.  The applicant contested this refusal before the courts.
.  In the proceedings before the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan the representative of the SRER submitted that the applicant’s request had been refused because her property was situated in an expropriation zone and included unauthorised constructions. Its division would be contrary to Government Decrees nos. 1151-N and 2020N.
.  On 20 May 2004 the District Court decided to dismiss the applicant’s claim. It found that the applicant was the sole owner of the property in question and it was groundless to seek its division or sever any part of it. As regards the registration of ownership in respect of the pavilion, this claim was similarly groundless since the applicant’s plot of land was situated in an expropriation zone, while the procedure prescribed by Government Decree no. 1748-N, pursuant to its paragraph 3, did not apply to unauthorised constructions built on plots of land falling within such expropriation zones.
.  On 28 May 2004 the applicant lodged an appeal.
.  On 29 April 2005 the Civil Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the District Court. The Court of Appeal found that the applicant had applied to the SRER with a request to have her property divided into four parts, which had been refused because the property was situated in an expropriation zone and included unauthorised constructions. Its division into four parts would be contrary to Government Decrees nos. 1151-N and 2020-N. As regards the refusal to register her title in respect of the pavilion, the Court of Appeal recapitulated the findings of the District Court.
.  On 12 May 2005 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law. In her appeal she argued that the Court of Appeal had ignored the findings made in its final judgment of 28 July 2004. Furthermore, the fact that the plot of land was situated in an expropriation zone could not serve as a basis for restricting her rights as an owner which she enjoyed under Article 163 of the Civil Code. She further argued that the pavilion in question was immovable property and the refusal to register her title in its respect deprived her of the right to receive compensation at the time of expropriation.
.  On 17 June 2005 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal on the same grounds.
.  According to Article 163, the owner has the right to possess, use and dispose of his property as he sees fit. The owner is entitled to carry out any action in respect of his property which does not contravene the law and violate the rights and lawful interests of others, including selling his property, to transfer the right to possess, use and dispose of the property to others, to mortgage or to make use of it in any other way.
.  According to Article 188, as in force at the material time, an unauthorised structure was a habitable building, construction, other structure or other immovable property built on a plot of land not allocated for that purpose in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law and other legal acts or built without requisite permission or built with serious breaches of town-planning norms and rules. The person who had built an unauthorised structure did not acquire ownership rights in its respect. He was not entitled to make use of the structure, including by selling, donating and renting or carrying out other transactions, except for cases prescribed by law. The owner of the plot of land on which the construction was built could be granted ownership rights in respect of the unauthorised structure by the courts. The recognition of the title of such persons could be refused if the maintenance of the structure violated the rights and interests of others or posed threats to the life and health of others.
.  According to Article 221, in force at the material time, the owner of a plot of land subject to be taken for the needs of the State was entitled, from the date of the decision on taking the plot of land until an agreement was reached or a court judgment was adopted concerning the taking of the plot of land, to possess, use and dispose of it.
.  This Law set out the grounds and procedure for recognition of ownership rights in respect of unauthorised buildings and constructions.
.  According to Article 2, this Law applied to buildings and constructions which had been built without permission prior to the entry into force of the Law and had been registered at the Real Estate Registry prior to 15 May 2001, including semi-structures whose construction had been completed by 50% or more.
.  According to Article 4 §§ 2 and 6, the ownership right in respect of unauthorised buildings and constructions built on plots of land owned by private persons or legal entities could be recognised, if such recognition was not contrary to town-planning norms. This right was to be recognised by the head of the community (the Mayor of Yerevan in the city of Yerevan).
.  According to Article 8 §§ 1 and 2, applications for recognition of ownership rights were to be submitted to the local department of the SRER. Within five days from the date of receipt of an application, the local department of the SRER was to submit a plan of the building or construction in question to the Mayor of Yerevan, who would then decide to reject or grant the application.
.  According to Article 10 § 4, the procedure for examination of applications and requests concerning unauthorised buildings and constructions which had not been registered at the Real Estate Registry prior to 15 May 2001, as well as before the entry into force of this Law, was to be established by the Government.
.  For the purpose of implementation of construction projects in Yerevan, the Government decided to approve the expropriation zones of the immovable property (plots of land, buildings and constructions) situated within the administrative boundaries of the Central District of Yerevan to be taken for the needs of the State, with a total area of 345,000 sq. m. The Mayor of Yerevan was instructed to determine the boundaries of the plots of land to be taken for the needs of the State and to register them at the Real Estate Registry. The owners and users of the immovable property situated within the expropriation zones were to be informed of the deadlines, sources of financing and the procedure for taking their immovable property. Valuation of the immovable property in question was to be organised and carried out by the relevant licensed organisations.
.  By this decree the Government approved the procedure envisaged by Article 10 § 4 of the Law on the Legal Status of Unauthorised Buildings and Constructions and Plots of Land Occupied without Authorisation.
.  According to paragraph 2, unauthorised buildings and constructions which had been registered prior to 15 May 2001 and were shown on the maps prepared in the context of mapping carried out for the purpose of the initial State registration, as well as those which had been properly recorded with ownership certificates prior to the introduction of the system of State registration of property rights (1 March 1998), were considered as “registered prior to the entry into force of the Law”. Applications and requests seeking to determine the status of unregistered unauthorised buildings and constructions could be filed until the Law was effective.
.  According to paragraph 3, this procedure did not apply to unauthorised buildings and constructions which, according to Government decrees, were situated within the boundaries of plots of lands to be taken for the needs of the State or society.
.  According to paragraph 2 of the approved procedure, the owners of unregistered buildings and constructions were to apply to the local department of the SRER to have their rights recognised in respect of such buildings and constructions.