The case originated in eight applications against the Italian Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by eight Italian nationals (“the applicants”) in 2010 (see Appendix for details).
The applicants were represented by Ms R. Palotti, a lawyer practising in Sondrio, Italy. The Italian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent Ms Ersiliagrazia Spatafora, and their Co-Agent, Ms Paola Accardo.
The applicants alleged that legislative intervention while their proceedings were pending had breached their right to a fair trial under Article 6 and their right of property under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 29 August 2012 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The circumstances of the case are analogous to those described in Maggio and Others v. Italy (nos. 46286/09, 52851/08, 53727/08, 54486/08 and 56001/08, 31 May 2011).
The applicants worked in Switzerland for the following periods of time, in total, over the relevant years:
Mr Stefanetti: approximately 23 years between 1959 and 1996;
Mr Rodelli: approximately 31 years between 1962 and 1996;
Mr Negri: approximately 13 years between 1954 and 1997;
Mr Della Nave: approximately 28 years between 1962 and 1989;
Mr Del Maffeo: approximately 32.5 years between 1959 and 1996;
Mr Cotta: approximately 26 years between 1962 and 1987;
Mr Curti: approximately 28 years between 1962 and 1997;
Mr Andreola: approximately 10.5 years between 1967 and 1977.
In 1982 Italy changed its pension system from a contributory one, where the amount received in pension was dependent on the contributions paid, to an earnings- or remuneration-based (“retributivo”) one.
The applicants, who had transferred to Italy the contributions they had paid in Switzerland, requested the Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (“INPS”) to calculate their pensions, in accordance with the 1962 Italo-Swiss Convention on Social Security (see Relevant domestic law and practice below), on the basis of the contributions paid in Switzerland for work they had done there over a number years (see appended table for details). As a basis for the calculation of their pensions (in respect of their average remuneration over the last ten years), the INPS employed a theoretical remuneration (“retribuzione teorica”) instead of the real remuneration (“retribuzione effettiva”). The former resulted in a readjustment on the basis of the contribution rate applied in Switzerland (8%) and that applied in Italy (32.7%), which meant that the calculation had as its basis a pseudo-salary with the result that the applicants received a lower pension than expected. According to the applicants, their pension was approximately a third of what it should have been.
As an example, the pension the applicants actually received in 2010 and an estimation, calculated by them, of what they should have received in that same year had this method of calculation not been applied is appended.
Consequently, in 2006 the applicants instituted judicial proceedings, contending that this was contrary to the spirit of the Italo-Swiss Convention. Various individuals in the applicants’ position had done the same and had been successful. The domestic courts had determined that people who had worked in Switzerland and had subsequently transferred their contributions to Italy should benefit from the remuneration-based pension calculations based on the wages they had earned in Switzerland, irrespective of the fact that the transferred contributions had been paid at a much lower Swiss rate.
While their proceedings were still pending, Law no. 296/2006 (see Relevant domestic law and practice below) entered into force on 1 January 2007.
The applicants’ claims were rejected in separate judgments of the Sondrio Tribunal (filed in the relevant registry as mentioned below), in view of the entry into force of Law no. 296/2006:
Judgment (no. 149/09) of 30 November 2009 in respect of Mr Stefanetti;
Judgment (no. 96/09) of 27 October 2009 in respect of Mr Rodelli;
Judgment (no. 09/10) of 28 January 2010 in respect of Mr Negri;
Judgment (no. 104/09) of 27 October 2009 in respect of Mr Della Nave;
Judgment (no. 09/10) of 28 January 2010 in respect of Mr Del Maffeo;
Judgment (no. 166/09) of 10 December 2010 in respect of Mr Cotta;
Judgment (no. 112/09) of 10 November 2009 in respect of Mr Del Curti;
Judgment (no. 96/09) of 27 October 2009 in respect of Mr Andreola.
None of the applicants appealed further, deeming it to be futile given that Law no. 296/2006 had been found legitimate by the Constitutional Court in its judgment of 23 May 2008, no. 172 (see Relevant Domestic Law and Practice below), which other courts were then bound to uphold.
Article 23 of the transitional provisions of the Italo-Swiss Convention on Social Security, of 14 December 1962, provides, in so far as relevant, as follows (unofficial translation):
“1. In so far as Switzerland is concerned, performance shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Convention, even in cases where the insured event occurred before the entry into force of the Convention. Old-age and survivors’ ordinary annuities will, however, only apply in accordance with these provisions if the insured event took place before 21 December 1959, and if the contributions were not or will not be transferred or reimbursed in accordance with the Convention of 17 October 1951, or paragraph 5 of this Article. ...
In so far as Italy is concerned, performance shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Convention where the insured event occurred on or after the date of its entry into force. Nevertheless, when the insured event occurred before that date, performance shall take place in accordance with the present Convention from the date of its entry into force, if it would not have been possible to grant such a pension owing to the insufficiency of the insurance periods, and only if the contributions have not been reimbursed by the Italian social insurance scheme.
With the exception of the above provisions, periods of insurance, of contributions and of residence occurring before the entry into force of this Convention will be taken into consideration.
...
For a period of five years from the entry into force of this Convention, on reaching pensionable age under Italian law, Italian citizens may request, in derogation of Article 7, that the contributions paid by them and their employers into the Swiss old-age and survivors insurance schemes be transferred to the Italian insurance scheme, on condition that they left Switzerland to settle permanently in Italy or in a third country prior to the end of the year in which their pensionable age was reached. Article 5 (4) and (5) of the Convention of 17 October 1951 will apply to the use of such transferred contributions, any reimbursements made and the effects of such transfers.”
In so far as relevant, Article 5 of the Italo-Swiss Convention on Social Insurance of 17 October 1951 provides (unofficial translation):
“... (4) Italian citizens not covered by the preceding sub-paragraph (*) or their survivors, may request contributions paid by them and their employers into the Swiss old-age and survivors’ insurance schemes to be transferred to the Italian social welfare insurance scheme as indicated in Article 1 (*). The latter will use the said contributions to ensure that the insured person obtains the benefits derived from Italian law quoted in Article 1 (*) and any other provisions issued by the Italian authorities. In the event that, under the relevant Italian legal provisions, the insured person cannot assert his or her right to a pension, the Italian social welfare services will, upon request, reimburse the transferred contributions.
(5) Transfer of contributions as provided for in the above sub-paragraph may be requested:
(a) if the Italian citizen left Switzerland at least ten years before,
(b) on the occurrence of the insured event.
An Italian citizen whose contributions have been transferred to the Italian social insurance scheme cannot assert any right in respect of Swiss old-age and survivors’ insurance on the basis of such contributions. Such a person, or his [or her] survivors, may expect an ordinary annuity from the Swiss old-age and survivors’ insurance scheme only ... [under] the conditions set out in the first paragraph (*).”
It is noted that the articles marked (*) were repealed by Article 26 (3) of the 1962 Convention, except for the purposes of the above-cited Article 23 (5).
The transitional provision of Article 23 of the 1961 Convention became final by means of the additional agreement of 4 July 1969, Article 1 (1) and (3) of which read:
“On reaching pensionable age under Italian law, and where they have not already been in receipt of a pension, Italian citizens may request, in derogation of Article 7, that the contributions paid by them and their employers into the Swiss old-age and survivors’ insurance schemes be transferred to the Italian insurance scheme, on condition that they have left Switzerland to settle permanently in Italy ...”
“The Italian social welfare entities must use such contributions in favour of the insured or his or her heirs in such a way as to ensure that they enjoy the benefits derived from Italian law, as cited in Article 1 of the Convention, in accordance with the specific arrangements issued by the Italian authorities. If no benefits can be attained on the basis of such arrangements, the Italian social welfare entities must reimburse the transferred contributions to the interested parties.”
The Court of Cassation’s judgment of 6 March 2004, and other analogous case-law at the material time, established that in the absence of specific legislation regulating the transfer of contributions, the method of calculation used to determine workers’ pensions should be based on the real remuneration received by that person, including any work undertaken in Switzerland, irrespective of the fact that contributions paid in Switzerland and transferred to Italy were calculated on the basis of much lower rates than those applied under Italian law.
Article 1, paragraph 777, of Law no. 296/2006, which entered into force on 1 January 2007, provides (unofficial translation):
“Article 5 (2) of Presidential Decree no. 488 of 27 April 1968 and subsequent modifications must be interpreted to mean that, in the event of transfer of contributions paid to foreign welfare entities to the Italian obligatory general insurance scheme, as a consequence of international social security treaties and conventions, the pensionable remuneration relative to the employment period abroad is calculated by multiplying the amount of transferred contributions by a hundred and dividing the result by the contribution rates for the invalidity, old-age and survivors insurance schemes as applicable during the relevant contributory period. More favourable pension treatment already liquidated before the entry into force of the current law is exempted.”
By a writ of 5 March 2007, the Court of Cassation questioned the legitimacy of Law no. 296/2006 and referred the case to the Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court gave judgment on 23 May 2008, holding, in sum, as follows.
Although interpretative, Law no. 296/2006 was innovative. There had been no conflicting case-law on the pension regime but a single well-established interpretation, according to which the Italian worker could ask to transfer his or her contributions, paid in Switzerland, to the INPS, in order to obtain the advantages provided for by Italian law in respect of invalidity, old-age and survivors’ insurance, including that of remuneration-based pension calculations, on the basis of wages earned in Switzerland, irrespective of the fact that the transferred contributions had been paid at a much lower Swiss rate.
The Constitutional Court noted that the laws defining pension payments were part of a welfare system which balanced available resources and the services supplied. A change in method of calculating pensions from the contributory one to the remuneration-based one (“retributivo”) was not to the detriment of the financial sustainability of the system. Thus, the changes brought about by the impugned Law sought to bring the relationship between pensionable remuneration and contributions into line with the system in force in Italy during the same period of time. The Law provided that remuneration received abroad (used as a basis for pension calculations) was to be adjusted by applying the same percentage ratios used for pension contributions paid in Italy during the same period. Thus, the norm made explicit what had been in the original interpretative provisions. Consequently, there had been no breach of the principle of legal certainty. Nor was the norm discriminatory since the acquired and more favourable rights of earlier pensioners were, by then, unassailable. Furthermore, the Law did not discriminate against people who had worked abroad, because it simply ensured an overall balance in the welfare system, and avoided a situation where people who had contributed relatively little to a foreign pension scheme were entitled to the same pension as those who had paid the much higher Italian contributions. The contested Law did not provide for any ex post facto reductions, as it merely imposed an interpretation which could already have been inferred from the original provisions. Lastly, this system still allowed for a sufficient and satisfactory pension, adequate for the lifestyle of a worker. Accordingly, the claim of unconstitutionality of the said Law was manifestly ill-founded.
The matter came up again before the Italian Constitutional Court following the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in Maggio and Others, cited above, in which the Court found, in circumstances similar to those of the present case, that by enacting Law no. 296/2006 the Italian State had infringed the applicants’ rights under Article 6 § 1 by intervening in a decisive manner to ensure that the outcome of proceedings to which it was a party was favourable to it. The Constitutional Court had therefore to examine the compatibility of Law no. 296/2006 with the relevant legal framework, and it found that it was in fact compatible.
The Constitutional Court noted that Presidential Decree no. 488 of 27 April 1968 had introduced a new, earnings/remuneration-based pension calculation method (metodo retributivo). A constant case-law had been established holding that Italians who had worked in Switzerland and then transferred their contributions into the Italian system would also benefit from the remuneration-based calculation, irrespective of the fact that they had paid lower contributions than those payable in Italy. Subsequently Law no. 296/2006 was enacted, and its constitutionality was confirmed by the Constitutional Court in 2008, since the law had been an authentic interpretation of the original law and was therefore reasonable, and from then onwards the case-law shifted accordingly.
The Constitutional Court referred to the findings in Maggio, but considered that it should assess the matter itself; the ECHR had acknowledged that it was possible to intervene in pending proceedings where there existed compelling general interest reasons, and in the Constitutional Court’s view it was the role of the Contracting States to identify those compelling general interest reasons and intervene legislatively to ensure they were resolved.
The case-law of the Constitutional Court showed that when comparing the national and Convention protection mechanisms, it was the protection of the guarantees that must prevail, account being taken, however, of other constitutionally protected interests. The principle of the margin of appreciation established by the Court itself was of particular relevance, and had to be taken into account by the Constitutional Court to ensure a uniform system of coherent laws.
While it was in principle bound by the Maggio judgment (the principles on which it was based being also constitutionally recognised principles), the Constitutional Court had to lend itself to a balancing exercise. It considered that other, opposing interests which were also constitutionally protected and which related to the matter in issue prevailed in the circumstances of the case. It followed that there existed compelling general interest reasons justifying a retroactive application of the law. Indeed the effects of the new law were such as to avoid a welfare system which privileged some and was disadvantageous to others, guaranteeing respect for the principles of equality and solidarity, which because of their founding nature, occupied a privileged position when weighed against other constitutional rights. The impugned law was inspired by the principles of equality and proportionality and took into account the fact that contributions paid in Switzerland were four times lower than those paid in Italy. It thus applied a direct recalculation which allowed pensions to be dispensed in proportion to the contributions paid, thus levelling out any inequalities and rendering the welfare system more sustainable for the benefit of all its users. Even the ECHR had upheld this reasoning in the Maggio case in relation to the complaint under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, although it did not find it to be sufficient to avoid a violation of Article 6. However, unlike the Court, which is bound to examine complaints separately, the Constitutional Court had to take a global approach and evaluate a case on the basis of all the relevant constitutional guarantees. The claim of unconstitutionality was therefore unfounded. Indeed to conclude otherwise would not only have consequences on the pension system but would also go against the spirit of the Court’s judgment in Maggio, which rejected the applicant’s claims for a pension based on the previous calculation method.
The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
"The Committee further notes from MISSOC [EU’s Mutual Information System on Social Protection] that in 2011 the amount of minimum pension (pensione minima) stood at €6,246.89 (€520 per month). The old-age pension (pensione di vecchiaia) is brought up to the amount of the minimum pension if the annual taxable income of the pensioner is less than twice the minimum pension. The Committee observes that the level of minimum pension falls below 40% of the median equivalised income (Eurostat) and is therefore inadequate. (page 29)"
"When assessing adequacy of resources of elderly persons under Article 23, the Committee takes into account all social protection measures guaranteed to elderly persons and aimed at maintaining income level allowing them to lead a decent life and participate actively in public, social and cultural life.
In particular, the Committee examines pensions, contributory or non-contributory, and other complementary cash benefits available to elderly persons. These resources will then be compared with median equivalised income. However, the Committee recalls that its task is to assess not only the law, but also the compliance of practice with the obligations arising from the Charter. For this purpose, the Committee will also take into consideration relevant indicators relating to at-risk-of-poverty rate for persons aged 65 and over.
The Committee notes from MISSOC that no statutory minimum pension is provided for in the case of workers first insured starting from 1 January 1996; therefore, only pensions paid under the earnings-related scheme can be topped up till the minimum pension amount is reached. It is a means-tested benefit, therefore, in order to be entitled to it, personal income or household income must not exceed certain limits, which are set annually (€6 247 for a single person, approx. € 521/month in 2011). The annual amount of minimum pension (pensione minima) amounted in 2011 to €6 076 (€ 506/month). Beneficiaries of a minimum pension may also receive a supplement or supplements. The information supplied by the Italian authorities mentions different supplements and provides different rates for these. (...)
In addition, the report states that the Social Card – a magnetic card, funded by public funds and private donations, distributed by the Italian Mail Company, allows elderly persons on low income to use it to purchase food in certain shops or pay utility bills up to €40/month. It is available to persons over 65 with a pension below €6 000 per year (€8 000 if aged 70 or more), and financial holdings below €15 000.
The Committee notes that 50% of the Eurostat median equivalised income in 2011 stood at €665 (40% at €532). The minimum pension falls below 40% of the Eurostat median equivalised income, therefore the Committee cannot assess the situation until it receives further information on the supplements available (see above question).
The Committee notes from the supplementary information submitted by Italy that there is a social assistance allowance payable to those over 65 years of age and who have an income below €5 749.90. In 2012 the amount payable to a single person was €442.30 per month. The Committee notes that this also falls below 40% of the Eurostat median equivalised income and again asks whether supplements or other benefits and allowance are payable. (pages 44-45)"