The case originated in an application (no. 76942/01) dated 21 December 2000 against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Valentin Petrov Ivanov, who was born in 1969 and lives in Sofia (“the applicant”).
The applicant was represented by Ms Y. Vandova, a lawyer practising in .
The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Ms M. Kotzeva and Ms M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 5 January 2006 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaints concerning the length of the proceedings and the lack of remedies in that respect to the Government. It also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 3).
On 1 May 2008 the new judge elected in respect of the , Ms Zdravka Kalaydjieva, began her term of office. She subsequently withdrew from the present case and the President of the Chamber exempted her from sitting in it.
On 16 September 2008 a Chamber, constituted within the Fifth Section and composed of Peer Lorenzen, President, Rait Maruste, Karel Jungwiert, Volodymyr Butkevych, Renate Jaeger, Isabelle Berro-Lefèvre and Mirjana Lazarova Trajkovska, judges, adopted a judgment in the case where it found a violation of Articles 6 and 13 of the Convention (excessive length of criminal proceedings and lack of effective remedies), which was delivered on 9 October 2008. However, the Chamber which adopted the judgment was not constituted in compliance with Article 27 § 2 of the Convention because no national judge had participated.
On 23 October 2008 the Registry informed the parties. In a letter of 13 November 2008 the applicant requested to have the proceedings reopened and a new judgment adopted.
On 25 November 2008 the Court reopened the proceedings and invited the Government to appoint an ad hoc judge.
On 10 January 2009 the Government informed the Court that they designated the judge elected in respect of “the ”, Mrs Mirijana Lazarova Trajkovska, to sit as national judge in the case.
On the night of 21 April 1992 two persons, who worked as bodyguards for the applicant’s former father-in-law, were murdered. A preliminary investigation was opened on an unspecified date.
The applicant’s former father-in-law was detained and questioned on an unspecified date. He confessed to the two homicides and implicated the applicant as an accomplice.
The applicant was detained and questioned on 4 and 5 May 1992. He confessed to having assisted his former father-in-law in planning, committing and concealing the two murders. The applicant was then remanded in custody and charged.
Thereafter the authorities conducted a preliminary investigation which involved, inter alia, the questioning of almost two hundred and fifty witnesses in different cities, performing a number of crime scene experiments and commissioning the following reports: autopsy, physicalchemical, forensic, ballistic, medico-ballistic, psychiatric, graphological, and accounting. An assessor’s report was also prepared.
The preliminary investigation ended in August 1994.
On 17 March 1995 an indictment was filed against the applicant and his co-defendant. The applicant was charged with (a) premeditated aggravated murder; (b) acquiring and retaining significant amounts of money obtained through fraudulent means; and (c) obtaining and possessing a handgun and ammunition without a permit.
On 21 June 1995 the charges against the applicant were amended, which led to the initial indictment being withdrawn on an unspecified date and a revised indictment being filed on 11 July 1995.
It is unclear on which dates and how many hearings were conducted before the Sofia City Court.
On 15 November 1996 the Sofia City Court remitted the case back to the public prosecutor’s office. The applicant contended, which the Government did not expressly challenge, that this was because of procedural violations but that no additional investigative procedures had been conducted as a result.
A new indictment was filed against the applicant on 1 July 1997.
On an unspecified date the victims’ relatives joined the proceedings as civil claimants.
It is unclear when and how many hearings were conducted before the Sofia City Court.
In a judgment of 11 June 1999 the Sofia City Court found the applicant guilty of (a) premeditated aggravated murder; (b) acquiring and retaining money obtained through fraudulent means; and (c) obtaining and possessing a handgun and ammunition without a permit. The applicant’s codefendant was also found guilty of related charges. The court sentenced the applicant to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole and awarded damages to the victims’ successors.
On 9 July 1999 the applicant appealed against the judgment of the Sofia City Court. It is unclear on which dates and how many hearings were conducted before the Supreme Court of Appeal.
In a judgment of 18 April 2000 the Supreme Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the lower court’s judgment in its entirety.
On 26 April 2000 the applicant filed a cassation appeal. In a final judgment of 3 November 2000 the Supreme Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal, but reduced the imposed sentence to life imprisonment.