The case originated in an application (no. 10425/03) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an  citizen, Mr Ibrahim Gulijev (“the applicant”), on 12 March 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Merkys, a lawyer practising in . The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicant complained under Article 8 of the Convention that his expulsion from Lithuania to Azerbaijan breached his right to respect for his family life, in view of the fact that his wife and children were Lithuanian citizens and lived in . The applicant alleged that the authorities’ decision to deport him on the ground that he posed a threat to “national security and public order” was arbitrary and that he had had no access to the documents, classified as “secret”, during the trial.
On 29 June 2005 the Court decided to give notice to the Government of the applicant’s complaints under Article 8 of the Convention. On the same date, the Court decided to apply Article 29 § 3 of the Convention and to examine the merits of the complaints at the same time as their admissibility.
The applicant is an Azerbaijan citizen who was born in 1971 and currently lives in .
The date of the applicant’s arrival in  was disputed between the parties. The applicant stated that he had lived in Lithuania since 1989, proof of which was the judgment of 1989 of  2nd District Court by which he was found guilty of theft and sentenced to two years’ imprisonment. He claimed that after that trial he was not ordered to leave the country. He also noted that he had arrived in  before the introduction of the visa regime in the early 1990’s, and that therefore his entry had not been illegal.
The Government stated that the date of the above-mentioned judgment was not 1989 but 1998, and that the applicant only lawfully entered the  on 12 March 2001, when he was issued with a single-entry visa.
On 25 July 1996 LG, the daughter of the applicant and his partner SG, a Lithuanian citizen, was born in . In 2001 the applicant was officially registered as the father of LG. The applicant married SG on 21 April 2001. On this basis, on 11 June 2001 he was issued with a temporary residence permit, valid for one year.
On 16 April 2002 the applicant applied for a renewal of that permit.
On 14 June 2002 the Migration Department refused to issue a new residence permit on the ground that the applicant posed a “threat to national security and public order”. In this connection the immigration authorities referred to the file classified as “secret”, which had been received from the State Security Department on 10 June 2002.
On 24 June 2002 the Police Commissariat of the Trakai Region ordered the applicant to leave the territory of the  by 4 July 2002.
On 26 June 2002 the applicant appealed to the , requesting that the decisions of the Migration Department and the Police Commissariat of the Trakai Region be quashed. The applicant argued that he had lived in Lithuania since 1989, from which date he had been granted a temporary residence permit several times, owned real estate in Lithuania, had his own business, had established a non-governmental organisation “Ibrahim and friends”, which aimed to foster the cultural traditions of Azeris residing in Lithuania, and in 1996 had had a daughter with his wife SG, a Lithuanian citizen. The applicant also noted that at the time of the deportation proceedings his wife had been expecting another child.
On 10 August 2002 the court dismissed the appeal. It relied on the written evidence in the case and, in particular, on the above-mentioned classified report of the State Security Department, which was not disclosed to the applicant, and concluded that the applicant’s continued presence in  endangered the national security of the country and public order.
The applicant appealed to the . In addition to his previous arguments, he noted that his wife was of Armenian origin and, taking into account the tensions in relations between Armenia and Azerbaijan, including the previous military conflicts between the two countries, she would have difficulties integrating in Azerbaijan if the applicant was expelled from  and she decided to go with him. The applicant maintained that the authorities’ main reason for denying him a residence permit was the classified file in which it was stated that he posed a threat to national security. As the content of that file had never been disclosed to him, he had had no opportunity to challenge such accusations.
The applicant failed to comply with the order to leave the  and, on 16 September 2002, he was arrested and temporarily accommodated at the Aliens Registration Centre.
On 14 October 2002 the  upheld the lower court’s decision. The court stated that it had examined the documents regarding the applicant, classified as “secret”, contained in the file provided by the State Security Department. The court did not disclose the content of those documents. On that basis, the court concluded that the applicant’s continued presence in  posed a threat to the national security of the State, and that the impugned administrative decisions were thus lawful.
On 14 October 2002 the Migration Department adopted a decision to deport the applicant to Azerbaijan and prohibit him from entering the  for an unspecified period of time. On the same day the applicant was deported from Lithuania by train; however, he jumped off the train and stayed in . On 16 October 2002 the applicant was prohibited from entering  until 2099.
In October 2002 the applicant and SG’s second child, IG, was born. IG is also a Lithuanian citizen.
On 18 February 2003 the applicant was arrested in  and placed in the Aliens Registration Centre. He was subsequently hospitalised, but escaped from there. A few months later the authorities apprehended him and returned him to the Aliens Registration Centre.
On 12 March 2003 the applicant submitted his application to the Court. From that day until 6 November 2003 he made several appeals to the Migration Department, requesting not to be deported. When his requests were denied, he appealed to the administrative courts, the final decision dismissing his appeals being given by the  on 4 September 2003. He also unsuccessfully requested the Migration Department to grant him refugee status. The applicant appealed to administrative courts, but on 22 September 2004 the  dismissed his request.
On 5 November 2003 the applicant lodged a request to be deported from the  as soon as possible, indicating that the questions regarding his administrative case would be taken care of by his wife and his lawyer. The following day he was deported to .
The Law on the Legal Status of Aliens (Įstatymas dėl užsieniečių teisinės padėties) regulates the status of aliens in the . At the material time the Law provided that an alien could be issued with a temporary residence permit. However, according to Article 14 of the Law, the authorities could refuse to issue a residence permit if the alien’s stay in the country posed a threat to national security or public order. Under Article 21 of the Law, for the same reasons the authorities could withdraw the alien’s temporary residence permit.
Article 19 of the Law stipulated that an alien was eligible to obtain a temporary residence permit in the Republic of Lithuania provided his or her children or spouse were Lithuanian citizens and resided in . According to Article 20 of the Law, an alien who entered into a marriage with a citizen of the Republic of Lithuania or an alien in permanent residence in the Republic of Lithuania could be issued with a temporary residence permit for a period of one year and a new permit was to be issued to that individual each year on the same grounds, provided the marriage had not been dissolved.
Articles 32-34 and 41 of the Law provided that an alien whose residence permit had been withdrawn, was required to depart from the Republic of Lithuania within ten days from the date of service of that decision. If an alien failed to comply with the requirement to depart within a specified time, he or she would be expelled from the country and prohibited from re-entering the  for a definite or an indefinite period. Article 36 of the Law provided that, when considering the expulsion of an alien, account was to be taken of the period of the person’s lawful stay in the country, the individual’s social, economic and other connections in the country and the consequences of the expulsion on members of the alien’s family lawfully residing in the Republic of Lithuania.
The Law on Administrative Proceedings (Administracinių bylų teisenos įstatymas) provides as follows:
Article 57. Evidence
“1. Evidence in an administrative case is all factual data found admissible by the court hearing the case and based upon which the court finds ... that there are circumstances which justify the claims and rebuttals of the parties to the proceedings and other circumstances which are relevant to the fair disposal of the case, or that there are no such circumstances ...
As a rule, factual data which constitutes a State or official secret may not be used as evidence in an administrative case, until the data has been declassified in a manner prescribed by law.”
In its judgment on 4 September 2002 in case no. A10-786-02, the  stated, insofar as relevant to the present case, that:
“as a rule, factual data which constitutes a State or official secret may not be used as evidence in an administrative case until it has been declassified (Article 57 § 3 of the Law on the Administrative Proceedings). Therefore, in the absence of other evidence, [the lower] court had no legal basis in relying solely on written information, provided by the State Security Department, which was marked as secret”.