The case originated in an application (no. 29985/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Viktor Petrovich Kislitsa (“the applicant”), on 4 July 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Nazarov, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his detention on remand had not been based on relevant and sufficient grounds.
On 1 April 2009 the applicant’s complaint under Article 5 § 3 of the Convention was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (former Article 29 § 3 of the Convention).
The applicant was born in 1946 and lives in Bolshoy Kamen, a town in the Primorye Region.
On 17 February 2005 criminal proceedings were brought against the applicant on suspicion of fraud. On the same day the applicant was arrested.
On 19 February 2005 the Frunzenskiy District Court of Vladivostok ordered that the applicant should be detained on remand. The court held as follows:
“In the court’s view, the non-use of a custodial measure in respect of an applicant who has committed a serious crime can entail the applicant’s fleeing from the pre-trial investigation and the trial, and hampering the identification and subsequent arrest of those involved in the crime.”
The applicant was placed in detention facility IZ-25/1 of .
The applicant appealed, claiming, in particular, that the Frunzenskiy District Court had not taken into consideration his advanced age and state of health (the applicant was suffering from ischemic heart disease necessitating regular medical supervision). The applicant further alleged that the District Court had no territorial jurisdiction over his case, and, therefore, could not decide on the issue of his detention. He further insisted that the custodial measure should be changed to bail.
Meanwhile, on 5 March 2005 another set of criminal proceedings was brought against the applicant on suspicion of fraud. On the same date the two sets of proceedings were joined under no. 512.
On 15 March 2005 the  upheld the decision of 19 February 2005 on appeal, having taken into consideration the gravity of the charges against the applicant. The court found no violation of the rules of territorial jurisdiction. It held that pursuant to Article 108 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure a request for application of a custodial measure could be examined by a court having territorial jurisdiction over the prosecutor’s office investigating the case.
On 13 April, 17 June and 12 August 2005 the Frunzenskiy District Court of Vladivostok extended the applicant’s detention until 17 June, 17 August and 17 September 2005 respectively. On each occasion the court held as follows:
“As established, the applicant is charged with a serious crime, and the court considers that, if released, he may reoffend, threaten witnesses and other participants in the criminal proceedings, destroy evidence, or otherwise obstruct the administration of justice.”
On 11 May, 21 July and 29 August 2005 respectively the  upheld the above-mentioned extension orders on appeal.
On 20 July 2005 the pre-trial investigation was completed; on 2 September 2005 the indictment was approved by the Deputy Prosecutor of the Primorye Region, and on 5 September 2005 the case was submitted to the Shkotovskiy District Court of the Primorye Region for trial.
On 15 September 2005 the Shkotovskiy District Court held a preliminary hearing and extended the applicant’s detention until 17 November 2005. The court held as follows:
“The court does not see any reason for granting the request filed by the [applicant’s] defence for the custodial measure to be changed to an undertaking not to leave the [applicant’s] place of residence.
In deciding on this issue the court takes into account the fact that [the applicant] is charged with having committed serious crimes, which, pursuant to Article 108 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, serves as one of the grounds for application of a custodial measure.
Moreover, in the court’s opinion, if at large, [the applicant] may obstruct the establishment of the truth in the case. Such a risk stems from the statements of the victim Ye., who submitted at the preliminary hearing that during the pre-trial investigation [the applicant’s] [relatives], on his instructions, had attempted to persuade her to change her statements to the applicant’s advantage ...”
During the preliminary hearing the prosecution challenged the judge’s impartiality. The judge withdrew from the case, and the case file was transferred to the .
The applicant appealed against the extension of his detention to 17 November 2005. He argued that the District Court had not considered the possibility of applying to him a more lenient preventive measure. The applicant further relied on his heart condition and the fact that the pre-trial investigation had already been completed.
On 27 October 2005 the  transferred the case to the Fokino Town Court of the Primorye Region. On the same day the  upheld on appeal the decision of 15 September 2005 to extend the applicant’s detention until 17 November 2005.
On 15 November 2005 the Fokino Town Court extended the applicant’s detention until the pronouncement of the judgment on the applicant’s criminal case, provided that period did not exceed six months, that is, until 8 March 2006. The court held as follows:
“At the present time [there are] no lawful grounds for lifting or altering the custodial measure. The applicant is charged with two crimes, one of which is a serious crime ... There are grounds to believe that, if at large, the applicant might obstruct the establishment of the truth in the case as he has been exerting pressure on the victim, Ye., with the purpose of persuading [the latter] to alter her statements to [his] advantage – this circumstance was mentioned by the victim herself.
There is no medical evidence preventing [the applicant] from being detained in custody. On the contrary, the case file contains a medical certificate ... dated 8 August 2005 to the effect that [the applicant’s] state of health allows him to be detained in a detention facility and participate in investigative actions”.
On 27 December 2005 the  upheld the above decision on appeal.
On 17 February 2006 the  convicted the applicant of fraud and attempted fraud. The applicant was given a suspended sentence of four years’ imprisonment, conditional on three years’ probation. The applicant was released in the courtroom.
On 10 April 2006 the  upheld the judgment on appeal.
Since 1 July 2002 criminal-law matters have been governed by the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001).
The “preventive measures” available include an undertaking not to leave a town or region, personal surety, bail, and detention (Article 98). When deciding on a preventive measure the competent authority is required to consider whether there are “sufficient grounds to believe” that the accused might abscond during the investigation or trial, reoffend, or obstruct the establishment of the truth (Article 97). The gravity of the charge, information on the accused’s character, his or her profession, age, state of health, family status and other circumstances must also be taken into account (Article 99). In exceptional circumstances, and when there exist grounds provided for by Article 97, a preventive measure may be applied to a suspect on account of circumstances listed in Article 99 (Article 100). If necessary, the suspect or accused may be asked to give an undertaking to appear (Article 112).
The Code makes a distinction between two types of remand in custody, the first being “pending investigation”, that is, while a competent agency – the police or a prosecutor’s office – is investigating the case, and the second being “before the court” (or “pending trial”), at the judicial stage.
A custodial measure may only be ordered by a judicial decision and in respect of a person who is suspected of, or charged with, a criminal offence punishable by more than two years’ imprisonment, and provided that a less restrictive preventive measure cannot be applied (Article 108 § 1). The time-limit for detention pending investigation is fixed at two months (Article 109). A judge may extend that period up to six months (Article 109 § 2). Further extensions may only be granted by a judge and if the person is charged with serious or particularly serious criminal offences (Article 109 § 3). No extension beyond eighteen months is permissible and the detainee must then be released immediately (Article 109 § 4).
Time-limits for detention “pending trial”