The case originated in an application (no. 41841/12) against the French Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a French national, Mr Alain Ottan (“the applicant”), on 21 June 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr P. Expert, a lawyer practising in Nîmes. The French Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Alabrune, Director of Legal Affairs at the Ministry of European and Foreign Affairs.
The applicant is a lawyer. He alleged that the disciplinary penalty imposed on him breached Article 10 of the Convention.
On 26 June 2015 the Government were given notice of the complaint concerning Article 10 and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Lunel.
The applicant, a lawyer at the Montpellier Bar since 1978, acted for M.B., who was a civil party in the context of a judicial investigation opened in Nîmes following the death of his minor son. The latter was killed on the night of 2 March 2003 by F.C., a gendarme who used his firearm.
In an indictment and partial discharge order of 26 June 2007 the investigating judge committed F.C. for trial before the Gard Assize Court on a charge of manslaughter. The investigating judge did not accept as justification either self-defence within the meaning of Articles 121 or 122 of the Criminal Code, or the use of firearms in accordance with the legislation or regulations under Article 174 of the Decree of 20 March 1903 (see, as regards those provisions, Guerdner and Others v. France, no. 68780/10, §§ 37 and 41 et seq., 17 April 2014). The judge also committed two of F.C.’s colleagues for trial before the Assize Court for having lied in their statements to him, given under oath.
On 26 November 2007 the Investigation Division of the Nîmes Court of Appeal upheld the order but ordered that the two gendarmes charged with giving false testimony stand trial before the Nîmes Criminal Court rather than the Assize Court.
The trial at the Assize Court began on 28 September 2009 and lasted for five days. The advocate-general requested a five-year prison term for the accused. It is not clear from the information available to the Court whether or not the sentence was to be suspended.
In a judgment of 1 October 2009 the Assize Court acquitted F.C.
Immediately after the verdict, at the exit from the courtroom, the journalists reporting on the case for, among others, France Bleu, RTL and the Midi Libre put questions to the parties’ lawyers, and in particular to the applicant. Some of the coverage was streamed live on the Internet. The applicant first stated as follows:
“... the verdict is received by the victims and by the community to which they belong, it is patently obvious that this is disastrous in terms of social peace.”
Asked by one journalist whether it was a “licence to kill”, he replied as follows:
“Well, I’m not sure you can say that. It’s not necessarily a licence to kill. It’s a refusal to face up to the reality in this country and to the existence of a two-speed society; not just a two-speed justice system, but actually a two-speed society at all levels. People are living in tower blocks cut off from city centres. For some, prosecution ends in conviction while others are acquitted. The entire social system needs to be revamped: we’ve turned into a real American-style society which is on the brink of civil war.”
When asked by an RTL journalist “But weren’t you expecting this verdict? Without really commenting on the verdict, weren’t you afraid this would happen?”, the applicant made the following statement:
“Yes, of course. I always knew it was a possibility. With a white – all-white – jury on which not all communities are represented, combined with, let’s face it, a very weak prosecution and a trial that was conducted in an extremely biased fashion, the door was wide open for an acquittal, it’s no surprise.”
These last remarks were the subject of a letter from the Principal Public Prosecutor at the Montpellier Court of Appeal, dated 6 October 2009, to the chairman of the Montpellier Bar, seeking the latter’s opinion “in view of the outcry caused by this statement in judicial circles in Nîmes”.
On 1 December 2009, after the chairman of the Bar had found that the applicant’s remarks were not offensive and did not go beyond the bounds of free criticism of a court decision, the Principal Public Prosecutor informed him of his decision to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the applicant under Article 188 of the Decree of 27 November 1991 on the organisation of the legal profession (see paragraph 29 above).
On 11 January 2010 the applicant gave evidence to the rapporteur of the Montpellier Bar Council. In particular, he stressed the need to put his remarks in context, as this was a sensitive case that had led to rioting in the working-class district where the victim had lived. He highlighted the length of the investigation, the fact that the gendarme had not been held in pre-trial detention and the disjoinder of the proceedings for false testimony concerning members of the gendarmerie patrol present on the day of the events, as well as the tensions during the five days of the hearing before the Assize Court. He denied making an accusation of racial and xenophobic bias, arguing that he had merely noted the absence of certain communities making up the French nation, in whose name criminal justice was administered. He added that he had not targeted the Assize Court, the prosecution or the defence.
The President of the Assize Court and the advocate-general who had participated in the proceedings refused a request from the rapporteur to hear evidence. However, the rapporteur was able to hear evidence from one of the lawyers for the acquitted gendarme, Mr N.-P. The latter confirmed the atmosphere of heightened pressure and tension throughout the trial, which had also been experienced by the lawyers of the civil parties. He observed that when the verdict had been delivered there had been a tremendous outcry, with the cameramen rushing to capture the scene. All the lawyers had been very emotional and the applicant had no doubt used an unfortunate turn of phrase, intending only to point to the lack of representation of certain communities in the criminal-justice system.
In parallel, in a judgment of 1 March 2010, the Nîmes Criminal Court sentenced the other two gendarmes to a one-month suspended term of imprisonment and a fine of 1,000 euros (EUR) for giving false testimony under oath. The court noted in particular that the false statements had been repeated over time, including before the investigating judge, and had been liable to influence the judge’s decision in that they concerned essential circumstances pertaining to the charges or at least circumstances of relevance to the case.
On 19 March 2010 the rapporteur sent her disciplinary investigation report to the chairman of the disciplinary board, the chairman of the Bar and the Principal Public Prosecutor.
On 2 April 2010 the applicant was summoned to appear before the disciplinary board on the basis of Article 183 of the above-mentioned Decree of 27 November 1991 (see paragraph 29 below), “for having, in the public lobby outside the courtroom of the Nîmes Court of Appeal, seriously breached the essential ethical principles of the legal profession, and specifically those of discretion and moderation, by publicly making the following comments accusing the court and jury of racist and xenophobic bias”.
“I always knew it was a possibility. With a white – all-white – jury on which not all communities are represented ..., the door was wide open for an acquittal, it’s no surprise.”
The disciplinary board of the Bar associations attached to the Montpellier Court of Appeal, sitting in plenary session, held its hearing on 21 May 2010. Reiterating his statements, the applicant relied in particular on Article 10 of the Convention, arguing that his remarks had been made in the context of the defence of his client’s interests as a civil party and within the ten-day period during which the Principal Public Prosecutor could appeal against the acquittal.
On 11 June 2010 the disciplinary board delivered its decision. It found that the applicant’s conduct had not been culpable and acquitted him. The disciplinary board considered that the remarks had to be placed in the dual context of the full statement and the circumstances in which they had been made. The words “a white – all-white – jury” had been supplemented by “on which not all communities are represented”, and had not accused the jury of racial or xenophobic bias but, together with other factors, had stated the obvious truth that “the social background of jurors contribute[d], even unconsciously and without their integrity and intellectual honesty being in question, to their decision, which necessarily ha[d] an element of subjectivity”. The disciplinary board stressed that the statements had been devoid of personal animosity and had reflected “ideas, opinions and information apt to contribute to a discussion or debate of public interest ... as part of a broader commentary on the decision of the Assize Court ...”; this came “within the scope of protection of the right to freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention”. The disciplinary board further considered that the impugned statements had formed part of the defence of the interests of the applicant’s client, since only the Principal Public Prosecutor could appeal against the acquittal verdict. They had therefore been intended “to stimulate a public debate apt to influence the Principal Public Prosecutor’s thinking ... and his decision whether or not to appeal against that verdict”. Lastly, the disciplinary board noted that the statements had been “made orally ... during an on-screen interview. In the interests of efficiency and given the brevity of the broadcasts and the speaking time, it [had been] necessary to use concise or even ‘shocking’ and caricaturised language”.
The Principal Public Prosecutor appealed against the disciplinary board’s decision. He requested that the applicant be barred from practising for three to six months.
In his pleadings before the Court of Appeal the applicant argued that his remarks had been directed at the jury rather than at the reputation, integrity and intellectual honesty of its members (who, moreover, had not brought any proceedings against him), based on the sociologically indisputable fact that the jury did not represent the diversity of the entire national community although its decision necessarily involved an element of subjectivity. His role as a lawyer had not ended with the delivery of the verdict, since it was up to the Principal Public Prosecutor to decide whether to lodge an appeal. Lastly, the applicant regretted that the prosecutor had chosen to prosecute him for comments that formed part of a debate of public interest and were not contrary to public policy, rather than appealing against the acquittal decision as his client and the public had hoped.
The Court of Appeal held, in a judgment of 17 December 2010, that the facts constituted a breach of the duties of discretion and moderation. It found as follows:
“Outside the courtroom, lawyers are not protected by immunity [of judicial speech] and the appropriate degree of their freedom of speech is no longer assessed in relation to the requirements of the exercise of the rights of the defence, but only in relation to freedom of expression.”
The Court of Appeal noted that the statements had been made in public, inside the court building, but before the press and not in the course of judicial proceedings; at that juncture, the verdict had been known and the hearing was over. In the court’s view, the cries from the public at the end of the hearing had been directed at the justice system, and the applicant had had a duty to exercise caution.
The Court of Appeal went on to find that, since all the members of the jury were French citizens, references to the colour of their skin did not relate to their social background or nationality but rather to their racial background. The term “white”, used in a repetitive and affirmative manner and without the intention to open a discussion or reflection on the matter, had racial connotations which cast aspersions and suspicion on the integrity of the jurors. The court further found as follows:
“As the members of the jury form part of the Assize Court, composed of three professional judges and nine lay jurors, this amounts to discrediting the entire court and consequently the judiciary itself, by disregarding the other three members of the Assize Court and especially the collegial spirit whose very purpose is to avoid bias and afford enhanced procedural guarantees.”
In the Court of Appeal’s view, the remarks did not form part of the exercise of the rights of the defence, in the absence of any mention of the possibilities of appeal against the decision of the Assize Court. “In view of the nature and degree of the offence”, the Court of Appeal imposed “the lightest possible disciplinary penalty – a warning” on the applicant.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law. In addition to the defence arguments already presented before the disciplinary body and the Court of Appeal, he argued that the latter had wrongly held that the statement had targeted the judiciary and the entire Assize Court, as the words “... combined with – let’s face it – a very weak prosecution and a trial that was conducted in an extremely biased fashion ...” had not been mentioned in the indictment (see paragraphs 13 and 20 above).
The advocate-general at the Court of Cassation concluded in his opinion that the judgment should be quashed on the basis of Article 10 of the Convention. In particular, he stated that the remarks had not disclosed any attack or personal animosity but rather had constituted, in the immediate aftermath of a highly contested acquittal, an irrepressible outburst based on the factual observation of the jury’s composition and echoing more general debates within society. Among those debates he mentioned the courts’ treatment of police officers implicated in criminal proceedings, stating as follows:
“We need only recall the judicial ramifications of two cases that caused a sensation and attracted widespread media coverage at the time of the proceedings resulting in the acquittal of gendarme C: [after] the pursuit and death of Zyed B and Bouna T in 2005 [triggered riots for weeks, the decision of the Paris Court of Appeal on 27 April 2011 to dismiss the case revived the debate], and the death of Ali Z in 2009. Following those events, in a report published on 2 April 2009, Amnesty International expressed concern about an increase in police violence and a lack of judicial action against the perpetrators. In addition to the ‘low rate of prosecution of alleged perpetrators’, according to the non-governmental organisation, there was a certain ‘laxity’ in the sentences imposed, leading to real impunity for the offences.”
In a judgment of 5 April 2012 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal in the following terms:
“Firstly, the complaint alleging that the disciplinary body exceeded the scope of its jurisdiction is inadmissible for failure to produce the indictment.
Secondly, having stated explicitly that, outside the courtroom, lawyers were not protected by the immunity conferred by section 41 of the Law of 29 July 1881, the Court of Appeal found that the impugned remarks had racial connotations casting aspersions and suspicion on the integrity of the jurors and thus amounted to a breach of the duties of moderation and discretion. It provided a legal basis for its decision merely to issue a warning to the lawyer, without laying itself open to any of the other complaints raised in the ground of appeal.”
The relevant provisions of the Decree of 27 November 1991 on the organisation of the legal profession, as amended, read as follows:
“Except in Paris, the disciplinary board shall be constituted as stipulated below.
After each re-election as provided for by section 15 of the above-mentioned Law of 31 December 1971, the Bar Council shall appoint the following members to sit on the disciplinary board:
(i)  one full member and one substitute member from those Bar associations in which the number of lawyers entitled to vote is between eight and forty-nine;
(ii)  two full members and two substitute members from those Bar associations in which the number of lawyers entitled to vote is between fifty and ninety-nine;
(iii)  three full members and three substitute members from those Bar associations in which the number of lawyers entitled to vote is between one hundred and two hundred.
...
Every Bar association with over two hundred lawyers entitled to vote shall appoint an additional representative and substitute for each two hundred lawyers. However, the members of that Bar association may not comprise more than half the membership of the Court of Appeal disciplinary board.
Lawyers entitled to vote are those who are on the Bar Council roll on the date of 1 September preceding the re-election of the Bar Council. ...”
“Any contravention of statutes or regulations, infringement of professional rules or breach of the duties of integrity, honour or discretion, even relating to nonprofessional matters, shall render the lawyer in question liable to the disciplinary sanctions listed in Article 184.”
“The disciplinary penalties shall be:
warning;
reprimand;
temporary disbarment not exceeding three years;
striking off the roll or withdrawal of honorary status.
...”
“In the cases provided for in Article 183 the chairman of the Bar to which the lawyer in question belongs, or the Principal Public Prosecutor, shall formally refer the case to the disciplinary authority, giving reasons, either directly or following an ethical standards investigation. He or she shall give advance notice to the authority that is not instigating the disciplinary proceedings.
The referral shall be notified to the lawyer by the authority instigating the disciplinary action, by registered letter with recorded delivery.
A copy shall be sent to the Bar Council with which the lawyer is registered, for the purpose of appointing a rapporteur
Within fifteen days of notification the Bar Council with which the lawyer is registered shall appoint one of its members to investigate the case. ...”
“The rapporteur shall send the investigation report to the chairman of the disciplinary board ... no later than four months after being appointed. ...
A copy shall be sent to the chairman of the Bar and the Principal Public Prosecutor if the latter has instigated the disciplinary proceedings.
The date of the hearing shall be set by the chairman of the disciplinary board ...”
“No disciplinary penalty may be imposed unless the lawyer in question has given evidence or been called at least eight days previously ...”
“The lawyer who is the subject of the disciplinary decision, the Principal Public Prosecutor and the chairman of the Bar may appeal against the decision to the Court of Appeal, which shall rule under the conditions laid down in Article 16, after hearing evidence from the Principal Public Prosecutor. The proceedings shall be conducted in public in accordance with Article 194.
The chief registrar of the Court of Appeal shall notify all the parties of the appeal in a registered letter with recorded delivery, indicating the date on which the appeal will be heard.
The time allowed for an interlocutory appeal shall be fifteen days following notification of the appeal in the main proceedings.
The Principal Public Prosecutor shall be responsible for the enforcement and supervision of the disciplinary penalties imposed.”
Under Article 380-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, only the Principal Public Prosecutor is entitled to appeal against an acquittal judgment. The Assize Court is composed of three professional judges and a jury made up of six citizens drawn by lots at first instance, and nine on appeal. Only the accused or his or her lawyer, and the public prosecutor, have the right to challenge jurors; the civil party may not do so. For a description of the procedure before the Assize Court with a lay jury, the Court refers to its judgment in Agnelet v. France (no. 61198/08, §§ 29 et seq., 10 January 2013).
In France, the question of the “racial” or ethnic representativeness of the jury is not debated because recognition of the existence of groups within the population is contrary to the Constitution. Thus, in a decision of 9 May 1991 (no. 91-290 DC), the Constitutional Council held that the reference made by the legislature to the Corsican people, as a group within the French nation, was contrary to the Constitution, “which recognise[d] only the French nation, composed of all French citizens without distinction as to origin, race or religion”. Similarly, in a decision of 15 November 2007 (no. 2007-557 DC), the Constitutional Council held that “ethnic statistics” were not permitted on the grounds that they breached Article 1 of the Constitution, according to which “France ... shall ensure equality before the law for all citizens without distinction as to origin, race or religion”. The Constitutional Council held as follows:
“... while the processing operations necessary for carrying out studies on the degree of diversity of people’s origins, discrimination and integration may concern objective data, they will be in breach of the principle set out in Article 1 of the Constitution if they are based on ethnic origin or race. ...”
The removal of the word “race” from the French Constitution has been the subject of debate for a number of years. A draft law to that effect tabled in 2013 was not adopted. The legislature has replaced the word “race” with the term “declared race” in the following provisions of the Criminal Code: Article 225-1 which defines discrimination (Law of 18 November 2016 on the modernisation of justice in the twenty-first century); Articles 132-76 and 222-13 which set out the aggravating circumstances of a crime or offence (Law of 27 January 2017 on equality and citizenship); and Article R. 625-7 concerning non-public provocation, defamation and insults (Decree of 3 August 2017 on non-public provocation, defamation and insults of a racist or discriminatory nature). The note accompanying this decree emphasises that the word “race” “is not applicable to human beings”.
The Court notes that the issue of the diversity and representativeness of the judiciary is the subject of debate in several Council of Europe member States, some of which have chosen to address the issue in a very different way to that chosen by France. In the United Kingdom, for instance, the under-representation of women and persons from visible minority groups among judges, especially in the higher courts, prompted the authorities to implement a proactive policy to promote diversity, with the creation in 2013 of a Judicial Diversity Committee under the authority of the Lord Chief Justice. In April 2017 the Committee published its first official statistics on the composition of the judiciary, together with an action plan to encourage greater diversity (Judicial Diversity Committee of the Judges’ Council – Report on Progress and Action Plan 2016-17, 13 April 2017). In the Netherlands the Council for the Judiciary, as far back as 2007, commissioned a study into the representation of ethnic minorities in the judiciaries of several traditional and more recent immigration countries (the Netherlands, Germany, France, Canada and the United States). A handbook published by the Council for the Judiciary in 2015 on reforming the process for the selection, recruitment and training of judges set out the clear objective of ensuring that the diversity within society was reflected in the judiciary (“Judicial reform in the Netherlands: A new process for the recruitment, selection and training of judges”, Scientific Magazine for the Judiciary Organisation of the Netherlands, 2015).
By way of comparison, in North America the diversity of juries and its impact on decision-making is the subject of numerous studies and court decisions. For example, in the United States the Supreme Court held in its decision in Batson v. Kentucky (476 US 79 (1986)) that the right of defence and prosecution lawyers to challenge jurors could not be exercised on the basis of “racial” criteria (see also, for a recent example, Timothy Throne Foster v. Bruce Chatman (578 U.S. – (2016)). In the Supreme Court’s decision in Peters v. Kiff (407 US 493 (1972)) regarding the systematic exclusion of African Americans from juries, Justice Thurgood Marshall issued a dissenting opinion in which he argued that removing a large part of the community from the jury reduced the diversity of human experiences and qualities that could be expressed during the deliberations. In Canada, in several recent cases, individuals accused of murdering “Aboriginal” people have been acquitted by juries with no Aboriginal members. These judgments triggered a debate on the representativeness of Canadian juries and the need to reform jury selection in order to promote the participation of members of Aboriginal communities; in particular, a former Supreme Court judge delivered a report in 2013 concerning the province of Ontario. In 2015 the Supreme Court ruled (R v. Kokopenace, 2015 SCC 28) that provinces had an obligation to make “reasonable efforts” to provide “a fair opportunity for a broad cross-section of society to participate in the jury process”. However, they are not required to ensure that the final composition of the jury accurately and proportionately reflects the different groups making up the Canadian population.