The case originated in an application (no. 2991/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Dmitriy Yuryevich Belugin (“the applicant”), on 31 October 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr A.V. Karev, a lawyer practising in Tomsk. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged that he had been ill-treated by police officers while in police custody and that an adequate investigation had not been carried out in this respect. He also claimed that the criminal proceedings against him had been unfair because his conviction had been based on a forced confession made in the absence of a lawyer.
On 13 April 2012 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1976 and is serving his sentence in Tomsk.
At around 12 noon on 25 December 2002 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of having assaulted Mr Kon. and taken to the offices of the Organised Crime Unit of Tomsk (Управление по борьбе с организованной преступностью по Томской области – “the UBOP”). According to the applicant, he was beaten up for nine hours by police officers with a view to making him confess to a crime which he had not committed.
At 9 p.m., in the absence of a lawyer, the applicant signed a record of his statement of surrender (протокол явки с повинной) describing the robbery of Mr Kon. His confession was recorded by an investigator, Mr M. An arrest record was drawn up at 9.20 p.m.
At 9.55 p.m. the applicant was interviewed as a suspect, in the presence of a State-appointed lawyer, Mr F. The applicant reiterated his earlier confession. The interview was recorded on video. According to the applicant, he did not have a confidential meeting with the lawyer prior to his questioning, and the lawyer also ignored the blood stains on his shirt.
In the meantime, according to the applicant, his relatives hired for him another lawyer, Mr T.
At 11.37 p.m. the applicant was taken to the scene of the crime. This investigative measure was recorded on video. The State-appointed lawyer Mr F. was present.
At an unspecified time the applicant was placed in a temporary detention facility (IVS). According to an entry in his medical record, he had no injuries at that time.
At 10.30 p.m. on 26 December 2002 in the absence of a lawyer, the applicant signed two documents: a handwritten statement of surrender and confession (явка с повинной); and a record of his statement of surrender regarding the robbery and murder of Mr Kol. According to the applicant, he made those statements as a result of the ill-treatment inflicted by police officers.
On 27 December 2002 the applicant was taken to the Leninskiy District Court of Tomsk to take part in a hearing. According to him, he then met with his lawyer, Mr T., for the first time. The court decided to release the applicant under an undertaking not to leave his place of residence.
After the hearing, the applicant went to the investigator’s office together with his lawyer and relatives in order to sign the aforementioned undertaking. According to the applicant, the investigator invited the lawyer to stay outside the room while three police officers accompanied the applicant therein and arrested him. He contended that he did not resist the arrest but only claimed access to his lawyer. According to the Government, the police used physical force against the applicant because he had actively resisted the arrest.
According to the applicant, on the night of 27 to 28 December 2002 the UBOP officers threatened him with further ill-treatment if he complained and identified them.
At 8 p.m. on 28 December 2002 the applicant was placed in an IVS. According to his medical record, he had no injuries.
On 29 December 2002, during an interview in the presence of his lawyer, Mr T., the applicant submitted that he had confessed under duress to two counts of robbery and one count of murder.
On 30 December 2002 the applicant was examined by a forensic medical expert. According to forensic report no. 1779, he had several bruises on the back of his head, the right temple and his left ear, and an abrasion on his right wrist. The injuries had been sustained between three and five days before the examination as a result of repeated blows by a hard blunt object with a limited surface area, for example by a fist. The expert considered that the abrasion on the applicant’s wrist could have been caused by handcuffs. The injuries were not considered as harmful to health.
On 13 and 29 January 2003 the applicant’s mother and grandfather complained to a prosecutor about his arrests on 25 and 27 December 2002 and his alleged ill-treatment by the police.
On 30 January 2003 an assistant prosecutor issued a refusal to institute criminal proceedings in respect of the applicant’s alleged illtreatment on the grounds that all of the applicant’s injuries, such as the bruises on the back of his head, his right temple and his wrists had been sustained on 25 December 2002 in the course of his arrest in response to his resistance. No appeal was lodged against that decision.
On 9 September 2005 the Sovetskiy District Court discontinued proceedings in respect of the alleged inaction of the regional prosecutor’s office, which had refused to specify the exact dates of the applicant’s detention on the grounds that the examination of the criminal case against him was pending before the Tomsk Regional Court. The District Court considered that the calculation of the term of the applicant’s pre-trial detention fell within the competence of the trial court.
On 13 October 2005 the decision of the Sovetskiy District Court was upheld on appeal.
On an unspecified date in July 2004 the applicant’s criminal case was referred to the Tomsk Regional Court for examination. The applicant was represented by his lawyer Mr T. On 1 September 2005 he asked the trial court to replace Mr T. by another lawyer. The applicant was henceforth represented by another lawyer, Mr K.
The applicant was charged with three counts of robbery and one count of murder. He pleaded not guilty to all charges. One of his codefendants, Mr Ku., pleaded guilty and made statements incriminating other co-defendants, including the applicant. Another co-defendant, Mr Kash., retracted the statements he had made at the investigation stage incriminating the applicant, alleging that they had been obtained under duress.
The applicant challenged the admissibility of his selfincriminating statements, arguing that they had been obtained as a result of ill-treatment by UBOP officers. He referred to the refusal to open a criminal case of 30 January 2003 and requested that the refusal and forensic report no. 1779 be appended to his criminal case file.
The trial court questioned officers U., G. and F. who had carried out the applicant’s arrest in the investigator’s office. They testified that they had brought the applicant to the floor and handcuffed his arms behind his back to overcome his resistance. The defence challenged their testimony that the injuries had been caused to the applicant during arrest, on the grounds that the police officers had been obliged, under the relevant legislation, to draw up a report about the circumstances of the arrest and the use of force, provide the applicant with medical assistance and immediately inform his relatives and the prosecutor about the arrest.
The trial court further questioned Ms A., a court clerk who had been present at the hearing of 27 December 2002. She submitted that she had not noticed any visible injuries on the applicant, but could not be certain whether he had any injuries as she was not a doctor and had not examined him.
When describing the circumstances in which he had given his selfincriminating statements, the applicant also referred to his unrecorded detention on 25 December 2002 and the delay in drawing up his arrest record. He asked the trial court to acknowledge the fact of the falsification of the latter in a separate decision.
After having examined the materials submitted by the parties in relation to the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment, the trial court considered that the applicant’s self-incriminating statements were admissible for the following reasons.
As regards the applicant’s self-incriminating statements about the robbery and murder of Mr Kol., the trial court first noted that on 26 December 2002 the applicant had made two statements of surrender and confession, one of which was handwritten. He had made them after he had been arrested on suspicion of having committed another offence, and the police officers who had arrested him could not have known about those other facts which he had confessed to having committed.
The trial court rejected the applicant’s argument that he had made the statements as a result of ill-treatment inflicted by police officers, on the following grounds:
“At trial Ms D.B., his mother, and Ms E.K., his sister, when questioned as witnesses, confirmed that [the applicant] had been severely beaten up; they had seen his injuries on 27 December 2002 after he had been released in the courtroom. [The applicant] contends that these injuries were inflicted on 25 December 2002 when one of the police officers hit him on the head with his shoe. It follows from the forensic medical examination of 30 December 2002 that [the applicant] had a wound on the back of his head, bruises on his left temple and his left ear, which could have been caused to him 3-5 days before the examination. In the meantime, it was established at the trial that these injuries could have been inflicted on him only after the hearing held by the Leninskiy District Court of Tomsk on 27 December 2002. On that day the District Court examined the request to place [the applicant] in detention, which was rejected by that court. It follows from the testimony of Ms A., the clerk of the hearing on 27 December 2002, that when [the applicant] was present in the District Court neither [he] nor his defence formulated any complaints regarding his ill-treatment; she remembers that when [the applicant] arrived at the District Court, she did not notice any injuries on his head or his face. These circumstances are confirmed by the hearing record of 27 December 2002 examined at the trial, demonstrating that [the applicant] expressed his readiness to cooperate with the investigation, an element which was taken into account in the court’s refusal to place him in detention. The absence of any injuries on the [the applicant’s] face on the night of 26 December 2002 follows from the video record of his interview carried out in the presence of a lawyer and examined in the courtroom. It follows from a certificate drawn up by the Seversk temporary detention centre (IVS), where Belugin was detained between 25 and 27 December 2002 before the detention hearing, and submitted to the trial court that he did not have any injuries. It follows from [his] own testimony that after the court [hearing] on 27 December 2002, he went together with his relatives and his lawyer to the regional prosecutor’s office to sign the undertaking not to leave his place of residence; however, he was arrested again in the investigator’s office. Witnesses Mr G., Mr U., Mr F., police officers, and Mr M., the investigator, testified that in the premises of the regional prosecutor’s office [the applicant] had been arrested again on suspicion of having committed another criminal offence; he actively resisted the arrest and physical force was used against him. In these circumstances, the trial court considers that [the applicant] was not ill-treated by police ... when he made his statements of surrender on 26 December 2002 regarding the circumstances of the attack and murder of Mr Kol.; physical force was used against him during his second arrest on 27 December 2002. The trial court thus considers that his statements of surrender were obtained at the pre-trial investigation stage in accordance with the law.
Since a confession statement constitutes a voluntary report of a person about a committed crime, the requirements prescribed by the relevant legislation on the mandatory participation of a lawyer when obtaining statements from a suspect or an accused person do not apply; consequently, the absence of a lawyer when [the applicant] voluntarily reported on the committed crime to the police cannot constitute a breach of his defence rights.”
The trial court further considered that the applicant’s selfincriminating statements had been corroborated by other evidence, namely the testimony of co-defendant Ku. that the applicant himself had told him about the murder of Mr Kol., and that of co-defendant Kash., given during the investigation. It also relied on the forensic reports, considering that their findings as to the way in which the victim’s injuries had been inflicted were consistent with the applicant’s statements. Finally, it noted that the investigation had examined alternative hypotheses that other people could have killed the victim. The trial court rejected the applicant’s alibi on account of several inconsistencies in the statements given by his mother and his sister.
Referring to the applicant’s self-incriminating statement of 25 December 2002 in relation to the robbery of Mr Kon., the trial court rejected his allegations of ill-treatment for similar reasons (see paragraph 31 above). It further considered that the applicant’s guilt was corroborated by the testimony of his co-defendants Ku. and Kash., and other evidence, such as forensic medical reports, witnesses’ statements, and search records.
On 9 June 2006 the Regional Court found the applicant guilty on three counts of robbery and one count of murder. It sentenced him to twenty years of imprisonment, starting on 25 December 2002, the day of his arrest. The court also ordered the applicant and two other co-defendants to pay jointly to Mr Kol.’s sister 188,762 roubles in respect of non-pecuniary damage. In accordance with the court’s decision, all physical evidence was to be destroyed.
On 8 April 2008 the Supreme Court of Russia rejected an appeal lodged by the applicant and upheld the conviction. The applicant’s arguments that his self-incriminating statements had been obtained under duress were rejected as unsubstantiated.
On 30 May 2012 the deputy prosecutor of the Tomsk Region overruled the refusal to institute criminal proceedings of 30 January 2003 and referred the complaints lodged by the applicant’s relatives on 13 and 29 January 2003 to the Investigative Committee for further investigation.
On 4 June 2012 a forensic medical examination was carried out. According to forensic medical report no. 3139-M, the applicant’s injuries indicated in forensic report no. 1779 could have been inflicted in the circumstances described by the police officers, that is during the applicant’s arrest on 27 December 2002. The injuries were not considered as harmful to health.
On 5 June 2012 a senior investigator of the regional department of the Investigative Committee issued a refusal to institute criminal proceedings. The decision referred to the Tomsk Regional Court’s findings according to which the applicant’s injuries recorded by the forensic medical expert on 30 December 2002 had been caused to him during his arrest on 27 December 2002. In addition to the elements referred to by the trial court, the investigator pointed to the inconsistencies in the applicant’s description regarding the time and place of his alleged ill-treatment. He noted, in particular, that before 29 December 2002 neither the applicant nor his lawyer had complained about his alleged ill-treatment by the police. He further indicated that at the hearing of 27 December 2002 the applicant had confirmed that he had made his confession statements voluntarily and that on 26 and 27 December 2002 his lawyer had asked the investigator and the court to take that fact into account when deciding on a preventive measure. The investigator thus concluded that it was not until 29 December 2002 when the applicant had made his allegations of ill-treatment on 26 December 2002. Lastly, the investigator observed that at a later stage, the applicant had also stated that he had been ill-treated on 25 December 2002 and in his application to the Court he had added that he had been ill-treated again between 27 and 28 December 2002.
For relevant domestic law and practice concerning the rights of suspects, see Turbylev v. Russia (no. 4722/09, §§ 46-49, 6 October 2015). In particular, the relevant Articles of the CCrP regarding the use of selfincriminating statements made by criminal suspects at the pre-trial investigation stage provide as follows:
“2.  The following constitute inadmissible evidence:
(1)  Statements by the suspect or accused given in the absence of counsel for the defence in the course of pre-trial proceedings in the criminal case ... which have not been confirmed in court ...”
“1.  A statement of surrender and confession (заявление о явке с повинной) is a voluntary statement by a person about a crime which he or she has committed.
A statement of surrender and confession can be made in a written as well as a verbal form. A verbal statement shall be taken and entered in a record under the procedure provided for by paragraph 3 of Article 141 of the present Code.”
In its decision no. 391-O of 20 October 2005, the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation held that Article 142 CCrP, which only lists “surrender with confession” among the reasons for opening a criminal investigation, does not prevent the application of Article 75 of the same Code governing the admissibility of evidence at trial and in particular the circumstances in which a self-incriminating statement made at the pre-trial investigation stage may be read out at trial.
Paragraph 9 of this Ruling provides that complaints lodged under Article 125 of the CCrP may be examined only as long as the criminal investigation is pending. If the case has already been transferred to a court for trial, the judge declares the complaint inadmissible and explains to the complainant that he or she may raise the complaints before the relevant trial court.
Paragraph 10 of this Ruling provides that before admitting in evidence a statement of “surrender and confession” referred to by the prosecution, the trial court should examine, among other things, whether prior to such a confession statement, the defendant had been informed about his rights, including the privilege against self-incrimination and the right to a lawyer, and whether he or she had been able effectively to use them.
If the defendant changes his previous statements or retracts them on the grounds that they were obtained under duress, the trial court should take adequate and effective measures for the examination of such allegation. In doing so, the courts must take into account that it is for the prosecution to refute the defendant’s allegations that his statements were obtained under duress (paragraph 12).
If there are grounds to carry out a preliminary inquiry into the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment raised at trial, the court should refer them to the competent investigative body. The court must then examine the results of such inquiry in its decision (paragraph 13).
If the defendant’s allegations of ill-treatment have not been refuted, his statements made as a result of such treatment may not be used in evidence (paragraph 14).
Sections 18-20 of the Police Act 2011 (Federal Law no. 3-FZ of 7 February 2011) provide that
-  a police officer may use physical force, special means or a weapon during an arrest;
-  a police officer must ensure that an injured arrestee receives first aid;
-  where the physical force used results in damage to health, and where special means or a weapon are used, a police officer must submit a report about the use of physical force, special means or a weapon to his supervisor within twenty-four hours.
The Police Act 1991 (Federal Law no. 1026-I of 18 April 1991) and respective by-laws contained similar provisions.
The Instructions for Police Station Duty Officers (approved by Order no. 389 of the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation on 30 April 2012) provides that
-  a police officer on custody duty must inform his superior of all cases where a person arrested and taken into police custody has visible wounds, injuries or is in a state that requires urgent medical intervention;
-  a police officer must call an ambulance or take an injured person to a nearby hospital;
-  a police officer must find out the reasons and circumstances of the injuries sustained by the person concerned. If the latter reports violent actions that resulted in his injuries, then the police officer must receive a criminal complaint from the person; if not, he must draw up a reasoned report and file it in the criminal complaints register.
The Instructions reproduced the rules that were in force at the time of the events (see Chernetskiy v. Russia, no. 18339/04, § 50, 16 October 2014).