The case originated in an application (no. 45526/08) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Ms Olga Vasilyevna Zhuravleva (“the applicant”), on 9 September 2008.
The applicant was represented by Ms N. Kusner, a lawyer practising in Donetsk. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant alleged that half her flat had been sold unlawfully at public auction and that the domestic courts had unfairly rejected her allegations in that respect. She relied on Articles 6 § 1 and 8 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 in this respect. She also complained under Article 8 of the Convention that the State authorities had failed to protect her from the co-owner of her flat and his associates.
On 8 October 2013 the application was communicated to the Government. The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered their objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Donetsk.
In 1996 the applicant and A.Z., her son, privatised a two-room flat of 49 square metres. They lived in it and were its co-owners with equal rights.
On 24 September 2002 A.Z. was sentenced to imprisonment; all his property was subject to confiscation, including his share of the flat.
On 18 April and 13 June 2005 the State company Ukrspetsyust held two public auctions to sell A.Z.’s share in the flat, but no bids were received.
On 4 August 2005 Ukrspetsyust held a third auction and reduced the starting price. The applicant alleges, without providing any details, that she was not allowed to bid at the auction, although she informed the State bailiffs that she was interested. A.Z.’s share was then sold to a certain A.N.
According to the applicant, immediately after purchasing A.Z.’s share in the flat, A.N. and his associates started harassing her to force her to sell the remaining share of the flat at a low price. On numerous occasions A.N. approached her with verbal insults and threats of physical violence and promised to make her daily life in the flat intolerable by settling alcoholics and drug addicts in it. On several occasions A.N. threatened to kill the applicant if she persisted in being unreasonable.
Thus, in mid-September 2005 at about 10 p.m. A.N. arrived in the flat with V.S. (his cousin) and announced that the latter would be living there. They then started threatening the applicant that they would throw her out of the window, kill her, or create intolerable living conditions for her if she did not give them the flat’s keys and documents and did not agree to transfer her part of the flat to A.N. on his conditions. A.N. said that he was not going to live in his part of the flat and that he needed the whole flat to be able to sell it on. On 16 September 2005 the applicant met A.N. outside the flat and gave him the keys. During the meeting A.N. behaved rudely, used coarse language, and insisted that he was the owner of the flat. Afraid of A.N.’s threats, on 22 September 2005 the applicant left the flat and sought shelter with acquaintances. Subsequently she visited the flat several times. A.N., who was there on one of the days, started insulting her, insisted that the whole flat belonged to him, told her that she had no rights to the flat, and demanded that she surrender her part of the flat in his favour. A.N. also settled various people in the flat; they also occupied her room.
The applicant continued to pay the monthly charges for the whole flat, and sometimes visited it with a police escort. During her visits she found that the flat was lived in by up to eight strangers, whose composition frequently changed. She also found that the door and some amenities had been damaged and some of her belongings were missing.
Subsequently the applicant found out that A.N. and his associates were part owners of more than sixty flats in the city, which they were subletting to various strangers for short periods of time.
From mid-September 2005 onwards the applicant lodged numerous complaints with law-enforcement authorities, alleging that A.N. and his associates were harassing her with a view to extorting her half of the flat from her; that various items belonging to her had been stolen or damaged, and that A.N. had let strangers live in the flat. Her complaints were rejected with reference to the insignificant value of those objects and lack of evidence that she had been ill-treated. The authorities also noted that A.N., as a co-owner of the flat, had the right to invite anyone he chose, and if the applicant had any conflicts with him about the use of the joint property she should resolve them in civil proceedings.
On 18 July 2006 the Ministry of Interior informed the applicant that they would no longer deal with her complaints, as they were repetitive. On the same day the local police informed her that they had received similar complaints from various individuals in flats of which A.N. and his associates had become part owners. However, there was no basis for bringing charges against them at the material time. The police also acknowledged that they had visited the applicant’s flat; it was inhabited by four men, but there was no reason to evict them from it, since they had settled there with A.N.’s permission.
On 27 September 2007 criminal proceedings were instituted against A.N., V.S. and their associate A.L. on charges of extortion and other crimes. The applicant and a number of other individuals, including the applicant in the case of Irina Smirnova v. Ukraine (no. 1870/05, 13 October 2016), were admitted to the proceedings as injured parties. The applicant also lodged a civil claim against A.N. and his associates for damages.
On an unspecified date A.N., V.S. and A.L. were committed for trial before the Kyivskyy District Court of Donetsk (“the District Court”) on charges of extortion and theft. A.N. was also charged with hooliganism. According to the prosecution, they had set up a criminal group for the purpose of acquiring shares of flats, which, depending on their owners’ personal circumstances, were made available at low prices. Having lawfully obtained these shares, they had proceeded to extort the remaining share from other co-owners by harassing them verbally or physically and by subletting the flats to strangers, who also damaged and stole the co-owners’ belongings and caused damage to the flats’ amenities.
On 24 May 2011 the District Court discontinued the proceedings against A.N. on charges of hooliganism as time-barred, and acquitted all three defendants of the remaining charges, finding that the accusations were based on assumptions. It concluded that the basis for the criminal proceedings was a civil-law dispute between the defendants and the injured parties concerning the use of joint property, which the injured parties had demanded to have examined within the criminal proceedings. It also dismissed the applicant’s civil claim.
On 27 February 2012 the Donetsk Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) quashed the above judgment and sent the case for retrial.
On 12 October 2012 the District Court found the defendants guilty of extortion and sentenced them to substantial terms of imprisonment. It found, in particular, that the harassment of the applicant (mentioned, in particular, in paragraphs 10 and 11 above) had indeed taken place. It also awarded the applicant 5,000 Ukrainian hryvnias in non-pecuniary damage. As to her claim for pecuniary damage, based on the alleged theft of and damage to property in the flat by the defendants and on the fact that she had been paying the charges for the whole flat, the court rejected it on the ground that it fell outside the scope of the charges brought against the defendants (as it appears from the case file, the applicant’s complaint about alleged thefts and spoilages in her flat was singled out into separate criminal proceedings, which were subsequently discontinued by the prosecutors on various grounds).
On 6 March 2013, following an appeal by the defendants, the Court of Appeal upheld the above judgment, except for one unrelated episode.
The parties did not inform the Court about further proceedings. However, as appears from the case of Irina Smirnova, in which the same defendants were convicted of the same charges in the same proceedings, on 18 September 2014 the Higher Specialised Civil and Criminal Court of Ukraine rejected the appeals in cassation lodged by A.N. and V.S. against the lower courts’ judgments (ibid., § 53).
On 3 July 2006 the applicant lodged a civil claim for the invalidation of the contract of sale of A.Z.’s share of the flat to A.N. In her claim she alleged that under Article 362 of the Civil Code she had a right of pre-emption, but despite her requests to the bailiffs to be allowed to buy part of the flat, they had refused to allow her to do this. She also alleged that the auction had been a criminal set-up between its organisers and A.N., which had enabled the latter to buy a share of her flat at a low price. As indicated in the judgment of 23 March 2007 (see paragraph 24 below), during the court hearing the applicant also asked the court to declare the auction invalid because, in the alleged breach of the procedure (see paragraphs 33 and 34 below), no public notice of the auction had been given and, furthermore, it had been unlawful in the first place to arrange the third auction.
On 23 March 2007 the District Court ruled against the applicant. She appealed, reiterating her allegations and also alleging that Ukrspetsyust had breached Article 366 of the Civil Code by selling half of the flat without allocating it in kind.
On 30 October 2007 the Court of Appeal rejected the applicant’s appeal. It found in essence that the pre-emption rights and provisions of Article 366 of the Civil Code did not apply in the case at issue and, furthermore, that it could not examine the validity of the auction, because the applicant had not lodged a claim for its invalidation in accordance with the procedure set in Articles 118 and 119 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The applicant appealed in cassation, mainly reiterating her previous submissions. On 25 April 2008 the Supreme Court of Ukraine rejected her appeal as unsubstantiated.
Article 362 of the Code provides that if a share of joint property is to be sold a co-owner has the right of pre-emption, except where the property is sold by public auction.
Article 366 provides that a creditor may lodge a claim against a coowner of joint property for allocation in kind of the latter’s share of that property, whereupon the co-owner’s right to the property would be forfeited, unless the latter has another property.
Other relevant provisions of the Code are summarised in the case of Irina Smirnova (cited above, § 56).
Article 11 of the Code provided that the court could examine cases only within the scope of the claims made by the parties.
Article 33 provided that the court could, at a claimant’s request, replace the original respondent with the proper respondent if a claim was lodged against the wrong respondent, or involve another person as a corespondent. If the claimant did not agree with the replacement of a respondent by the court, the latter could involve another person as a corespondent.
Articles 118 and 119 set formal requirements for submitting civil claims. They specified that claims had to be submitted to a trial court in written form, where they were registered and then forwarded to a judge. Those articles further set a number of requirements concerning the contents of a civil claim (including, inter alia, its subject matter, defendants, relevant arguments, evidence in support of the claim, and so on).
Paragraph 3.5 of the above Regulation envisaged that a specialised organisation which arranged an auction had to publish in the print media, in the locality where the real estate subject to sale was situated, an information notice about the real estate offered for sale no later than fifteen days before the day of the auction. This information could also be publicly announced in other media.
Paragraph 7.3 provided that if the public auction failed twice, the property was to be removed from auction.