The case originated in an application (no. 29992/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Semenovich Zelenkov (“the applicant”), on 12 August 2005.
The applicant was represented by Ms A. Starodumova, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been unable to participate in the appeal hearing on 15 February 2005 owing to the domestic courts’ failure to duly notify him of its date and time.
On 6 February 2009 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in .
On an unspecified date the applicant, a former investigator with the military prosecutor’s office, challenged in court the lawfulness of his discharge from the army.
On 23 November 2001 the Chelyabinsk Garrison Military Court dismissed the applicant’s claims in full. The applicant appealed.
On 17 January 2002 the Uralskiy Circuit Military Court upheld on appeal the substance of the judgment of 23 November 2001.
On 5 August 2004 the Supreme Court of Russia granted a request submitted by the applicant for supervisory review of the judgments of 23 November 2001 and 17 January 2002.
On 27 October 2004 the Presidium of the Uralskiy Circuit Military Court quashed the above-mentioned judgments by way of supervisory review and remitted the matter for fresh consideration.
On 16 December 2004 the Chelyabinsk Garrison Military Court again dismissed the applicant’s claims in full, noting that the applicant had failed to lodge them within the statutory three-year period. The applicant’s counsel attended the hearing, but the applicant himself was not present. On an unspecified date the applicant lodged an appeal against the judgment.
On 21 January 2005 the Chelyabinsk Garrison Military Court sent a letter to the applicant’s address notifying him of the appeal hearing fixed for 15 February 2005. It appears that the applicant did not receive the letter.
On 15 February 2005 the Uralskiy Circuit Military Court upheld the judgment of 16 December 2004 on appeal. The applicant did not attend the hearing. The court heard two army officers representing the respondent.
On an unspecified date the applicant asked the  for supervisory review of the judgments in his case. He argued that the courts had erroneously applied the statutory time-limit to his claims.
On 21 June 2005 the Uralskiy Circuit Military Court dismissed the applicant’s request for supervisory review. An identical request subsequently submitted by the applicant to the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation was dismissed on 30 January 2006.
The Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation (“the CCP”, in force at the material time) reads as follows:
Article 113.  Court summonses and notifications
“1. Parties ... shall be summoned to court by a letter sent via registered mail with an acknowledgment of receipt, a court summons with an acknowledgment of receipt, a telegram, by telephone or fax or by any other means of communication which guarantees recording of the reception by the parties of the court summonses or notifications.
A court summons is one form of court notification. Parties are notified by a court summons of the date and place of a court hearing or of particular procedural measures ...
A summons or another form of notification shall be served on parties in such a way [as to ensure] that they have enough time to prepare their case and to appear at the hearing.
A court summons issued to a party shall be sent to the address indicated by that party or his/her representative. If a party does not reside at the address indicated, the court summons may be sent to his or her place of work ...”
Article 115.  Service of court summonses and notifications
“1. A court summons or other notification shall be sent by mail or delivered by a person whom the court authorises to deliver them. The time of service shall be recorded as laid down by post office regulations or on a document which shall be returned to the court.
With the party’s consent, a judge may serve him or her with a summons or notification to be delivered to another party. A person authorised by the judge to deliver a court summons or another notification shall return a counterfoil of the summons or a copy of the notification bearing the addressee’s signature confirming receipt.”
Article 116.  Receipt of a court summons
“1. A court summons ... to a person shall be served on him or her against his or her signature on a counterfoil of the summons, which shall be returned to the court.”