The case originated in an application (no. 21074/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Nikolay Fedorovich Makarov, (“the applicant”), on 4 June 2003.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 24 October 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1944 and lives in .
He was engaged in emergency operations at the site of the  nuclear plant disaster. As a consequence, he was entitled to certain social benefits.
In 1998 the administration of  placed the applicant on a special “waiting list” for getting free accommodation.
As the town administration did not provide him with a flat within three months after placing him on a waiting list, the applicant brought a court action against the administration.
By judgment of 2 March 1999 the Leninskiy District Court of Tambov ordered that:
 “...the Mayor of Tambov should allocate to the Administration of the Leninskiy District of Tambov well equipped dwelling premises having a living surface of no less than 27 square metres and comprising additional dwelling premises in the form of a separate room for the further allocation to Mr Makarov.
The head of the administration of the Leninskiy District of Tambov should provide Mr Makarov, whose family comprises three members, a well equipped flat having a living surface of no less than 27 square metres and comprising additional dwelling premises in the form of a separate room in the boundaries of Tambov”.
No appeal was brought against the judgment and it entered into force on 13 March 1999.
Enforcement proceedings were initiated by the bailiffs' service of the Leninskiy District of Tambov. However, the judgment could not be enforced because the town administration possessed no available housing or financial resources to purchase a flat.
On 12 March 2001, 31 March and 30 October 2003 the bailiffs' service fined the Mayor of Tambov for the failure to provide the applicant with accommodation. Those decisions were quashed by the Leninskiy District Court, upon the mayor's appeal. The District Court held that the Mayor of Tambov could not enforce the judgment due to the lack of available accommodation.
Following those decisions the bailiff returned the writ of execution to the applicant.
On 22 January 2004 the writ of execution was again forwarded to the bailiffs' service and new enforcement proceedings were instituted.
In December 2004 the town administration unsuccessfully applied to a court seeking to change the method of the enforcement of the judgment of 2 March 1999.
On 24 January 2006 the bailiff fined the town administration for the failure to provide the applicant with a flat. The Leninskiy District Court of Tambov upheld the decision and confirmed that the town administration had taken no steps to enforce the judgment.
The judgment of 2 March 1999 remains unenforced to date.