The case originated in an application (no. 5425/11) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Ruslan Anatoliyovych Yakovenko (“the applicant”), on 17 January 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr O.V. Levytskyy, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their then Agent, Mr N. Kulchytskyy.
The applicant complained of the unlawfulness of his detention and of a violation of his right of appeal in criminal proceedings.
On 12 December 2012 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Korolivka, in the Kyiv Region.
On 12 July 2010 the Bila Tserkva Town Court (“the Bila Tserkva Court”) found the applicant guilty of inflicting grievous bodily injuries on a certain Mr N. on 12 May 2006. Although this type of crime was punishable with five to eight years’ imprisonment, the court considered it possible to apply a more lenient sanction to the applicant. It had regard, in particular, to the fact that he had pleaded guilty and had shown remorse. Accordingly, the Bila Tserkva Court sentenced the applicant to four years and seven months’ imprisonment. It also decided to include in the served part of the applicant’s sentence the period from 20 October 2005 to 3 May 2006 (six months and fourteen days), during which he had been detained in the context of another criminal case. Lastly, in fixing the applicant’s sentence the court had regard to the fact that he “had spent more than four years in [pre-trial] detention facilities in which the detention conditions were considerably harsher than in a post-conviction prison, and the previous judgments in respect of him had been quashed”. No further information is available regarding the earlier detention of the applicant, the other criminal cases involving him, or the judgments that had been quashed.
In the operative part of its judgment, the Bila Tserkva Court also ruled that the applicant should remain in a pre-trial detention centre (“SIZO”) as a preventive measure until the judgment became final. It further noted that the judgment was amenable to appeal within fifteen days of the date of its delivery.
On 15 July 2010 the term of the applicant’s sentence expired, and he asked the SIZO administration to release him. His request was rejected. On the same day the SIZO administration, however, applied to the Bila Tserkva Court for permission to release the applicant subject to an undertaking not to abscond, given that he had served his prison sentence in full. No reply was received.
On 19 July 2010 the applicant’s lawyer applied once again to the SIZO administration for the applicant’s immediate release. He submitted, in particular, that there were no grounds for his client’s continued detention. A copy of that letter was also sent to the Kyiv Region Prosecutor’s Office.
On 27 July 2010 the fifteen-day time-limit for lodging an appeal against the judgment of 12 July 2010 expired and, in the absence of an appeal, it became final.
On the same day the SIZO administration wrote to the applicant’s lawyer stating that it could not release the applicant until either the preventive measure in respect of him was changed or the judgment became final. It was noted in the letter that, in any event, it was for the Bila Tserkva Court to authorise the applicant’s release.
On 29 July 2010 the SIZO received the court’s order to enforce the final judgment and the applicant was released.
On 5 August 2010 the State Prisons Department wrote to the applicant’s lawyer in reply to his complaints regarding the delayed release of the applicant, stating that there had been no violation of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Article 148 specified the purpose and grounds for the application of preventive measures. It stated, in particular, that a preventive measure was to be imposed where there were sufficient grounds to believe that a suspect, an accused, a defendant or a convicted person would attempt to abscond, fail to comply with procedural decisions, obstruct the establishment of the truth in the case, or pursue criminal activities.
.  At the stage of judicial proceedings a detainee could be released only on the basis of a decision of the judge or the court to that effect (Article 165). As also provided in Article 165, a preventive measure could be lifted or changed if the measure applied previously was no longer necessary.
Although during the pre-trial investigation a detainee was to be released immediately by the administration of the detention facility if the term of his or her detention had expired and if no court ruling on its extension had been received by that time (Article 156 in fine), no such provision existed in respect of the procedure for releasing a detainee at the stage of judicial proceedings.
.  Article 274 concerned the application, lifting or change of a preventive measure by a trial court. It obliged the court to be guided by the relevant provisions of Chapter 13 (“Preventive measures” – Articles 148 to 165-3).
Article 324 required the sentencing court to decide, in particular, on the preventive measure to be applied to a convicted person until the judgment became final.
Article 343 reiterated in substance the above provision and further specified that the court could remand a convicted person in custody as a preventive measure only on the grounds provided for in the relevant provisions of Chapter 13.
Article 358 listed the issues which the appellate court could consider at a preparatory hearing. It could decide, in particular, to change, lift or apply a preventive measure in respect of a convicted person.
Under Article 401, a judgment would become final if it was not challenged on appeal before the statutory deadline (within fifteen days of the date of its delivery – Article 349). If an appeal was lodged, a judgment would become final after the examination of the case by the appellate court (unless it was quashed). An acquittal judgment, or a judgment lifting the punishment, was to be enforced immediately, whereas a judgment involving a guilty verdict was to be enforced once it had become final. Article 404 provided that the court that delivered the judgment had to send the case for enforcement no later than three days after the judgment became final.
Article 1176 imposed on the State an obligation to “fully compensate an individual for the damage caused to him or her by unlawful conviction, unlawful imposition of criminal liability, unlawful application of a preventive measure [or] arrest ... regardless of the guilt of officials of the bodies of inquiry, pre-trial investigation authorities, prosecutors’ offices or courts” (first paragraph). It further specified that “the right to compensation for damage caused to an individual by unlawful actions of the bodies of inquiry, pre-trial investigation authorities, prosecutors’ offices or courts [would] arise in cases envisaged by law” (second paragraph).
.  Under section 1, a person was entitled to compensation for damage caused, in particular, by an unlawful conviction, unlawful indictment, unlawful arrest or remand in custody. In the listed cases, damage was to be compensated for regardless of whether the officials from the bodies of inquiry, pre-trial investigation authorities, prosecutors’ offices or courts were guilty.
.  Section 2 listed the cases in which the right to compensation arose. They included the following: (1)  an acquittal judgment; (1-1) a judicial decision acknowledging, in particular, that the detention was unlawful; and (2)  discontinuation of the criminal proceedings on the grounds of a lack of corpus delicti or of proof of guilt of an accused.