The case originated in an application (no. 49848/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Vyacheslavovich Manerov (“the applicant”), on 25 July 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Ryabiy, a lawyer practising in Vladivostok. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic court had discontinued his appeal against the decision of 15 February 2010 rejecting his application for release, and that the examination of his appeal against the custody order of 22 March 2010 had not been speedy.
On 27 August 2013 the above complaints were communicated to the Government under Article 5 § 4 of the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant, a former military unit commander, was born in 1963 and lives in Vladivostok.
On 28 May 2008 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of fraud.
On 30 May 2008 he was released having given an undertaking not to leave his place of residence.
On 1 July 2009 the Military Court of the Vladivostok Garrison (the Garrison Court) convicted the applicant of fraud committed in abuse of position and sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment with a dishonourable discharge. The applicant was arrested in the courtroom and placed in a remand prison.
On 29 January 2010 the Military Court of the Pacific Fleet (the Fleet Court) quashed the conviction on appeal and ordered a retrial. The court held that the custodial measure applied to the applicant should remain unchanged until 1 April 2010 in view of the seriousness of the charges against him, and the risk of his absconding and threatening witnesses, a risk confirmed by the statements of Sh., a witness.
On 15 February 2010 the Garrison Court rejected the applicant’s application for release, including in its reasoning the seriousness of the charges and the risk of the applicant absconding and exerting pressure on witnesses. The decision mentioned that it could be appealed against within a three-day time-limit to the Fleet Court. The applicant appealed.
However, on 26 March 2010 the Fleet Court discontinued the appeal proceedings against the decision of 15 February 2010. Relying on Article 355 § 5 (2) of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure, the court held that the refusal of an application for release was not amenable to a separate appeal before the final decision in the case, as it was not in breach of the applicant’s right to access to a court and his right to have the case heard within a reasonable time, and did not delay the progress of the proceedings.
In the meantime, on 22 March 2010 the Garrison Court extended the applicant’s detention until 1 July 2010. The court again mentioned the seriousness of the charges against the applicant in its reasoning. It further held, with reference to a medical report, that the applicant’s state of health allowed him to participate in the proceedings, and that his judge-ordered removal from the courtroom until the end of the proceedings due to unacceptable behaviour gave sufficient grounds to believe that, if released, he might influence the witnesses and abscond from justice.
On 25 March 2010 a copy of the extension order of 22 March 2010 was handed over to the applicant after the three-day time-limit for lodging an appeal against it had expired.
On 27 March 2010 the applicant lodged his appeal against the extension order of 22 March 2010.
On 8 April 2010 the Garrison Court renewed the time-limit for the applicant to lodge his appeal against the extension order of 22 March 2010.
On 21 April 2010 the applicant’s appeal was submitted to the Fleet Court for examination. On the same day the Fleet Court scheduled the hearing for 23 April 2010, to be held by video link, and sent notification to the remand prison where the applicant was being held.
On 23 April 2010 the applicant was informed of the examination of his appeal before the Fleet Court. He requested an adjournment of the hearing because of the late notification. The applicant also asked the Fleet Court to ensure his physical presence at the examination of the appeal as a hearing impairment condition prevented him from following effectively the examination of his appeal by video link.
On 23 April 2010 the Fleet Court granted the applicant’s request and adjourned the examination of his appeal against the custody order of 22 March 2010 until 30 April 2010.
On 29 April 2010 the Garrison Court convicted the applicant of nine counts of fraud committed in abuse of office and sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment with a dishonourable discharge.
On 30 April 2010 the Fleet Court upheld on appeal the custody order of 22 March 2010.
On 2 December 2010 the Fleet Court discontinued the appeal proceedings against the judgment of 29 April 2010 as the applicant had withdrawn his request for reconsideration.
A judge’s decision on detention is amenable to appeal before a higher court within three days of its delivery date. Having received a file, the second-instance court should examine the appeal lodged against the judge’s decision on detention within three days (Article 108 § 11).
Procedural decisions rendered by a court in the course of a trial in response to requests lodged by a party to the trial proceedings are not amenable to separate appeal (Article 355 § 5 (2)).
In its decision no. 44-O of 6 February 2004, the Constitutional Court held as follows:
“3.  In accordance with Article 355 § 5 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation, [procedural decisions] rendered by the court in the course of a trial granting or rejecting requests [lodged] by parties to the trial proceedings are not amenable to [a separate] appeal.
This approach is consistent with the judicial opinion of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, as shown in its ruling of 2 July 1998 ... pursuant to which, in order to secure the independence of the court, the lawfulness and reasoning of intermediate court decisions can only be challenged once the proceedings before the first-instance court have been completed, at the same time as, and in connection with, a judgment [on the merits of the criminal case].
In the above-mentioned ruling the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation admitted, at the same time, that delayed control over the lawfulness and reasoning of intermediate court decisions ... is not a sufficient guarantee of human rights and freedoms and cannot be found to be in compliance with Articles 21 § 1, 22 § 1, 45 § 2 and 46 §§ 1 and 2 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation. When such decisions (including decisions on the application or alteration of a preventive measure) lead to consequences which go beyond the framework of proper criminal procedure, they significantly limit a person’s constitutional rights and freedoms and cause damage which may be impossible to rectify in the future. Judicial control over [such procedural decisions] must be provided without delay, until the pronouncement of the judgment [on the merits of the criminal case].
This judicial opinion of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation was reflected in the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation. Its Articles 108 §§ 10-11 and 255 § 4 regulate the procedure for dealing with, in the course of a trial, the choice of measure of restraint and the extension of custodial measures, as well as the procedure and time-limits for appealing against relevant court decisions.
It follows from the judicial opinions formulated in the ruling of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation of 2 July 1998 that when it comes to examination on appeal of a complaint against a decision rendered in the course of a trial on the application of a custodial measure or its extension, the provisions of Article 355 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federations should be applied together with Article 108 §§ 10 and 11 and Article 255 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, regardless of whether the contested ruling on the custodial measure had been taken on the initiative of the court or at the request of a party to the trial proceedings.”
“1.2.  In his complaint Mr S.V. Brovchenko also challenges the constitutionality of Article 355 §§ 5 and 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation in so far as [the relevant provisions] exclude, in the applicant’s opinion, the possibility to appeal against the decisions taken by a first-instance court to reject a request for release ... and thereby restrict without reason the right to judicial protection.
The Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, in its ruling of 2 July 1998 regarding the constitutionality of Articles 331 and 464 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Soviet Federal Socialist Republic ... governing the procedure for appeal against first-instance court decisions, held that the above provisions had been in violation of the Constitution of the Russian Federation in so far as they excluded the possibility, prior to delivery of the judgment [on the merits of the criminal case], to challenge on appeal court decisions authorising or extending preventive measures in respect of the accused ...
The above ruling remains in force, and the judicial opinion expressed in it is applicable to determining the question of the possibility of challenging a court’s decision rejecting a request for release until delivery of a judgment [on the merits of the criminal case].
Taking into account this judicial opinion, the provisions of Article 355 §§ 5 and 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation cannot be viewed as violating an individual’s constitutional rights and liberties. Moreover, upon discovery of circumstances showing the existence of grounds for termination of the custodial measure, the affected person is entitled to lodge a further request for release.”