The case originated in an application (no. 74845/12) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Turkish nationals, Mr Nezir Ürek and Mr Ahmet Ürek (“the applicants”), on 18 September 2012.
The applicants were represented by Ms A. Pamukçu Yördem, a lawyer practising in Diyarbakır. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent
The applicants alleged that their criminal convictions had been in breach of their rights under Articles 9, 10 and 11 of the Convention. They also alleged under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 of the Convention that they had been convicted despite the fact that they had not been involved in any violence; that the first-instance court had failed to conduct a proper enquiry regarding the events; that they had been deprived of the opportunity to question police officers whose statements had been taken in court in the applicants’ absence; and that the first-instance court had not taken their written and oral defence submissions into account.
On 8 January 2014 notice of the aforementioned complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants were born in 1960 and live in Şırnak.
On 5 December 2009 a demonstration was held in Cizre to protest about the conditions of detention of Abdullah Öcalan, the leader of the PKK (Kurdish Workers’ Party), an illegal terrorist organisation.
According to a report prepared on 7 December 2009 by Cizre police headquarters, the police had issued a warning, informing the crowd that the march and demonstration were illegal, and asked them to disperse. The demonstrators had not obeyed the warning. The police had then used tear gas to disperse the crowd. The demonstrations had continued in other streets.
The report went on to state that at around 1.30 p.m. a group of ten to fifteen people had gathered in a street close to the office of the DTP (Party for a Democratic Society). They had waved posters of the leader of the terrorist organisation and shouted slogans in support of him. Some of them had had their faces covered and had had stones and Molotov cocktails in their hands. They had then started marching. The police had asked them to disperse but they had not obeyed and had attacked the police officers with stones. When the police had intervened, the demonstrators had split into groups and had started running away. The applicants and four other people had been followed and arrested. At the place of the arrest of the applicants and the four other people the police had found a number of banners with slogans in support of the leader of the terrorist organisation, as well as wooden clubs and iron bars.
The report also contained thirty photographs of demonstrators. The second applicant, Ahmet Ürek, could be seen in four of them – in the first two photographs he was walking next to the demonstrators, in the third he was standing in the crowd and making a “V” sign, while in the fourth photograph he was talking to another man. The report did not include any photograph showing the first applicant.
According to the applicants’ submissions, on 5 December 2009 they had arrived in Cizre from the Uludere district of Hakkari where they lived, in order to sell some items and do some shopping. They had found out that the shops were closed in Cizre as there was a demonstration in the town centre. They had then found themselves in the middle of the demonstration and had listened to the press statement made by Cizre’s mayor and officials from the DTP. The police had later begun to use tear gas in order to disperse the demonstrators. The applicants had run away and had entered a garden, where they had been found and arrested.
On 5 December 2009 eight police officers, who had carried out the applicants’ arrest, gave separate but identical statements. According to those statements, the applicants had been found in a shed in the garden of a house and had been arrested along with four other people. At that location the police had found banners with slogans in Kurdish and Turkish, which constituted propaganda in favour of Abdullah Öcalan, as well as wooden clubs and iron bars.
The first applicant refused to make any statements to the police. During his questioning, the second applicant stated that he had not been involved in any illegal or reprehensible act. He contended that he had gone to Cizre in the same bus as the first applicant and two other people to do some shopping and that he had taken refuge in the garden where they had been arrested as he had tried to protect himself from the tear gas.
On 7 December 2009 the applicants were brought before the Cizre public prosecutor and the Cizre Magistrates’ Court. They maintained that they had not participated in the demonstration and had no knowledge of the banners found in the shed. Nezir Ürek contended that he had taken refuge in the garden as children had thrown stones at the police, who had then used tear gas. Ahmet Ürek stated that he had not chanted illegal slogans. During his questioning by the court, Ahmet Ürek was asked about four photographs of him taken during the demonstration of 5 December 2009. He stated that he did not know whether the person in those photographs was him and added that he had not participated in the demonstration.
On the same day the judge at the Cizre Magistrates’ Court decided to remand the applicants in custody.
On 23 December 2009 the Diyarbakır public prosecutor filed a bill of indictment with the Diyarbakır Assize Court against the applicants and two other persons. In the indictment, the applicants were charged with membership of an illegal organisation under Article 220 § 6 and Article 314 of the Criminal Code, carrying explosive materials under Article 174 of the Criminal Code, violating the Meetings and Demonstration Marches Act (Law no. 2911), and disseminating propaganda in favour of the PKK, under section 7(2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713). Subsequently, a trial was commenced before the Diyarbakır Assize Court.
On 19 March 2010 a police officer, O.E., made statements regarding the matters in question to the Diyarbakır Assize Court, saying that he had not been present at the scene of the arrest and that he therefore had no knowledge of the impugned acts. The applicants contended once again that they had not been involved in any unlawful acts.
On 13 May 2010 a witness, Y.T., a jeweller, stated before the court that the first applicant, Nezir Ürek, had gone to Cizre in order to sell him some gold. According to Y.T., Nezir Ürek had called him prior to his arrival in Cizre and he had sent his son to meet him and buy the gold. Y.T. noted that the first applicant had not been able to go to his shop as shops in the centre of Cizre had been closed that day. At the end of the hearing the court issued a summons requiring the police officers who had signed the arrest report to give evidence at the next hearing, which was to be held on 24 June 2010.
On 1 June 2010 eight police officers who had carried out the applicants’ arrest spontaneously attended to give evidence before the firstinstance court, without the attendance of the applicants or their lawyers. According to the transcript of the hearing, they stated that the day of the hearing had been notified to them as 1 June 2010. They contended that they would not be able to go back to the court on 24 June 2010 because they were stationed in Şırnak, which was far away, and they would be on duty on the day of the hearing. The Diyarbakır Assize Court took note of the reasons given by the police officers and accepted to obtain their statements in the presence of the public prosecutor, but in the absence of the applicants and their lawyers. In their statements, five of the officers stated that they had not seen the applicants or the other arrestees throwing stones or Molotov cocktails during the clashes. They noted that when they had carried out the arrest, some demonstrators had had lemons in their hands (in order to protect themselves against the tear gas) and that there had been banners and sheets of paper containing slogans in the shed. One officer submitted that he had not seen the arrestees throwing stones at the police, but that they had been carrying banners. Two police officers, A.A.K. and G.İ., on the other hand, contended that they had seen all six arrestees throwing stones and chanting illegal slogans during the demonstration, different than their statements made during the investigation stage.
During the hearing held on 24 June 2010, the arresting officers’ statements were read out to the applicants, the other accused and their lawyers. The applicants objected to the police officers’ statements, stating that they had been deprived of their right to cross-examine those witnesses. They asked the court to re-examine the police officers in their presence. The Assize Court did not take a decision on the applicants’ request.
During a hearing held on 30 September 2010, the lawyer of one of the applicants’ coaccused asked the court to order the police officers who had been examined by the court on 1 June 2010 to attend a hearing in the accused’s presence. The lawyer requested that he be allowed to question the witnesses. At the end of the hearing the Assize Court dismissed the request without providing any reasons.
On 3 December 2010 the applicants made their defence submissions. The first applicant submitted that he was a retired public official and had been in Cizre in order to sell some gold. He stated that he had not been involved in the clashes between the demonstrators and the security forces and that he had not thrown stones at the police.
The second applicant stated that he had gone to Cizre to do some shopping and had found himself in the middle of the demonstration. He noted that he was an old man and that he had gone to the shed in order to escape from the tear gas.
The applicants’ lawyer contended that the arresting police officers who had given evidence against the applicants could have been mistaken about them. She stated that the telephone conversations between the first applicant and Y.T. had proved that he had been in Cizre to sell some gold. According to the lawyer, there was in any case no evidence in the case file demonstrating that the applicants had committed an offence on behalf of a terrorist organisation.
On the same day the Diyarbakır Assize Court rendered its judgment. It acquitted the applicants of the charge of carrying explosive materials, brought under Article 174 of the Criminal Code. However, the applicants were convicted of:
(a)  disseminating propaganda in support of a terrorist organisation, contrary to section 7(2) of Law no. 3713, resulting in a sentence of ten months’ imprisonment each;
(b)  taking part in a demonstration while in possession of prohibited materials, contrary to section 33(1) of Law no. 2911, resulting in a sentence of five months of imprisonment each;
(c)  resisting the security forces, who had had to use force to disperse the demonstrators, such resistance being contrary to section 32(1) of Law no. 2911, resulting in a sentence of six months’ imprisonment each on that count;
(d)  obstructing the security forces in the execution of their duties by way of resistance, contrary to Article 265 § 1 of the Criminal Code, and sentenced to seven months and fifteen days’ imprisonment each; and
(e)  membership of an illegal organisation, the PKK, contrary to Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code, on the basis of Article 220 § 6 and Article 314 § 3 of the same Code, resulting in a sentence of six years and three months’ imprisonment each.
The Diyarbakır Assize Court decided to suspend the pronouncement of the sentences under sections 33(1) and 32(1) of Law no. 2911 and Article 265 § 1 of the Criminal Code on condition that the applicants did not commit another wilful offence for a period of five years, in accordance with Article 231 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271) (see points (b), (c) and (d) in paragraph 22 above).
The court, however, decided that the applicants should serve the prison sentences arising from their convictions under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 and Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code (see points (a) and (e) in paragraph 22 above) which amounted to six years and thirteen months’ imprisonment in respect of each of them.
According to the Diyarbakır Assize Court’s judgment, the following evidence was included in the case file:
(a)  the accused’s statements given at the investigation stage and during the trial;
(b)  the arrest and confiscation report of 5 December 2009;
(c) the arresting officers’ statements made to other police officers on 5 December 2009;
(d)  the report prepared by Cizre police headquarters on 7 December 2009;
(e)  two police reports concerning the photographs of the banners found in the shed where the applicants had been arrested and photographs of the second applicant taken by the police during the demonstration;
(f)  O.E.’s statement to the court on 19 March 2010;
(g)  Y.T.’s statement to the court on 13 May 2010; and
(h)  the arresting officers’ statements to the court on 1 June 2010.
The court established the facts of the case against the applicants and their co-accused in the light of the contents of the case file. According to the court, the applicants had been in a group of demonstrators who had attacked the police with stones and Molotov cocktails and they had themselves also attacked the police with stones. The trial court went on to hold that the applicants chanted slogans such as “Bastards of Atatürk”, “Long live Öcalan”, “The PKK is the people and the people are here” and “We would destroy a world without Öcalan” before the police had intervened.
On 6 December 2010 the applicants lodged an appeal with the Court of Cassation against the judgment of 3 December 2010.
On 13 December 2010 the Diyarbakır Assize Court’s decision to suspend the pronouncement of the sentences under sections 33(1) and 32(1) of Law no. 2911 and Article 265 § 1 of the Criminal Code became final as the applicants had not objected to that decision (see points (b), (c) and (d) in paragraph 22 above).
On 11 April 2012 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of 3 December 2010.
In its decision, the Court of Cassation held that according to Article 231 of the Criminal Code it was not possible to lodge appeals against decisions by first-instance courts to suspend the pronouncement of sentences. It therefore considered that it was not required to examine the applicants’ appeal concerning their convictions under sections 33(1) and 32(1) of Law no. 2911 and Article 265 § 1 of the Criminal Code.
On the other hand, the Court of Cassation found that the applicants’ convictions under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 and Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code, on the basis of Article 220 § 6 and Article 314 § 3 of the same Code, were in accordance with the law.
On 5 July 2012 Law no. 6352 amending various laws with a view to suspending proceedings and sentences given in cases concerning crimes committed through the press, media and similar expressions of opinions entered into force.
On an unspecified date the applicants asked the first-instance court to reduce the sentences they had been given in the judgment of 3 December 2010.
On 20 July 2012 the Diyarbakır Assize Court revised its judgment of 3 December 2010 in the light of the provisions of Law no. 6352. The court decided to suspend the pronouncement of the judgment on the applicants’ conviction under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 for a period of five years. It also reduced the sentence of six years and three months’ imprisonment for their conviction under Article 220 § 6 and Article 314 of the Criminal Code to five years, two months and fifteen days each.
On 3 August 2012 the applicants lodged an objection against the decision of 20 July 2012.
On 9 August 2012 the Diyarbakır Assize Court dismissed their objection.
On an unspecified date in 2015 the applicants were released after serving their sentences.
A description of the relevant domestic law and practice can be found in Gülcü v. Turkey (no. 17526/10, §§ 42-44, 51, 56-59 and 6672, 19 January 2016) and Balta and Demir v. Turkey (no. 48628/12, § 26, 23 June 2015).
Article 188 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271 of 4 December 2004) in force at the material time provides, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“The date on which a witness or an expert is to give evidence shall be notified to the public prosecutor, the victim and his or her representative, the accused and his or her defence counsel.”