The case concerns the availability of an enforceable right to compensation under Armenian law, in compliance with the requirements of Article 5 § 5 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in the village of Metsavan. The applicant was represented by Mr K. Tumanyan, a lawyer practising in Vanadzor.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, and subsequently by Mr Y. Kirakosyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 29 September 2008 the applicant and a number of others were charged with a drug-related crime.
On 17 October 2008 the Lori Regional Court decided to detain the applicant. It appears that the applicant did not lodge an appeal against that decision.
On 12 October 2009 the Lori Regional Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to three years’ imprisonment.
Following an appeal by the applicant, on 22 December 2009 the Criminal Court of Appeal decided to uphold the guilty verdict, but to reduce the sentence to one year and six months’ imprisonment.
Following a further appeal by the applicant, on 26 March 2010 the Court of Cassation decided to quash those judgments and to remit the case for fresh examination. The Court of Cassation found that there had been a breach of the applicant’s right to defence and that his conviction had been based on evidence obtained in a manner which breached that right. In particular, the Court of Cassation noted that, at the initial stage of the investigation during which the applicant had been involved as a witness, he was in fact already considered a suspect and should have been able to avail himself of the rights enjoyed by a suspect in criminal proceedings, including the right not to incriminate himself and to have a lawyer. However, he had been interviewed only as a witness and had not been provided with a lawyer from the very start and, moreover, in a situation where a lawyer’s participation was mandatory. Thus, the evidence in question had been obtained as a result of investigative measures conducted in breach of the applicant’s right to defence, including his interview as a witness and a confrontation between him and another suspect.
On 17 April 2010 the applicant was released from prison after serving his sentence.
On 5 October 2010 the Lori Regional Court examined the case again and acquitted the applicant. In doing so, the Regional Court declared the above-mentioned evidence inadmissible and found that the remaining evidence had not been reliable and sufficient to substantiate the applicant’s guilt. Following appeals by the prosecutor, that judgment was upheld by two higher courts and became final.
On 21 July 2011 the applicant lodged a civil claim with the Lori Regional Court against the State seeking compensation for both pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage, estimating the latter at 6,500,736 Armenian drams (AMD). He argued that he was entitled to compensation, as his acquittal had rendered unlawful the time that he had spent in detention. He relied on, inter alia, Articles 17 and 1064 of the Civil Code (CC), Article 66 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”), and Article 5 § 5 of the Convention.
On 23 December 2011 the Lori Regional Court gave its judgment on the applicant’s civil claim. It noted that the applicant had been deprived of his liberty between 17 October 2008 and 17 April 2010 and that on 5 October 2010 he had been acquitted. The law stipulated the grounds and the procedure for awarding compensation for damage caused as a result of unlawful deprivation of liberty. In particular, under Article 66 of the CCP, an acquitted person had the right to claim compensation for pecuniary damage (including lost income and legal costs) sustained as a result of unlawful arrest, detention, prosecution and conviction. Under Article 1064 of the CC, such compensation was to be paid by the State. An award of damages was to be made if it were to be established that the plaintiff had sustained such damage, the respondent had behaved unlawfully, and there was a causal link between the damage and the unlawful behaviour. Finding that the applicant had been unlawfully convicted and had incurred pecuniary damage – namely lost income and legal costs – as a result of unlawful actions on the part of the respondent, the Regional Court decided to allow in part his claim for compensation for pecuniary damage. As regards the applicant’s claim for compensation for non-pecuniary damage, the Regional Court decided to terminate that part of the proceedings on the grounds that the law did not allow for the awarding of compensation of that type. In reaching its findings, the Regional Court also relied on Article 16 of the Constitution, Article 17 of the CC, Article 5 § 5 of the Convention, and the Court of Cassation’s decision of 1 July 2011 in the case of A. Davtyan and Vank Ltd v. the Republic of Armenia.
On 24 January 2012 the applicant lodged an appeal in which he argued, inter alia, that the Regional Court, in deciding on his claim for compensation for nonpecuniary damage, should have been guided by Article 5 § 5 of the Convention, which prevailed over the domestic law.
On 28 March 2012 the Civil Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the Regional Court in the part concerning the applicant’s claim for compensation for nonpecuniary damage.
On 12 April 2012 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, raising similar arguments.
On 23 May 2012 the Court of Cassation ruled the applicant’s appeal on points of law inadmissible for lack of merit.
Article 16 provided at the material time that everyone had the right to liberty and security of person. Every person had the right to compensation in the event of his or her unlawful detention on the grounds – and in accordance with a procedure – prescribed by law.
Article 66 § 3 provides that an acquitted person is entitled to claim full compensation for pecuniary damage sustained as a result of unlawful arrest, detention, prosecution and conviction – that is to say any possible lost profits.
Article 17 provides that a person whose rights have been violated may claim full compensation for damage suffered, unless the law or a contract provides for a lower level of compensation. Damage that may be compensated includes the expenses borne or to be borne by a person whose rights have been violated in connection with (i) restoring those violated rights, (ii) the loss of his property or damage to it (pecuniary damage), including lost earnings, which the person would have realised under normal conditions of civil life had his rights not been violated.
Article 1064 provides that damage caused as a result of unlawful conviction, criminal punishment, the imposition of a preventive measure in the form of detention or a written undertaking not to leave one’s residence, or the imposition of an administrative penalty shall be compensated for in full by the Republic of Armenia, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law, regardless of whether it was the officials of the relevant body of inquiry, investigating authority, prosecutor’s office or courts who were at fault in that regard.
Since 1 November 2014 Article 17 has included nonpecuniary damage in the list of the types of civil damage for which compensation can be claimed in civil proceedings. The CC was supplemented by new Articles 162.1 and 1087.2, which regulate the procedure for claiming compensation for non-pecuniary damage. Until the introduction on 30 December 2015 of further amendments (which came into force on 1 January 2016), compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage could be claimed where it had been established that a person’s rights, as guaranteed by Articles 2, 3 and 5 of the Convention, had been violated, and also in cases of wrongful conviction.
This decision concerned the claim of Mr A. Davtyan against the State for compensation for damage sustained as a result of, inter alia, his allegedly unlawful pre-trial detention. Mr Davtyan, who had eventually been acquitted, had been an accused in a criminal case, in the course of which he had spent three periods in pre-trial detention, ranging from four days to about two months. The Court of Cassation was called upon to interpret, inter alia, the rules applicable in cases of unlawful conviction, punishment, detention or the requirement to give a written undertaking not to leave one’s residence. The relevant parts of the decision read as follows:
“Rules for compensation for damage sustained as a result of unlawful conviction, punishment, detention or a [requirement to give a] written undertaking not to leave one’s residence.
[Citations of Article 16 of the Constitution, Article 18 of the Constitution (right to an effective remedy) and Articles 5 § 5 and 13 of the Convention.]
It follows from the above-mentioned provisions that the right to compensation for damage in cases where a person is unlawfully deprived of his liberty as a result of unlawful actions on the part of public authorities is a constitutional principle, which is also prescribed by international treaties.
...
The implementation of the above-mentioned principle must be viewed in the light of the right to an effective remedy, especially in cases where a person sustains damage as a result of unlawful actions on the part of public authorities.
[Citation of general principles of the Court’s case law regarding Article 5 § 5, including Rehbock v. Slovenia, no. 29462/95, § 92, ECHR 2000XII; Wassink v. the Netherlands, 27 September 1990, § 38, Series A no. 185A; N.C. v. Italy [GC], no. 24952/94, § 49, ECHR 2002X; and Sakık and Others v. Turkey, 26 November 1997, §§ 55-61, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1997VII.]
The Court of Cassation considers that, in order to ensure the above-mentioned provisions, the law provides with sufficient certainty the grounds and the procedure for awarding compensation for damage sustained in cases of unlawful deprivation of liberty. [Citations of Article 66 § 3 of the CCP and Article 1064 of the CC]. It follows from an analysis of these provisions that – taking into account the specifics of the status of an acquitted person, the necessity to remedy his legal and de facto situation, and the constitutional and international legal provisions – the legislature has stipulated the rule [that] full compensation should be paid to an acquitted person for damage sustained owing to his having been unlawfully deprived of his liberty. Furthermore, damage to be compensated for is that resulting from unlawful conviction, punishment, detention or [the requirement that he give] a written undertaking not to leave his residence.”
The Court of Cassation then enumerated the types of damage that may be compensated for, including lost salary, pension, benefits, court fees, legal costs and possible lost income, and proceeded to examining whether Mr Davtyan had substantiated with evidence the pecuniary damage claimed.