The case originated in an application (no. 7363/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Yevgeniy Aleksandrovich Mikryukov, on 6 January 2004.
The applicant was represented before the Court by Mr K. Krakovskiy, a lawyer practising in the Rostov Region. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 30 September 2004 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Rostov-on-Don.
The applicant was engaged in emergency operations at the site of the  nuclear plant disaster. As a consequence, he was entitled to certain social benefits.
In 2001 the applicant was placed on a waiting list for free housing. As the Kirovskiy District Administration did not provide him with a flat within three months, the applicant sued the administration.
On 19 December 2001 the Kirovskiy District Court of Rostov-on-Don allowed the applicant’s claim against the Kirovskiy District Administration for the provision of housing. It ordered that the administration:
“...provide [the applicant’s] family of five - [the applicant], his wife, his son, his daughter and his mother - with other comfortable living premises within three months after the entry of the judgment into force”.
No appeal was brought against the judgment and on 4 January 2002 it became final.
On 24 January 2002 the bailiffs’ service opened enforcement proceedings. However, the judgment could not be enforced because the town administration possessed no available housing or financial resources to purchase a flat.
On 10 August 2003 the applicant’s mother died.
On 28 October 2004 the Mayor of Rostov-on-Don issued an order allocating a three-room flat measuring 81.7 square metres in the  to the applicant’s family of four.
The bailiffs asked the Kirovskiy District Court to stay the enforcement proceedings until the completion of the construction works on the block of flats in the . In the alternative, they requested to amend the method of enforcement and to order that the Kirovskiy District Administration should pay the applicant the monetary value of the flat.
On 1 December 2004 the Kirovskiy District Court dismissed the bailiffs’ request.
On 24 January 2005 the  quashed that decision and remitted the matter for a new examination. The proceedings are now pending.
By a letter of 14 December 2004 the Chief Bailiff of the Kirovskiy District bailiffs’ service informed the applicant that the bailiffs had fined the Kirovskiy District Administration five times for their failure to execute the judgment of 19 December 2001. It was not possible to collect the fines because the administration’s funds were allocated for specific purposes.
The applicant has not yet received an occupancy voucher in respect of either the flat in the  or any other flat.
It appears that the judgment of 19 December 2001 remains unenforced to date.