The case originated in an application (no. 76943/11) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by the Lupeni Greek Catholic Parish (the first applicant), the Lugoj Greek Catholic Diocese (the second applicant) and the Lupeni Greek Catholic Archpriesthood (the third applicant), on 14 December 2011.
The applicants were represented by Ms D.O. Hatneanu and Ms C.T. Borsányi, lawyers practising in Bucharest and Timișoara respectively. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Alleging a refusal by the domestic courts to grant their claim for restitution of a church building, lodged by them under ordinary law, the applicants complained that there had been a breach of their right of access to a court, a failure to comply with the principle of legal certainty and a violation of the right to a fair hearing within a reasonable time. They also considered that they had been the victims of discrimination on grounds of religion in relation to the alleged violation of their right of access to a court.
The application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 18 December 2012 it was communicated to the Government.
Following the withdrawal from the case of Ms Iulia Motoc, the judge elected in respect of Romania (Rule 28), Ms Kristina Pardalos was appointed by the President to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
On 19 May 2015 a Chamber of the Third Section composed of Josep Casadevall, President, Luis López Guerra, Ján Šikuta, Kristina Pardalos, Johannes Silvis, Valeriu Griţco, Branko Lubarda, and Stephen Phillips, Section Registrar, unanimously declared the application admissible as to the complaints under Article 6 § 1 of Convention concerning the right of access to a court, compliance with the principle of legal certainty and the length of the proceedings, and as to the complaint under Article 14 of the Convention taken together with Article 6 § 1 concerning the right of access to a court, and the reminder of the application inadmissible. It concluded, unanimously, that there had been no violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention as regards the right of access to a court and compliance with the principle of legal certainty, and that there had been a violation of that provision with regard to the length of the proceedings. It also held, unanimously, that there had been no violation of Article 14 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 19 August 2015 the applicants requested the referral of the case to the Grand Chamber under Article 43 of the Convention and Rule 73. On 19 October 2015 the panel of the Grand Chamber granted the request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicants and the Government each filed further written observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 2 March 2016 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Hatneanu, then by Ms Brumar and Ms Ezer, as well as their answers to questions put by the judges.
The three applicants belong to the Romanian Church United to Rome, also known as the Greek Catholic or Uniate Church.
In 1948 the Greek Catholic Church was dissolved by Decree no. 358/1948, and its assets, with the exception of parish property, were transferred to the State; an inter-departmental committee was given responsibility for determining the ultimate allocation of the parish property. However, the committee never completed this task and the parish property was transferred to the Orthodox Church under Decree no. 177/1948.
In 1967 the property comprising the church building and the adjoining courtyard, which had belonged to the first applicant, was entered in the land register as having been transferred to the ownership of the Lupeni I Romanian Orthodox Parish (“the Orthodox parish”).
After the fall of the communist regime in December 1989, Decree no. 358/1948 was repealed by Legislative Decree no. 9/1989. The Uniate Church was officially recognised by Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 on certain measures concerning the Romanian Church United to Rome. Article 3 of that Legislative Decree provided that the legal status of property that had belonged to the Uniate parishes and that was in the possession of the Orthodox Church was to be determined by joint committees made up of representatives of both Uniate and Orthodox clergy. In reaching their decisions, the committees were to take into account “the wishes of the worshippers in the communities in possession of these properties”.
Article 3 of Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 was amended by Government Ordinance no. 64/2004 and Law no. 182/2005. Under the amended decree, in the event of disagreement between the members of the clergy representing the two denominations in a joint committee, the party with an interest in bringing judicial proceedings could do so under “ordinary law” (drept comun, see the procedure referred to in paragraphs 41 and 121 below).
The first applicant was legally re-established on 12 August 1996 and the applicants brought proceedings before the joint committee to have their former properties returned to them, but without success.
The domestic law, in particular Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 and the amendments made to it in 2004 and 2005, is set out in paragraphs 39 to 43 below.
On 23 May 2001 the second applicant brought proceedings before the domestic courts against the Arad Orthodox Archdiocese and the Orthodox parish. It requested that the expropriation of the church building and cemetery in Lupeni, carried out on the basis of Decree no. 358/1948, be set aside, and that the church be returned to the first applicant. The first and third applicants were mentioned in the initial statement of claim as representatives of the second applicant.
By a judgment of 10 October 2001, the Hunedoara County Court (“the County Court”) declared the action inadmissible on the ground that the dispute ought to be settled through the special procedure established by Legislative Decree no. 126/1990, that is, before the joint committee.
The first and second applicants lodged an appeal against that judgment. On 22 February 2002 they requested a stay of proceedings so that the case could be resolved by friendly settlement. On 25 March 2003 they applied for it to be restored to the court’s list of cases. On the same day, the Alba-Iulia Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) dismissed the appeal, holding that the action was premature. In a final judgment of 24 November 2004, ruling on an appeal on points of law (recurs) by the first and second applicants, the High Court of Cassation and Justice (“the High Court”), quashed the Court of Appeal’s judgment and sent the case back to that court to be examined on the merits.
On 12 May 2006, in application of the legislative amendments to Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 which gave the courts jurisdiction to rule on the merits of cases concerning properties that had belonged to the Uniate parishes and were in the possession of the Orthodox Church (see paragraph 42 below), the Court of Appeal upheld the second applicant’s appeal and sent the case back to the County Court.
On 27 July 2006, when the case was restored to the County Court’s list, the action was amended in order to add the first and the third applicants formally as claimants in the proceedings. On 8 November 2006 the applicants supplemented their action with a claim for recovery of possession of the properties in question, on the basis of ordinary law.
The County Court asked the parties to organise a meeting in order to decide the fate of the church building in question, and to inform it of the outcome of the negotiations by 25 April 2007. The parties met on 20 April 2007 without reaching an agreement.
By a judgment of 27 February 2008, the County Court dismissed the applicants’ action on the ground that the Orthodox parish had become the legally recognised owner of the contested property by virtue of Decree no. 358/1948 and that it had behaved as an owner, inter alia by ensuring that the church was maintained properly.
By a judgment of 26 September 2008, ruling on an appeal by the applicants, the Court of Appeal set aside the judgment of 27 February 2008 on grounds of a procedural defect and remitted the case to the County Court.
By a judgment of 13 February 2009, the County Court found in favour of the applicants and ordered that the church be returned to the first applicant. Comparing the parties’ title deeds in respect of the property in question, it noted that the Greek Catholic party had been entered in the land register as owner of the property from 1940, and that in 1967 the Orthodox Church had entered its ownership right to the same property, transferred to it under Decree no. 358/1948. It held that the repealing of Decree no. 358/1948 had had the effect in the present case of terminating the Orthodox party’s right of ownership over the disputed property. It also pointed out that the first applicant did not have a place of worship and that it was obliged to hold its religious services in premises which it rented from the Roman Catholic Church.
By a judgment of 11 June 2010, the Court of Appeal allowed an appeal lodged by the Orthodox parish and dismissed the applicants’ action. On the basis of the evidence in the case file, it noted, firstly, that the church building being claimed and two parsonages in Lupeni had been constructed between 1906 and 1920 by Eastern-rite Orthodox and Greek Catholic worshippers and that, after its construction, the church building had been used alternately for services by both denominations. It noted that in 1948 the members of the Greek Catholic Church had been obliged to convert to the Orthodox Church and that this church building had been transferred to the ownership of the Orthodox Church, which had maintained it and carried out renovation work.
The Court of Appeal also examined statements, collected by the County Court, from four witnesses. It noted that these statements supported the statistical data indicating that there were more Orthodox than Greek Catholic worshippers in Lupeni. It noted that, according to the most recent census, there were 24,968 Orthodox worshippers and 509 Greek Catholic worshippers in Lupeni. It also compared the witness statements, written documents attesting to the number of Greek Catholic worshippers as declared when the Greek Catholic Church was re-established in Lupeni, and data from the most recent census conducted in Lupeni.
It then reasoned as follows:
“... although the action was based on the provisions of ordinary law, namely Article 480 of the Civil Code, in view of its subject matter the court cannot rule without applying the provisions of Article 3 § 1 of Legislative Decree no. 126/1990, to the effect that the legal situation of places of worship and parsonages ... must be determined taking account of the wishes of the worshippers in the community that is in possession of the properties”.
It considered that, given that there were more Orthodox than Greek Catholic worshippers in Lupeni, including the converts who no longer wished to return to the Greek Catholic Church, their refusal had to be taken into account in ruling on the case. It found that “having regard to the social and historical realities, ignoring the wishes and proportional strength of Orthodox worshippers, who are in the majority, in relation to the far fewer Greek Catholic worshippers, would be to undermine the stability and certainty of legal relations”.
The Court of Appeal held that the fact that Decree no. 358/1948 had been repealed did not automatically mean that the Orthodox Church’s title had been annulled, as this Decree represented the law in force at the time that the ownership right was transferred. In consequence, it considered that, although it had been granted under legislation which had subsequently been declared unlawful, the Orthodox Church’s title had been valid from the date on which the transfer had been made, with the result that the action to recover possession was unfounded.
The applicants lodged an appeal on points of law before the High Court, alleging that the Court of Appeal had incorrectly applied the legal provisions governing actions for recovery of possession. They argued that the right of ownership could not be linked to a religion’s majority status, since ownership was a legal concept that was independent of the numerical strength and wishes of the parties.
On 15 June 2011 the High Court, by a majority, delivered a final judgment in which it set out, in detail, the decisions taken by the lower courts. Reiterating that those courts alone had jurisdiction to establish the facts, it endorsed their findings of fact. It dismissed the applicants’ appeal on points of law and upheld the judgment delivered on appeal. As to the applicable law, it held, in particular, as follows:
“Pursuant to Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 ... a distinction is made between two situations: (a) that in which the property is in the ownership of the State ... (b) that in which the places of worship and the parishes have been taken over by the Romanian Orthodox Church and in respect of which [the question of] restitution will be decided by a joint committee made up of representatives of the clergy of the two denominations, a committee which will take account of the wishes of the worshippers in the communities in possession of these properties.
In the light of those provisions, the Court of Appeal, examining an action for recovery of possession of a place of worship, correctly applied the criterion of the wishes of the (predominantly Orthodox) worshippers of the community in possession of the property, while simultaneously emphasising the unlawfulness of the reasoning of the first-instance court, which had merely compared the title deeds and ignored the special law...
However, it appears that there are 24,968 Orthodox worshippers and 509 Greek Catholic worshippers in Lupeni, that the worshippers who were obliged to transfer to the Orthodox Church in 1948 do not wish to return to the Greek Catholic Church and that an attempt has been made to resolve [the dispute] through the joint clerical committee (according to the minutes of 20 April 2007 ... the Orthodox party had indicated that the request for the return of the place of worship could not be granted, having regard to the wishes of the worshippers in the parish and the fact that since 1948 the place of worship has been administered by the Orthodox believers)...
The fact of supplementing Article 3 [of Legislative Decree no. 126/1990] with a paragraph stating “If the committee does not meet within the period established in its mandate, or if the committee does not reach a conclusion or if one of the parties is dissatisfied with the decision taken by the committee, the party with an interest in bringing judicial proceedings may do so under ordinary law” does not mean that actions for restitution governed by the special provisions are transformed into applications to establish title under ordinary law.
A court which is required to examine such an action cannot ignore the special regulations in this area, which indicate the criterion to be taken into account in resolving such claims, namely the wishes of the worshippers in the community in possession of the property.
In other words, by virtue of its full jurisdiction and in order not to compromise access to justice, a court may be called upon to decide an action on the merits, even though the prior procedure did not culminate in a decision by the joint clerical committee; at the same time, however, it may not go beyond the limits imposed by the special statutory framework.
The priority to be given to the criterion of the worshippers’ wishes was decided by the legislature, which wished in this way to regulate an area which concerns the buildings assigned to a particular use (places of worship), [and so] the court is not entitled to criticise the law.
Moreover, in ruling on the alleged unconstitutionality of Article 3 of Decree no. 126/1990 and the criterion of the worshippers’ wishes, the Constitutional Court has stated that the text did not infringe the principle of democracy of the Romanian State, nor that of the freedom of religious denominations (CC decision no. 23/1993, CC decision no. 49/1995)...
In the Court of Appeal’s view, the fact that the State unlawfully dispossessed the Greek Catholic Church of its places of worship in 1948 cannot be remedied – in a State subject to the rule of law – by committing the opposite error, that is, by failing to take account of the wishes of the majority of worshippers at the point of adopting the given measure. Returning the properties which belonged to the Greek Catholic Church without respecting the criteria imposed by Article 3 § 1 of Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 would undermine the stability and certainty of legal relations. A right cannot be reconstructed in abstracto, in disregard of social and historical realities, and mitigation of past damage must not create disproportionate new problems...
Moreover, in order to be able to bring an action for recovery of possession under ordinary law rather than under the special law, the appellants must rely on the existence of a “possession”, namely of a pecuniary right that could be relied upon by them.
However, the Greek Catholic denomination was dissolved by Decree no. 358/1948 and the assets of the Greek Catholic Church passed into the ownership of the State. The building in question is currently entered (in the land register ... as belonging to the Lupeni I Romanian Orthodox Church.
The fact that, through Legislative Decree no. 9/1989, the Romanian Church United to Rome (Greek Catholic) was officially recognised following the repeal of Decree no. 358/1948 does not mean that all of its titles to property were restored, in so far as the right of ownership is subject to a procedure (namely the provisions of Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 and its subsequent amendments), and the hope of obtaining title to property is not to be equated with a possession...”
In a separate opinion, one of the judges sitting in the case noted that the legislature’s reference to ordinary law could not be reduced to a purely procedural dimension, but was to be interpreted as the application of a rule of substantive law. Referring to the rules governing the preparation of statutes, the judge expressed the opinion that if the legislature had wished to ascribe a specific meaning to this reference to “ordinary law”, it ought to have done so explicitly. As an action for recovery of possession involved a comparison of the relevant property titles, the judge concluded that the Orthodox Church had no such title to the church building in question.
Article 21 of the Constitution reads as follows:
“(1)  Everyone shall be entitled to apply to the courts for protection of his rights, freedoms or legitimate interests.
(2)  The exercise of this right shall not be restricted by any statute.”
Article 37 of Decree no. 177/1948 on the general status of religious denominations, published in an amended version in Official Gazette no. 204 of 3 September 1948, was worded as follows:
“(1)  If at least 10% of the worshippers affiliated to a denomination leave it for another denomination, the religious community of the denomination which they leave shall automatically lose a part of its assets, in proportion to the number of worshippers who have left. This part shall be transferred ipso jure into the ownership of the local community of the new denomination adhered to by the worshippers.”
This decree was repealed by Law no. 489/2006 on freedom of religion and the general legal status of religious denominations (privind libertatea religioasă şi regimul general al cultelor), published in the Official Gazette on 8 January 2007. Under that law, the relationship between the Romanian State and the legally recognised religious denominations is governed by compliance with the principle of the autonomy of religious communities and recognition by the State of their regulations.
Government Emergency Ordinance no. 94/2000 on the restitution of buildings having belonged to religious denominations in Romania, as amended on 25 July 2005 and published in the Official Gazette on 1 September 2005, provides as follows:
“(2)  The legal status of buildings which served as places of worship shall be regulated by a special law.”
After the repeal of Decree no. 358/1948, draft legislation was submitted to Parliament with a view to regulating the situation of places of worship which had belonged to the Greek Catholic Church. The explanatory memorandum recognised that the question of the restitution of places of worship ought to be decided by means of dialogue between the two Churches concerned. Following negotiations, the representatives of the two denominations stated, by common agreement, that it was necessary to enact legislation, to return to the Greek Catholic Church the assets that were in State ownership and to set up joint committees to decide the fate of the places of worship that were in the ownership of the Orthodox Church. The draft law drawn up to take account of the proposals by both parties gave rise to heated parliamentary debate.
On 25 April 1990 Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 was published in Official Gazette no. 54. In so far as relevant, it provided as follows:
“Following the repeal of Decree no. 358/1948 by Legislative Decree no. 9 of 31 December 1989, the Romanian Church United to Rome shall be officially recognised...”
“The legal situation of the religious buildings and parsonages which belonged to the Uniate Church and were appropriated by the Romanian Orthodox Church shall be determined by a joint committee, made up of representatives of the clergy from both of the two religious denominations, which shall take into consideration the wishes of the worshippers in the communities in possession of those properties (dorinţa credincioşilor din comunităţile care deţin aceste bunuri).”
“In the municipalities where the number of places of worship is insufficient in relation to the number of worshippers, the State shall provide support for the construction of new churches; for that purpose, it shall make available to the denominations concerned the necessary land if they do not have it, and shall contribute to raising the necessary funds.”
Article 3 of the above-mentioned Legislative Decree was amended by Government Ordinance no. 64/2004 of 13 August 2004 (“Order no. 64/2004”), which entered into force on 21 August 2004 and added a second paragraph, worded as follows, to that provision:
“Should the members of the clergy representing the two denominations on the joint committee fail to reach an agreement within the joint committee provided for in Article 1, the party with an interest in bringing judicial proceedings may do so under ordinary law.”
Law no. 182/2005 of 13 June 2005 (“Law no. 182/2005”), which entered into force on 17 June 2005, also amended Article 3 of the Legislative Decree no. 126/1990, as follows:
“The party with an interest in bringing proceedings shall convene the other party, by communicating in writing its claims and providing the evidence on which it bases those claims. The meeting shall be convened by registered post with a form for acknowledgment of receipt, or by personal delivery of the letter. A period of at least thirty days shall elapse between the date of receipt of the documents and the date fixed for the meeting of the joint committee. The committee shall be made up of three representatives from each denomination. If the committee does not meet within the period established in its mandate, or if the committee does not reach a conclusion or if one of the parties is dissatisfied with the decision taken by the committee, the party with an interest in bringing judicial proceedings may do so under ordinary law.
The action shall be examined by the courts.
The action shall be exempt from court tax.”
The explanatory memorandum on Law no. 182/2005 states as follows:
“Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 lays down a number of measures concerning the Romanian Church United to Rome (Greek Catholic Church).
In applying this text, there has not been a uniform approach in the courts’ practice: some courts have considered that they have jurisdiction to rule on actions concerning places of worship and parsonages that belonged to the Romanian Church United to Rome and were taken over by the Romanian Orthodox Church, while others have considered that such disputes do not come under the general jurisdiction of the courts, thus denying the right of free access to the courts.
Having regard to the standards which exist at European level in this area, ... to the initiatives of the European Commission and to the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights, a change is required to the Romanian legislation in this area in order to guarantee genuine access to the justice system, through an explicit reference in the law to the possibility for the interested parties to take legal action.
The present law explicitly invests the courts with jurisdiction to rule on the disputes which concerns properties which had belonged to the Romanian Church United to Rome, where the committees provided for in Article 3 of Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 do not reach an agreement.
In order to enable both parties to take measures to resolve the problem of the places of worship in issue, the order allows for continued activity by the committees, offering the possibility of resolving the question of restitution of these premises through inter-denominational dialogue.
This new text guarantees that the principle of unrestricted access to the courts will be applied in the cases targeted by Legislative Decree no. 126/1990, in accordance with Article 6 of the Convention ... and Article 21 of the Constitution of Romania.
...”
Article 480 of the Civil Code, as in force throughout the relevant time, provided:
“Ownership is the right to enjoy and dispose of things in the most absolute manner, provided that one does not use them in a way prohibited by law.”
An action for recovery of possession is not defined by statute. According to the case-law, it is an action by which the owner of a property who has lost possession of it to a third party seeks to have his or her title to the property re-established and to recover possession of it from the third party. The land registry system guarantees that the rights in rem in respect of each building are fully public in nature, and names the persons holding those rights.
Under Article 329 of the Code of Civil Procedure as in force at the relevant time, the Principal Public Prosecutor in the prosecutor’s office at the High Court of Cassation and Justice, acting on his own motion or on a request by the Minister of Justice, and also the governing council of the High Court, the governing councils of the appeal courts and the Ombudsman (Avocatul Poporului) had a duty to request that the High Court rule on questions of law which had been decided in different ways by the courts. Under Article 3307 of the same Code, the decisions were given in the interests of the law, and did not have an effect on the judicial decisions in question or the situation of the parties to the proceedings. As soon as the decision was published in the Official Gazette, the courts were required to follow the conclusion reached by the High Court.
The parties filed in the proceedings judicial decisions concerning actions brought by Greek Catholic parishes against Orthodox communities with a view to obtaining restitution of places of worship. The majority of these actions were based on Article 480 of the Civil Code and sought to obtain rectification of the entries in the land registers in which the Orthodox communities had had their ownership rights to the properties in question recorded.
In a series of decisions, delivered prior to 2013, the lower courts (county courts or appeal courts), at first instance, on appeal or on an appeal on points of law, ruled on actions for recovery of possession after having examined the validity of the parties’ title deeds and, more particularly, the manner in which the property in question had passed into the ownership of the Orthodox Church (judgments of the Timișoara Court of Appeal of 20 June 2006, 24 November 2010 and 15 September 2011; decisions of the Hunedoara County Court of 27 February 2008 and 8 July 2009; decisions of the Bihor County Court of 6 March 2008 and 3 September 2010; final judgment of the Brașov Court of Appeal of 11 March 2008; decision of the Brașov County Court of 28 March 2011; judgment of the Târgu-Mureș Court of Appeal of 11 November 2010; and judgment of the Oradea Court of Appeal of 22 February 2012).
In decisions also delivered prior to 2013, other lower courts ruled on actions for recovery of possession by examining the parties’ titles and by referring to the criterion of the worshippers’ wishes (judgment given on appeal by the Alba-Iulia Court of Appeal on 14 January 2010 and judgment given on appeal by the Cluj Court of Appeal on 28 March 2012).
The Government filed decisions delivered in 2015 in which the lower courts had applied Article 3 of Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 (decisions given on appeal by the Cluj Court of Appeal on 11 and 17 March 2015, and 9 October 2015; by the Timișoara Court of Appeal on 18 June and 29 October 2015; and by the Târgu-Mureș Court of Appeal on 17 June 2015; judgment of the Sălaj County Court of 29 January 2015).
In a final judgment of 25 November 2008, the High Court, then known as the Supreme Court of Justice, referred a case back to the lower courts after having noted that the Orthodox Church had been entered in the land register as the owner and that the criterion of the worshippers’ wishes was applicable only during the preliminary procedure before the joint committees.
In a series of judgments, the High Court quashed the lower courts’ decisions and remitted the cases for a fresh examination on the ground that the criterion laid down by Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 had not been applied (see, for example, the judgments of 24 March 2009, 9 November 2010, 14 November and 11 December 2012, and 7 February 2013). In another series of final judgments, the High Court held that, although the Greek Catholic party had brought an action under ordinary law to recover possession, the High Court could not overlook the criterion of the wishes of the worshippers in the communities in possession of these properties, laid down in Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 (see, for example, the High Court’s judgments of 29 May 2007, 26 January and 24 November 2011, and 16 May and 12 December 2012).
In certain judgments, the High Court ruled on the action for recovery of possession by comparing the titles held by the parties to the dispute as entered in the land register (see, for example, the judgments of 10 March 2011, 16 May, 2 October and 21 November 2012, and 1 October 2013).
The Government filed twenty-seven final judgments delivered between 2013 and 2015 in which the High Court applied the criterion of the worshippers’ wishes. In a judgment of 20 June 2013, the High Court granted an action to recover possession brought by a Greek Catholic church, in a situation where both denominations were present in a village and where, although only two of the village’s ninety residents belonged to the Greek Catholic Church, the church building being claimed was not used by the Orthodox worshippers.
In decision no. 23 of 27 April 1993, ruling on a plea of unconstitutionality with regard to Article 3 § 1 of Legislative Decree no. 126/1990, the Constitutional Court held that the contested criterion, laid down in Article 3 and applied by the joint committees, was compatible with the Constitution. Following another plea of unconstitutionality, it confirmed its position in decision no. 49 of 19 May 1995.
On 19 January 2012 the Constitutional Court received a further complaint alleging that Article 3 § 1 of Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 was unconstitutional, in the context of a different action for recovery of possession of a place of worship from the applicants’ claim, which was at that stage pending before the Alba-Iulia Court of Appeal.
By a decision of 27 September 2012, it rejected that complaint, ruling as follows:
“... The provisions of Article 3 of Legislative Decree no. 126/1990 concerning the repeal of certain legislative provisions do not run counter to the provisions of the Constitution relied upon, but, on the contrary, they comply with both the general principle enshrined in Article 1 § 3 of the Constitution, according to which the Romanian State is “a democratic and social State based on the rule of law”, and the principle of the freedom of religious denominations enshrined in Article 29 § 3 of the Constitution.
By ... decision [no. 23 of 27 April 1993], the [Constitutional] Court held that democracy entailed respect for the wishes of the majority; the last part of Article 3, [according to which the joint committee] “will take into account the wishes of the worshippers in the communities in possession of the properties” enunciates this principle by introducing a social criterion, that of the wishes of the majority of the parishioners.
... Where there are Orthodox and Greek Catholic worshippers in the same [parish], the fact of applying a social criterion – namely that of the majority of parishioners – in deciding the fate of places of worship and parsonages is compatible with the democratic principle of determining the religious use of that property on the basis of the wishes of the majority [of worshippers concerned]. To rule otherwise would mean that the Orthodox worshippers, who are in the majority, would be unjustifiably prevented, by a measure contrary to their wishes, from practising their religion, short of moving to the Greek Catholic Church...
Given that no new evidence capable of bringing about a change in the Constitutional Court’s case-law has been presented, both the conclusion and the reasoning of the above-mentioned decision remain valid in the present case...”
The Third Report on Romania by the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (“ECRI”), adopted on 24 June 2005 and published on 21 February 2006, contains the following observations:
“Legislation on religious denominations
...
ECRI notes with concern reports that although it does not have the status of a state religion, the Orthodox Church, which is the majority religion in Romania, holds a dominant position in Romanian society. The other religions thus consider that the Orthodox Church has too much influence on the authorities’ policies. It also appears to receive benefits that the other religions do not have, such as chapels in prisons and detention centres. This Church is also said to exert a lot of influence over government decisions on matters such as the award of status as a religious cult to religious associations. ECRI also notes that given the number and diversity of officially recognised and practised cults in Romania, the inter-religious dialogue between the Orthodox Church and other religious denominations could be improved. In particular, the dialogue between this Church and the Greek Catholic Church is apparently at a low ebb, mainly on account of the manner in which the authorities handle the issue of the restitution of property confiscated during the communist period.
ECRI also notes with concern reports that members of the Orthodox Church were engaging in all manner of harassment against followers of the Greek Catholic Church with a certain degree of complacency from the authorities.
...
ECRI notes with concern that the restitution of churches previously belonging to the Greek Catholic Church has become a source of tension between the latter and the Orthodox Church. Despite attempts to reach a friendly settlement, the Orthodox Church refuses to return these churches to the Greek Catholic Church and the authorities do not appear to be taking action to enforce the law. ECRI therefore hopes that the authorities will take a more active part in resolving issues relating to the restitution of Greek Catholic churches to ensure that the law is applied fairly, in a spirit of tolerance and mutual respect...”
ECRI’s Fourth Report on Romania, adopted on 19 March 2014 and published on 3 June 2014, contains the following observations:
“22. In its third report, ECRI recommended that the Romanian authorities enforce the law governing property restitution and encourage religious denominations, particularly the Orthodox Church and other religious minorities, to initiate a constructive dialogue on this point. It also recommended that the authorities introduce mediation arrangements, hold inter-religious colloquies and seminars and conduct information campaigns to promote the idea of a multidenominational society.
The authorities have confirmed that property disputes between the Orthodox Church and the Greek Catholic Church have led to tensions between the two confessions. On a general note, the Orthodox Church has been slow in returning Greek Catholic churches received in 1948 by the State and has often refused to do so.
A joint commission, composed of representatives of the clergy of the two churches, has been in place since 1999 in order to resolve these property disputes; the work of this commission, however, does not seem to have yielded significant results. The National Authority for Property Restitution has informed ECRI that since 2005, out of 6,723 restitution claims, 1,110 have been processed ... An advisory Council of the Churches and Religious Denominations was also set up in April 2011 in order to promote solidarity and cooperation and prevent conflicts between the different religions in Romania; it meets up to twice a year. ECRI welcomes the abovementioned efforts and encourages the authorities to take a leading role in resolving these disputes, which, again, relate to property confiscated by the State.”
In so far as relevant to this case, the Romanian Government’s response to ECRI’s Fourth Report is worded as follows:
“With regard to paragraphs 22-25, the State Secretariat for Religious Denominations constantly sought to act as a mediator for defusing the tensions between the Romanian Orthodox Church and the Romanian Church United with Rome (Greek Catholic), and was actively involved in finding solutions convenient to both sides in their patrimonial dispute; the State Secretariat for Religious Affairs supports financially the projects of building new houses of worship in the areas where one of the parties becomes irrevocably the owner of the house of worship previously disputed.
The National Authority for Property Restitution/NAPR also continued the series of meetings with the representatives of the two churches, during which the discussed aspects concerned the state of solution of applications lodged before the special restitution commission and the difficulties encountered within the restitution process.
During these meetings aspects related to the situation of properties which belonged to the Greek-Catholic Church and which are currently held by the Romanian Orthodox Church were also discussed, the encouragement of the dialogue between the two churches with a view to reaching a friendly solution of the patrimonial dispute.
As regards the present state of solution of restitution demands lodged by the Greek Catholic Church before the special restitution Commission, it is to be underlined that out of 6.723 restitution demands, 1.110 have been solved (a percentage of 16,51%).
The situation of restitution demands finalized according to the manner of their solution:
Restitution in kind: 139
Proposal for damage: 52
Rejection: 66
Other solutions (redirection, renunciation etc.): 853”