The case originated in an application (no. 21788/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Vyacheslavovich Balakin (“the applicant”), on 3 April 2006.
The applicant was represented by Ms Zh. Dmitrovskaya, a lawyer practising in Orel. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that by refusing to examine his complaint concerning the provision of additional social housing to his family the courts had deprived him of his “right to a court” under Article 6 of the Convention.
On 15 October 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant works in a municipal school in Orel; his wife is a librarian. They own a two-room apartment measuring 27.9 square metres, which they share with their two children, a daughter and a son. Their daughter is handicapped – she suffers from severe diabetes.
In 1988 the applicant’s family was put on the “general” waiting list for residents of Orel who have sub-standard housing and who are therefore entitled to more spacious social housing (otherwise called “the list for those in need of better housing”). From 1997 onwards the applicant filed numerous requests with the local authorities of Orel seeking better housing for his family, which, in his view, they were entitled to on the ground of his daughter’s illness. In 1999 the applicant’s family was put on the local authorities’ “first priority” list of persons needing improved living conditions, on account of his daughter’s illness.
In July 2004 the applicant was received by the Governor of the Orel Region and then met with the head of the Housing Authority of the Orel municipality. According to the applicant, the head of the Housing Authority promised him a new three-room flat in the town centre. However, a month later the Housing Authority offered the applicant’s family an old three-room flat in a suburb. The applicant was not satisfied with that offer, referring to the poor transport connections and the remoteness of the place.
On 5 December 2005 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Sovetskiy District Court of Orel (“the District Court”) about inaction on the part of the local authorities and their failure to provide him with better social housing. He asked the court to order the local authorities to grant him a three-room apartment in exchange for his two-room apartment, and to pay him compensation for the non-pecuniary damage caused to him by their inaction. The relevant part of the applicant’s statement of claim read as follows:
“Under Decree No. 330 of the USSR Ministry of Health ... of 1983, diabetes was included in the list of illnesses which conferred a “first priority” (pervoocherednoy) right to the provision of additional room [to the families concerned]. In addition, under Decree No. 901 of the Russian Government of 27 July 1996, “... families with disabled children [who have been previously put on the “general” waiting list for families in need of better housing] shall be put on a separate list for the provision of “first priority” housing.
Additional room ... is to be provided to the disabled persons in accordance with the list of illnesses established by the Government.
In allocating the housing to families with disabled children ... [the competent authority] has to take into account the needs of an individual treatment program for the disabled person, his medical condition, and the distance to the [relevant] medical centre, the homes of his relatives, etc.”
The applicant further indicated that he had been waiting for new housing for nine years. The authorities had repeatedly promised to provide him with a three-room apartment but had not done so. He added that the conditions his family had to live in (four persons living in a two-room apartment) were having a negative effect on the health of his handicapped daughter. The applicant described his correspondence and personal meetings with the representatives of the administration of the Orel Region and the town administration concerning the improvement of his living conditions. He acknowledged that in August 2004 his family had been offered a three-room flat, but he had had to decline that offer because the flat had been old and had been located too far from the polyclinic, a pharmacy, relatives, and so on. The statement of claim contained lengthy citations from the 1959 UN Declaration of the Rights of the Child, from the Russian Constitution of 1993, and from the European Convention on Human Rights. In the closing part of his statement of claim the applicant asked the court to order the town administration “to allocate [them] a three-room flat with the right of privatisation, free of charge, pursuant to Governmental Decree No. 901 ..., in exchange for their two-room flat ...”. He also sought payment of compensation for non-pecuniary damage caused by the prolonged inaction of the authorities.
On 8 December 2005 the District Court invited the applicant to re-formulate his claim by a fixed a time-limit. On an unspecified date the applicant re-formulated his claim against the local authorities and asked the court to acknowledge his right to additional housing, and to impose an obligation on the local authorities to provide him with a three-room apartment in a particular area of town.
On 9 February 2006 the District Court held a preliminary hearing. Its decision of the same date states that, at that hearing:
“... the plaintiff and his representative confirmed that they had been seeking to obtain housing in essence ‘out of turn’, and that the law did not set time-limits for the allocation of housing to families with disabled children; that their claim was based on the prolonged (more than 9 years) failure of the Town Administration to provide them with housing, on the worsening of the health of their child, and on the repeated promises of the Town Administration to provide them with a three-room flat.”
Having heard the applicant, the District Court concluded that it did not have jurisdiction to examine his case and discontinued the proceedings. It held, in particular, as follows:
“Under Article 134 point 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the judge must refuse to examine a claim if it does not fall to be examined pursuant to the rules of civil procedure because it is to be examined and determined within a different judicial procedure.
The court [refused to examine the applicant’s claim] for the following reasons.
Pursuant to Ruling No. 2 of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court of the USSR of 3 April 1987, as amended ..., the courts had jurisdiction to examine ... housing disputes between landlords and tenants in State-owned houses ..., and other housing disputes relating to ... eviction ..., the provision of housing on grounds provided by the civil law (as a result of the demolition or substantial renovation of a house, transfer of housing to the category of non-residential premises, etc.), [disputes related to] orders concerning allocation of housing by joint decision of the administration ... of a public association and a trade union committee, with subsequent notification of the executive committee [of the local administration] (under Article 24 of the USSR Basic Legislation on Housing ...), and in the case of a refusal of the executive committee to deliver an order of allocation of housing.
The courts are also competent to examine cases concerning the provision of housing at the request of persons who under the housing legislation ... have the right to obtain housing “extraordinarily”, including those who have the right to obtain housing within a particular time-limit, if that time-limit has not been respected. The courts cannot examine claims which fall within the competence of other bodies, [namely disputes] concerning provision of housing for those in need of better living conditions, or concerning provision of smaller housing ... .
It has been established that the plaintiff had been put on the “general” waiting list [created by the municipal authorities] for those in need of better housing ... and on the “first priority” list on the ground that he had a disabled child. Simultaneously, the plaintiff had been put on a waiting list [created] by his employer - the Department of Culture, and he was the first on the list.
Governmental Decree No. 901 of 1996 ... provides that families with disabled children ... which are ... in need of better housing are to be put on separate waiting lists for “first-priority” allocation of housing ... .
The law “On the social protection of disabled persons in the Russian Federation” does not fix time-limits for granting housing to ... families with disabled children.
It follows that [the applicant’s] claim is not within the competence of this court.”
The applicant appealed against the decision.
On 15 March 2006 the Orel Regional Court upheld the decision of 9 February 2006. The court found that, according to the relevant Articles of the Code of Civil Procedure and the Housing Code, the courts did not have jurisdiction to examine disputes concerning the granting of social housing and that other State bodies had competence in respect of that issue. It emphasised that the courts could examine cases brought by persons entitled to the “extraordinary” provision of social housing, including those who had not received housing within the time-limit established by law. However, (a) the applicant was only entitled to receive housing in accordance with the “first priority list”, and (b) the Law “On the Social Protection of Handicapped Persons in the Russian Federation” did not establish any time-limit for providing families with handicapped children with housing.
The applicant’s supervisory review complaints proved unsuccessful. In those complaints the applicant confirmed that he had been put on the “general” and “first priority” waiting lists.
On 12 January 2007 the local authorities suggested to the applicant that he submit an application for receiving social housing aid in the form of a financial grant. It appears that the applicant did not do so.
The applicant has not received new housing to date.
The “old” Soviet Housing Code of 1983 (in force until 29 December 2004) proclaimed in Article 1 the right of the citizens to housing, which was realised, inter alia, through “just distribution of public housing” and “provision of suitable dwellings as the public building programs advance”. Article 28 provided: “citizens in need of better housing have the right to be allocated State-owned housing for their use ... under the conditions provided by the legislation ...”. Articles 29-35 of the old Code defined the criteria and modalities for inclusion on the “general waiting list” for those in need of better housing. Article 36 provided for a special “first priority” waiting list for certain categories of the population. Article 37 defined situations in which persons were entitled to “extraordinary” (in other words, immediate) provision of housing.
On 28 March 1983 the Ministry of Public Health of the USSR adopted Decree no. 330, which established a list of illnesses that entitled persons suffering from them to be put on a “first priority” waiting list for the allocation of social housing. Amongst other illnesses, it mentioned “type 1 diabetes, moderate or severe form”.
Government Decree no. 901 of 27 July 1996 “On the granting of privileges to handicapped persons and families with handicapped children in respect of the receipt of housing and payment for housing and utilities” adopted rules which provided for the placement of families with handicapped children and in need of better housing on separate “first priority” lists for receiving a larger social housing (Section 5 of those rules). Such “first priority waiting lists” also established the priority order in which housing was to be allocated once available. No time-limit for providing persons on the “first priority waiting list” with housing was stipulated; however, it conferred an advantage on those on the “first priority” list vis-à-vis those on the “general” list.
Under the Russian Housing Code of 29 December 2004, which entered into force on 1 March 2005, certain persons were entitled to claim social housing from local authorities provided that they satisfied the conditions established by law (Article 51). Such persons were eligible to be placed on a local authority waiting list in order to obtain social housing (Article 57 § 1). The “general” waiting list established the priority order in which housing was to be allocated once available. Again, being on such a waiting list did not entitle the persons concerned to obtain new housing from the State under any specific conditions or within a specific time-frame; it only guaranteed that the housing would be allocated in a certain order when it became available.
The new Housing Code did not provide for “first priority” waiting lists anymore. However, under the Enactment Law of 29 December 2004, No. 189-FZ, the “first priority” waiting lists created before the entry into force of the new Code remained in force (Section 6 point 2, as interpreted by Ruling No. 1549-O-P of the Constitutional Court of 1 December 2009).
Finally, certain categories of person, such as persons whose dwelling has become unfit for living, orphans and persons of similar status, and persons suffering from a severe chronic illness which makes it impossible for others to live with them in the same dwelling, are entitled to have their claim for social housing treated as “extraordinary” (Article 57 § 2 in conjunction with Article 51 § 1 (4) of the Housing Code). A list of the severe chronic illnesses concerned was established by Government Decree no. 378 on 16 June 2006; it does not include diabetes.
As interpreted by the Russian Supreme Court, the designation of a claim as “extraordinary” means that housing must be provided immediately (supervisory review decisions nos. 85-В08-3 of 30 September 2008, 85В10-7 of 8 February 2011, and 85-В11-2 of 3 May 2011), and, it would seem, ahead of the provision of housing to those on all other types of waiting list.
The Housing Code provides that a court must secure housing rights in accordance with the jurisdiction rules established by the relevant procedural law (Article 11 § 1). Housing rights can also be protected by resorting to various executive bodies. A decision taken by an executive body can be challenged in court (Article 11 § 2). Housing rights can be protected by, inter alia, the acknowledgement of a right, modification of the scope of a right or obligation, and in other ways envisaged by the Code or by federal laws (Article 11 § 3 (1), (5) and (6)).
The Code of Civil Procedure of 14 November 2002, which entered into force on 1 February 2003, provides for a court to refuse to deal with a claim if it cannot be examined in the course of civil proceedings because it falls to be examined in other court proceedings (Article 134 § 1 (1)). A refusal to deal with a claim prevents the claimant’s subsequent recourse to a court with a claim against the same respondent, concerning the same subject and based on the same grounds (Article 134 § 3). The court discontinues the proceedings if the case cannot be examined in the course of civil proceedings on the grounds envisaged by Article 134 § 1 (1) (Article 220).
Ruling of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court of the USSR no. 2 of 3 April 1987 “On the practice of the courts in applying housing legislation” (amended on 30 November 1990) provides, inter alia, that the courts have jurisdiction over disputes brought by persons who have a claim to receive housing in “extraordinary” way under the relevant laws, including persons who have not been provided with housing within the time-limit established by the relevant law. The courts have no jurisdiction to examine requests which fall within the competence of other bodies: for example, concerning the granting of housing to persons in need of better living conditions, or concerning the granting of housing of a smaller size (Section 1).
Ruling of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court of Russia no. 14 of 2 July 2009 “On certain issues arising in the judicial practice of the application of the Housing Code of the Russian Federation” states that housing disputes, including those concerning the recognition of rights in respect of housing, are to be examined by a district court at first instance (Section 3).
Article 46 of the Constitution guarantees to everybody judicial protection of his rights and freedoms. In particular, point 2 of that Article provides that “[d]ecisions and actions (inaction) of the State and municipal authorities ... can be challenged in the courts”.
The Code of Civil Proceedings of 2003 provides for two main types of judicial proceedings: examination of claims (Articles 131-244.9 of the Code) and judicial review of administrative actions (Articles 245-261.4 of the Code). In particular, Articles 254-258 (Chapter 25) of the Code concern “the challenging of decisions and actions (inaction) of the State and municipal authorities ...”. Under Articles 254 and 255 a person can challenge in court inaction on the part of a State or municipal body or official if that inaction breaches the rights or freedoms of the plaintiff, or creates an obstacle to the realisation of his rights and freedoms.