The case originated in an application (no. 6110/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Denis Vasilyevich Kuptsov (“the first applicant”) and his mother, Ms Lyudmila Aleksandrovna Kuptsova (“the second applicant”), on 10 January 2003.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Dubovskoy, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the first applicant had been detained in appalling conditions, that his detention on remand had been unlawful and excessively long and had not been attended by appropriate procedural guarantees and that the criminal proceedings against him had been unfair.
On 20 February 2007 the President of the First Section decided to communicate the above complaints to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government's objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicants are a son and his mother. They were born in 1987 and 1962 respectively and live in .
On 29 October 2002 the first applicant, a minor at that time, was arrested on suspicion of several counts of robbery committed in conspiracy with others. Until 6 November 2002 he was held at the Krasnoarmeyskiy District police station. On 6 November 2002 he was transferred to remand centre no. 4 in .
During the night of 29 to 30 October 2002 the first applicant was held in cell no. 1 together with adults. The cell was overcrowded. Inmates had to take turns to sleep.
On 30 October 2002 he was transferred to cell no. 4. The cell measured about 8 sq. m and accommodated ten inmates. The cell had no windows. It was equipped with a dim lamp which was never switched off.
Inmates slept on a bench about 20 cm wide and 2 m long or on the concrete floor. They were not provided with bedding. They had to remain standing during the day as the bench was not big enough for all of them to sit on.
Inmates were not allowed to exercise outdoors. Two or three times a day they were escorted to the toilets.
Inmates were not provided with any food or drinking water. They ate food supplied by relatives and drank tap water from the toilets.
According to the Government, the Krasnoarmeyskiy District police station did not have a temporary detention facility. All detained persons were held in five cells for temporarily arrested persons (комнаты для временно доставленных). The cells were not equipped with beds. Bedding and food were not provided. Drinking water was provided upon request. Outdoor exercise was not organised as the police station had no exercise yard. The police station had toilet facilities which inmates could use upon request. It was not possible to establish in which cells the first applicant had been held or the number of inmates in those cells, as the registers for that period had been destroyed on the expiry of the statutory storage period.
It can be seen from an undated report issued by the Ministry of the Interior, submitted by the Government, that the cells for temporary arrested persons at the Krasnoarmeyskiy District police station had no windows. Each cell had forced ventilation and artificial lighting and was equipped with benches. The cells had no beds or lavatory bowls. Inmates were allowed to use communal toilet facilities upon request. The same information is contained in the report of 26 April 2007 prepared by the Volgograd Regional Department of the Ministry of the Interior.
Further, it follows from an affidavit by an acting head of the Krasnoarmeyskiy District police station that the police station's registers for 2002 had been lost. It was therefore impossible to establish the cell in which the first applicant had been held.
The Government also submitted black and white photographs of cells nos. 1 and 4. The photographs show small windowless rooms with bare concrete walls, narrow benches along one of the walls and an electric lamp above the door. No other furniture or equipment is visible.
On 30 October 2002 the first applicant was questioned by the investigator and admitted his guilt. The second applicant was present during the questioning. Ms S., who had been appointed by the investigator to act as the first applicant's counsel, was also present.
On 31 October 2002 the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court of  remanded the first applicant in custody. The court referred to the gravity of the charges and the risk of his absconding or interfering with the investigation. It also noted that the first applicant was unemployed. A prosecutor and the applicants were present at the hearing. Ms S. did not attend.
On 1 November 2002 the second applicant, in her capacity as the first applicant's guardian, lodged an appeal. She referred to the first applicant's young age, permanent place of residence and positive references. She further submitted that placement in custody would interrupt his studies at school. She also informed the appeal court that she had retained counsel Mr D. to represent the first applicant and asked that he be invited to the appeal hearing.
On 6 November 2002 the first applicant was formally charged with several counts of armed robbery in conspiracy with others.
On 14 November 2002 the prosecutor submitted, in reply to the second applicant's appeal submissions against the custody order of 1 November 2002, that there was a strong evidentiary basis against the first applicant, in particular his confession, witness statements and the results of the search in his flat, where some of the stolen objects had been found. There were reasons to believe that the first applicant might abscond, reoffend or interfere with the investigation. He had regularly skipped school, had negative references from the teachers and his parents had no influence over him. Further, some of the stolen objects had not yet been discovered and the first applicant might destroy them if released. One of the accomplices was hiding from the police and the first applicant might influence him and induce him to conceal the information about the offences committed. In any event, it was necessary to isolate the first applicant and his accomplices from each other to prevent collusion. Finally, the prosecutor submitted that the first applicant and his accomplices were dangerous and immoral as they had robbed kindergartens, had assaulted elderly nightwatchmen and had destroyed kindergartens' property intended for young children.
On 3 December 2002 the  upheld the decision of 31 October 2002 on appeal, finding that it had been well reasoned and justified. The District Court had correctly relied on the gravity of the charges and the information on the first applicant's character. The first applicant was not brought to the courtroom. His counsel was not notified of the date of the hearing and was also absent. The prosecutor was in attendance and made oral submissions.
On 24 December 2002 the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court extended the first applicant's detention until 16 February 2003. The court found that the first applicant had not attended school, had been charged with particularly serious offences and might therefore abscond, reoffend or interfere with the investigation. The applicants, counsel Mr D. and the prosecutor attended the hearing.
On 14 February 2003 the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court granted a further extension of the first applicant's detention until 16 April 2003, repeating the reasons set out in the decision of 24 December 2002. The first applicant and his counsel were present at the hearing.
On 11 March 2003 the  upheld the decision on appeal. It endorsed the reasoning of the District Court. The first applicant was not brought to the courtroom, whereas his counsel and the prosecutor were present.
On 16 April 2003 the investigation was completed and the case was sent for trial before the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court.
On 30 April 2003 the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court decided to join the first applicant's case and the cases of his four accomplices, found that the case should be examined by a single judge and fixed the first trial hearing for 14 May 2003. It further ordered that the defendants should remain in custody.
On 27 May 2003 the  quashed the decision of 30 April 2003, finding that the District Court had unlawfully refused to have the case examined by a bench of three judges.
On 2 June 2003 the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court decided to join the first applicant's case and the cases of his four accomplices, ordered that the case be examined by a bench comprising a professional judge and two lay judges and fixed the first trial hearing for 10 June 2003. It further held that the defendants should remain in custody.
On an unspecified date a judicial bench consisting of a presiding judge and two lay judges, Ms G. and Mr R., was formed.
The hearing of 10 June 2003 was adjourned until 18 June 2003 because counsel for the first applicant did not appear. According to the applicants, counsel Mr D. was not notified of the date of the hearing.
On 11 June 2003 counsel for the first applicant lodged an appeal against the decision of 2 June 2003. The case file was forwarded to the  and the hearing of 18 June 2003 was cancelled.
On 15 July 2003 the  upheld the decision of 2 June 2003 on appeal.
On 31 July 2003 the case file was returned to the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court. The District Court scheduled the next trial hearing for 26 August 2003.
The hearing of 26 August 2003 was adjourned until 27 August 2003 because counsel for the first applicant did not appear. According to the applicants, counsel Mr D. was not notified of the date of the hearing.
The Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court held trial hearings on 27 and 28 August and 2, 9, 10, 11, 17, 18, 24, 25 and 30 September 2003.
On 1 October 2003 the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court convicted the first applicant of aggravated robbery and sentenced him to nine years' imprisonment.
The first applicant appealed. In particular, he complained that the composition of the trial bench had been unlawful because Ms G. and Mr R. did not appear on the official list of lay judges. He enclosed an officially published list of lay judges of the Krasnoarmeyskiy District of Volgograd.
On 9 December 2003 the  ordered an inquiry into the first applicant's complaint about the allegedly unlawful composition of the trial court. On 8 January 2004 the Administrative Department of the Supreme Court concluded that the trial bench had been composed lawfully. Ms G. and Mr R. appeared on the list of lay judges of the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court.
On 17 February 2004 the  upheld the conviction on appeal and reduced the sentence to seven years and six months' imprisonment. It found that the trial bench had been composed lawfully. The first applicant's counsel was present at the appeal hearing but the first applicant himself had not been brought to the courtroom. He remained in the remand centre and followed the proceedings through a videoconference system.
The applicants submitted a copy of a judgment of the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court delivered in an unrelated civil case on 31 January 2003. It follows from the judgment that Ms G. acted as a lay judge in the proceedings. The applicants also submitted an affidavit by a former employee of the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court who testified that Ms G. had been employed by the court for at least five years and received a salary.
The Government submitted a copy of the list of judges of the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court approved by the Volgograd Regional Legislature on 2 July 2002. The list mentioned Ms G. and Mr R. They also produced a certificate issued on 24 April 2007 by the acting president of the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court, stating that Ms G. had never been employed by that court.
The Federal Law on Detention of Suspects and Defendants charged with Criminal Offences (“the Detention of Suspects Act”, no. 103-FZ of 15 July 1995) provides that suspects and defendants detained during the investigation and trial are held in remand centres (section 8). They may be transferred to temporary detention centres (ИВС) if this is necessary for the purposes of the investigation or trial and if transport between a remand centre and a police station or courthouse is not feasible because of the distance between them. Such detention at a temporary detention centre may not exceed ten days per month (section 13).
Detainees should be given free food sufficient to maintain them in good health according to standards established by the Government of the  (section 22 of the Detention of Suspects Act). Detainees should be kept in conditions which satisfy sanitary and hygiene requirements. They should be provided with an individual sleeping place and given bedding, tableware and toiletries. Each inmate should have no less than four square metres of personal space in his or her cell (section 23). Detainees are entitled to a one-hour-long daily walk (section 17).
Annex no. 1 to Order no. 174dcp by the Interior Ministry on measures for enhancement of the activities of police units on duty in the  provides that persons arrested on suspicion of an administrative offence should be placed in a cell for temporarily arrested persons (комнаты для временно доставленных) at the police station. Such cells must meet sanitary and hygiene requirements. The period of detention in such cells must not normally exceed three hours (paragraph 48.2). A person arrested on suspicion of a criminal offence must be placed in a temporary detention centre (ИВС) as soon as a record of the arrest has been drawn up (paragraph 54).
Since 1 July 2002 criminal-law matters have been governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001).
By Article 50 of the Code, the investigator, the prosecutor or the court should provide the suspect or the accused with legal-aid counsel upon his or her request. Article 51 provides that counsel must, without exception, be appointed by the investigator, prosecutor or the court if, inter alia, the suspect or the accused is a minor. Counsel must be appointed if the suspect or the accused has not retained a lawyer.
The Constitution guarantees the right to liberty. Arrest, placement in custody and detention are permitted only on the basis of a judicial decision. Prior to a judicial decision, an individual may not be detained for longer than forty-eight hours (Article 22).
In accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure, “preventive measures” or “measures of restraint” (меры пресечения) include an undertaking not to leave a town or region, personal surety, bail and detention (Article 98). If necessary, the suspect or accused may be asked to give an undertaking to appear (обязательство о явке) (Article 112).
When deciding on a preventive measure, the competent authority is required to consider whether there are “sufficient grounds to believe” that the accused would abscond during the investigation or trial, reoffend or obstruct the establishment of the truth (Article 97). It must also take into account the gravity of the charge, information on the accused's character, his or her profession, age, state of health, family status and other circumstances (Article 99).
Detention may be ordered by a court if the charge carries a sentence of at least two years' imprisonment, provided that a less restrictive preventive measure cannot be applied (Article 108 § 1).
After arrest the suspect is placed in custody “during the investigation”. The period of detention during the investigation may be extended beyond six months only if the detainee is charged with a serious or particularly serious criminal offence. No extension beyond eighteen months is possible (Article 109 §§ 1-3). The period of detention “during the investigation” is calculated up to the day when the prosecutor sends the case to the trial court (Article 109 § 9).
From the date the prosecutor forwards the case to the trial court, the defendant's detention is “before the court” (or “during the trial”). Within fourteen days of receipt of the case file (if the defendant is in custody), the judge is required either: (1) to refer the case to a competent court; (2) to fix a date for a preliminary hearing (предварительное слушание); or (3) to fix a date for trial (Article 227). Upon receipt of the case file, the judge must determine, in particular, whether the preventive measure applied should be lifted or changed (Article 228 (3) and Article 231 § 2 (6)).
The period of detention “during the trial” is calculated up to the date the judgment is given. It may not normally exceed six months, but if the case concerns serious or particularly serious criminal offences, the trial court may approve one or more extensions of no longer than three months each (Article 255 §§ 2 and 3).
The presence of the accused, his or her counsel and the prosecutor is mandatory at hearings where issues relating to detention are examined. Where the accused is a minor his or her guardian may also attend the hearing. If a party to the proceedings was duly notified of the date of the hearing but failed to appear without a valid reason the court may proceed with the hearing in the absence of that party. This rule does not apply to situations where it is the accused who fails to appear. The hearing cannot in any case proceed in the absence of the accused (Article 108 § 3 and Article 109 § 2).
An appeal may be lodged with a higher court within three days against a judicial decision ordering or extending detention. The appeal court must decide the appeal within three days after its receipt (Article 108 § 10).
In accordance with section 1(2) of the Federal Law on lay judges at the federal courts of general jurisdiction in the Russian Federation (“the Lay Judges Act” no. 37-FZ of 10 January 2000, in force at the material time), lay judges were persons authorised to sit in civil and criminal cases as non-professional judges.
Section 2 provided that lists of lay judges were to be compiled for every district court by local self-government bodies; the lists were subject to confirmation by the regional legislature. The confirmed list was to be submitted to the relevant district court no later than one month before the expiry of the term of office of the lay judges on the previous list. The term of office of lay judges was five years.
Section 6 determined the procedure for the selection of lay judges at the regional courts. It provided that the president of the regional court was to draw names at random from the overall list of lay judges assigned to the district courts situated in the territory of the region concerned. The number of lay judges assigned to every professional judge should be at least three times as many as the number needed for a hearing. From the list of lay judges assigned to him the professional judge was to select two lay judges by lot to sit in a particular case.
Under the terms of section 9, lay judges could only be called for service in a regional court once a year, for the entire duration of the court proceedings in a particular case.
Article 1064 § 1 of the Civil Code of the  provides that damage caused to the person or property of a citizen must be fully compensated for by the tortfeasor. Pursuant to Article 1069, a State agency or a State official is liable towards a citizen for damage caused by their unlawful actions or failure to act. Such damage is to be compensated for at the expense of the federal or regional treasury. Articles 151 and 1099 to 1101 of the Civil Code provide for compensation for non-pecuniary damage. Article 1099 states, in particular, that non-pecuniary damage must be compensated for irrespective of any award for pecuniary damage.