The case originated in an application (no. 6318/17) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovak national, Ms M.M.B. (“the applicant”), on 13 January 2017. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have her name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by her mother, Ms S.M.B., who instructed Ms I. Rajtáková, a lawyer practising in Košice, to act on her behalf. The Slovak Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that her right to an effective investigation under Article 8 of the Convention had been breached by the domestic authorities’ investigation into the allegation of abuse by her father.
On 20 December 2017 notice of the complaint concerning the ineffective investigation was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 2008 and lives in Košice.
On 31 October 2012 the applicant’s mother requested that her daughter be examined by the psychologists of the Dada, Mama and Me Private Centre for Pedagogical and Psychological Counselling and Prevention (Súkromné centrum pedagogicko – psychologického poradenstva a prevencie Oco, Mama a Ja) in Prešov. The applicant’s mother approached the centre with a suspicion that the applicant had been sexually abused by her father. After talking to the applicant, psychologists of the centre concluded, on 9 November 2012, that she exhibited many symptoms usually displayed by children with CAN (Child Abuse and Neglect) syndrome, and that she was undergoing an internal psychological struggle. They also stated that she refused to portray her father in a picture and manifested, in organised play, sexual behaviour towards the psychologist that was not typical for her age.
On 7 December 2012 the applicant’s mother lodged a criminal complaint (trestné oznámenie) against the applicant’s father. She alleged, relying on the report drawn up by the above centre, that the applicant, who had been four years old at the time, had been sexually abused between July and December 2012.
On 12 December 2012 the applicant’s father left the family home following a court preliminary measure ordering him to refrain from any contact with the applicant, with whom he has had no contact since.
On 18 January 2013 a criminal prosecution (trestné stíhanie) against an unknown perpetrator was opened by the Košice police (Okresné riaditeľstvo Policajného zboru).
Following a request by the investigator, on 10 February 2013, the psychologist L.L. confirmed that she had examined the applicant on two occasions, on 4 and 18 September 2012, without having identified any extraordinary features in the applicant’s behaviour. However she could neither confirm nor exclude the fact that the applicant might had been sexually abused, and recommended a further examination.
On 12 February 2013 the investigator requested a report from the social-protection authority, which had been following the family since the preliminary measure of 12 December 2012. The report described the living situation of the persons concerned and gave an account of the applicant’s parents’ statements; no interview with the applicant was mentioned.
Following another request by the investigator seeking to evaluate the applicant’s and her father’s tendency to lie or distort the reality and to identify any traces and possible aftereffects suggesting that the applicant had been sexually abused, a psychological expert opinion was produced by E.S. (hereinafter the “first expert report”) on 25 March 2013. The expert found that the applicant showed no signs of sexual abuse and that neither the father nor the applicant had any tendency to lie. However, the applicant had a vivid imagination typical for children of her age. On the other hand, the applicant was also capable of reproducing her perception of past events, albeit only according to a subjective importance of such events to her; her ability to reproduce past events was more exact in respect of recurring events.
Between 11 March and 16 May 2013, the investigator questioned the applicant’s parents, the applicant herself (in presence of the expert E.S.) and the social-protection authority appointed as legal guardian for the applicant for the purposes of the criminal proceedings. The applicant denied any sexual interference; the legal guardian summarised the above report and mentioned the pending divorce proceedings.
On 17 May 2013 the criminal prosecution was discontinued pursuant to Section 215 of the Code of Criminal Procedure since no offence of sexual abuse was found to have been committed. An appeal by the applicant’s mother was unsuccessful, as she had no procedural standing to challenge the decision.
On 13 March 2014 the applicant’s mother lodged a fresh criminal complaint against the applicant’s father. She alleged that the applicant, who had been attending the Centre of Pedagogical and Psychological Counselling (Centrum pedagogicko- psychologického poradenstva) in Košice since April 2013, had started talking about the events of 2012 and described what had happened between her and her father. The mother also provided the police with two drawings by the applicant depicting her father in a sexually explicit way. In addition, she submitted a report dated 6 March 2014 by the centre’s psychologist, who stated that the applicant had revealed her past traumatic experience through drawings and had verbally described situations of abuse during their sessions.
By a decision of 23 April 2014, the investigator of the Košice police opened a criminal prosecution for sexual abuse. A legal guardian was appointed in respect of the applicant by a court.
After having questioned the applicant’s parents, the investigator commissioned three expert opinions.
On 26 May 2014 a psychologist, V.S., was asked to assess the applicant’s personality (hereinafter the “second expert report”). The expert concluded on 17 June 2014 that the applicant showed no negative emotions towards her father. She did not find the applicant’s drawings unusual and noted that the applicant’s description of events raised the suspicion and the suggestion that the topic had been artificially generated by people around her. The applicant had no genuine tendency to lie. Rather, she confused real memories with imagination and employed her fantasy to explain situations she could not understand. She also manifested none of the signs typical of victims of sexual abuse; rather, she exhibited signs of emotional confusion as her feelings towards her father were uncertain. The expert recommended not questioning the applicant in the presence of the prosecuting authorities.
After having examined the applicant’s father, V.S. concluded in her expert report of 24 June 2014 (hereinafter the “third expert report”) that he had no tendencies to lie, no aggressive reactions to pressurised situations, and that his personality displayed no signs of pathological symptoms.
On 6 June 2014 a sexologist, D.C.-Š., was asked to consider the applicant’s father’s sexuality (hereinafter the “fourth expert report”, of 29 August 2014). The expert concluded that he was not suffering from any sexual deviation, had no sexual interest in children and manifested no signs of sexually aggressive behaviour. She excluded any sexual or other motivation (such as schizophrenia, mental disorder, alcoholism, and so forth) in respect of any alleged acts towards the applicant.
On 5 September 2014 a psychologist, D.H., was asked to assess the mother’s personality. In her report of 8 October 2014 (hereinafter “the fifth expert report”), she concluded that the mother had a slightly heightened tendency to lie, to make assumptions and to be confused regarding reality. The mother’s statements were very subjective and based on assumptions, suspiciousness and naivety, assigning sexual connotations to neutral situations. According to the expert, she might have manipulated the applicant and stimulated her sexual imagination.
In the meantime, the mother requested another expert opinion, which was added to the file on 23 July 2014 (hereinafter the “sixth expert report”). The psychologist, O.T., concluded that the applicant displayed symptoms of sexual abuse, and appended to the report several drawings displaying the applicant’s father in a sexually explicit way.
On 5 November 2014, the expert V.S. was questioned by the investigator. She was asked whether the applicant had drawn pictures during her expert examination and if so, why they were not included into the report. The expert replied positively and stated that the choice of the examination methods were within her competence.
Given these divergent conclusions, on 1 December 2014 the investigator requested another expert opinion (hereinafter the “seventh expert report”) from the Research Institute of Child Psychology and Pathopsychology (Výskumný ústav detskej psychológie a patopsychológie) in Bratislava. This report, dated 26 January 2015, was elaborated on the basis of the existing file, interviews with the applicant and her mother and a psychological examination of the applicant. According to its conclusions, it was highly probable that the applicant had not invented the events she had described and that she had experienced sexual abuse. The authors of the report concluded that the applicant was already able to discern reality from fantasy and did not display any personality features likely to negatively influence her statements. They reported that she had referred to her past experience verbally, non-verbally and inadvertently through gestures, which had increased the specific credibility of her statements. The experts considered that the revelation by the applicant of the details of her sexual abuse was a process, which included stages in which she was reluctant to make any statement, when she denied any abuse and then revealed certain details, withdrew her statements and reconfirmed them again. Her drawings had also shown that there was a likelihood of her having experienced the alleged sexual abuse. Furthermore, the applicant was experiencing internal anxiety and general fear; she was also very sexually receptive and her inner stability was distorted by past inadequate sexual stimulation.
On 10 March 2015 the expert, D.C.-Š., was questioned by the investigator. She stated that the mere fact that the applicant’s father did not suffer from any sexual deviation did not exclude sexually abusive behaviour, only excluding sexual motivation for such behaviour; he was not found to have had any psychiatric motivation, but the expert examination had not been focused on this issue. The expert stated that, in general, there might be other non-sexual motivations caused for example by psychiatric disorders or drugs, but signs of those were not manifested in the applicant’s father.
On 23 April 2015 the applicant’s father was charged by the investigator with the offence of sexual abuse.
On 28 May 2015, following a complaint by the applicant’s father, the Košice regional prosecutor’s office (krajská prokuratúra) annulled the decision to press charges. The regional prosecutor considered that, bearing in mind the earlier reports, the seventh expert report lacked any express assertion as to whether or not the applicant had been sexually abused. The investigator was therefore ordered to interview the two experts who had prepared the seventh expert report, in order to obtain explicit statements as to whether the applicant had been sexually abused by her father.
On 24 June 2015 the two experts, E.S. and A.K., were interviewed. They were asked to answer the following question:
“Answer, in an unambiguous manner, whether [the applicant] has or has not been sexually abused by her father, providing reasons for your answer.”
Both experts confirmed all the conclusions reached in their report and reaffirmed that it was not their role to decide whether the crime in question had been committed; this was, rather, the investigator’s role. They stated:
“... It is highly probable that this experience as such was not invented [by the applicant], there is an assumption that she must have gone through and experienced the situation.”
They further stated that the mother could not have provoked the applicant’s sexual imagination by asking suggestive or manipulative questions since the latter had displayed specific and authentic behaviour and emotions. They also noted that repeated questioning was not the best way of dealing with victims of sexual violence. However, they confirmed that revealing the details of the applicant’s sexual abuse was an ongoing process rather than a one-off event, and that the changes in the applicant’s position and behaviour formed part of that process. Also, had the applicant been subject to external influences, her statements would have lacked consistency, detail and nonverbal gestures, which had not been the case.
On 7 September 2015 the district prosecutor informed the regional prosecutor about the interview. He stated that given the experts’ answer to the above question, the evidentiary situation was similar to the one preceding the decision of 28 May 2015 and noted that in the latter decision the regional prosecutor had rather considered that the act had not been committed. Consequently, it was not possible to decide unequivocally whether criminal charges should again be brought against the applicant’s father or whether another decision should be reached.
In a letter of 17 September 2015 the regional prosecutor agreed that the evidentiary situation had not changed and thus referred to his decision of 28 May 2015.
By a decision of 28 October 2015 the investigator of the Košice police discontinued the criminal prosecution since there was no doubt that the impugned act had not been committed. After having summarised the statements of the applicant and her parents and the contents of the expert reports, the investigator noted that according to the second expert report, it could not be excluded that the applicant distorted reality and confused real memories with fantasy, and thus her statements did not appear objective; no signs indicating sexual abuse experience could be found in her personality which was still subject to developments. Referring to the third and fourth expert reports, the investigator observed that no tendencies to lie, no pathological symptoms or signs of sexual deviation or aggression had been identified in respect of the applicant’s father, while the fifth expert report pointed to the subjectivity of the assertions of the applicant’s mother who had a slightly heightened tendency to lie and was characterised by suspiciousness, naivety and confusion over reality. There was thus no evidence proving that the act in question had occurred. Despite the sixth and seventh expert reports having concluded that the applicant had displayed symptoms of a sexually abused child, those conclusions were not sufficient to prove that the act had really been committed, particularly in view of the expert reports assessing the personality of the applicant.
The applicant’s mother learned about the decision when consulting the file on 9 December 2015.
On 9 February 2016 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ústavný súd), in which, relying on Articles 19 and 41 of the Slovak Constitution and on Articles 3 and 19 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, she challenged the last decision of the police dated 28 October 2015.
On 31 May 2016 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint as manifestly ill-founded. It concluded that the police had proceeded in accordance with the law and without any arbitrariness. The court further stated that the function of the criminal proceedings primarily lay in the perpetrator-State relationship and in the protection of societal values, not in the protection of the individual rights of the applicant.
In the context of the applicant’s parents’ divorce proceedings and the determination of their access rights after the divorce, a further expert report was commissioned. In her report of 25 July 2016, Ľ.G., a psychologist, stated that the mother might have provoked or perpetuated the applicant’s interest in sexual themes. She also found that the applicant had no tendency to lie consciously or to distort reality and that she could not have invented certain stories without having experienced them in the past. In any event, the expert did not find any symptoms of sexual abuse, apart from some emotional trauma which could have been connected either to sexual abuse or to her parents’ separation. However, four years had passed since the alleged sexual abuse and the applicant’s memory had naturally faded, or might have been intentionally erased as a response to a possible traumatic event. The applicant had a rather ambivalent attitude towards her father. The expert also reported that the applicant’s mother had tendencies to dissimulate and that the applicant’s father had reached a higher level in the lying test. Both parents had been evaluated as rather neurotic personalities.
Article 19
“(1) Everyone shall have the right to maintain and protect his or her dignity, honour, reputation and good name.
(2) Everyone shall have the right to be free from unjustified interference in his or her private and family life. ”
Article 41
Sexual abuse
Section 201
Section 215
Discontinuation of the criminal proceedings
“(1) A prosecutor shall discontinue the criminal proceedings, if
a) there is no doubt that the act for which criminal prosecution is being carried out did not occur, ...
(4) Discontinuation of the criminal proceedings under paragraph 1 may be done also by the investigator, as long as no charges have been brought.”
Section 31
“(1) A prosecutor may examine the lawfulness of actions and decisions of bodies of public administration, prosecutors, investigators, police authorities and courts in so far provided for by statute, including following a request, and is entitled to take measures to rectify established violations, provided [such measures] do not fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of other bodies by special statute.
(2) A request is understood as a written or oral demand, proposal or other submission by an individual or a legal entity, which is aimed at a prosecutor taking a measure within [the prosecutor’s] jurisdiction, in particular lodging an application for proceedings to commence before a court, or submitting a remedy, joining existing proceedings, or taking other measures for rectification of a violation of the law, which fall within [the prosecutor’s] jurisdiction.”
...
(5) No review of the lawfulness of a decision issued in criminal proceedings or a review of the lawfulness of the criminal prosecution can be sought under this Act, including the review of the procedure of the police authority during an investigation or a shortened investigation under the Code of Criminal Procedure. This provision does not apply to a request to lodge an appeal on points of law under the Code of Criminal Procedure.” (note: (5) effective from 1 January 2016)
Section 34
“1. An applicant may demand a review of the lawfulness of how her or his request has been resolved by means of a repeat request, which shall be dealt with by a prosecutor at a higher level.”
Section 35
“1. In dealing with a request, a prosecutor is duty bound to examine all circumstances decisive for the assessment of whether there has been a violation of the law; whether the conditions have been fulfilled for lodging an application for proceedings before a court to commence or for submitting a remedy; or whether [the prosecutor] may join existing proceedings before a court or take other measures which [the prosecutor] is entitled to take under [the Public Prosecution Service Act].
The prosecutor assesses the petition according to its content, taking into account all the facts revealed during the investigation.
If the prosecutor establishes that a petition is well founded, [he or she] shall take measures for rectification of the violation of law pursuant to [the Public Prosecution Service Act] or a special statute.”
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 20 November 1989, has binding force under international law on the Contracting States, including all of the member States of the Council of Europe. It was ratified by the former State Czechoslovakia on 7 January 1991, and succeeded to by Slovakia on 28 May 1993. Its relevant Articles read:
Article 3
Article 19
Article 34
On 25 October 2007 the Council of Europe, recognizing that the well-being and best interests of children are fundamental values shared by all member States, adopted the Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse urging the member States to adopt measures to protect children from any form of abuse and to put in place a system capable of punishing any such acts.
On 1 March 2016 the respondent State ratified that Convention which entered into force in respect of the Slovak Republic on 1 July 2016.