The case originated in an application (no. 38359/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Antun Džinić (“the applicant”), on 3 June 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. Štivić, a lawyer practising in Županja. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged that the seizure of his property in the context of criminal proceedings had not been proportionate in the circumstances of the case and that he had not had an effective procedure to challenge it, contrary to Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and Article 13 of the Convention.
On 8 November 2013 the complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1952. He is a businessman living in Županja.
On 11 August 2000 the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office (Županijsko državno odvjetništvo u Vukovaru) asked an investigating judge of the Vukovar County Court (Županijski sud u Vukovaru) to open an investigation in respect of the applicant, in his capacity of the director of company M., in connection with suspicion of several charges of economic crime. It also requested that several items of the applicant’s real property be restrained so as to secure effective enforcement of a probable confiscation order in the amount of 3,573,747.24 Croatian kunas (HRK) (approximately 469,475 Euros (EUR)).
The investigation was opened on 21 August 2000, and on 6 March 2001 the investigating judge declared the request for seizure of the applicant’s property inadmissible on the ground that under the Code of Criminal Procedure applicable at the time the State Attorney’s Office had not been authorised to make such a request.
After the completion of the investigation, on 10 May 2002 the applicant was indicted, together with three other persons, in the Vukovar County Court on several charges of economic crime, concerning in particular misappropriation of company shares, and misuse of the company M.’s assets and facilities.
On 28 May 2007 the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office amended the indictment, dropping the charges on six counts against the applicant and charging him on one count of misappropriation of company shares, and several counts of misuse of the company M.’s assets and facilities. The total value of the pecuniary gain which the applicant had allegedly obtained by the commission of these offences was set out at approximately EUR 1,060,000.
On the basis of the amended indictment, on 8 April 2008 the Vukovar County Court found the applicant guilty of charges of misappropriation of company shares and acquitted him of all other charges. The applicant was sentenced to three years and six months’ imprisonment and confiscation of the pecuniary gain in the amount of HRK 6,169,977.35 (approximately EUR 850,000) allegedly obtained by the commission of the offence of which he was found guilty.
Upon appeal by the applicant and the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office against this judgment, on 18 October 2011 the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) quashed it and ordered a retrial.
In the resumed proceedings, and after the 2010 Confiscation of the Proceeds of Crime Act (see paragraph 36 below) had entered into force, on 27 June 2012 the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office requested the Vukovar County Court that several items of the applicant’s real property be seized (ten plots of land, two houses and a commercial building) so as to secure effective enforcement of a probable confiscation order in the amount of approximately EUR 1,060,000.
In support of its request the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office submitted records from the land registry attesting to the applicant’s ownership of the real properties in respect of which the request for a seizure order was made. It did not submit an assessment of the value of the property nor did it make any reference to its possible value. However, according to the information submitted by the Government, the assessment of the value of several items of the real property, which were the subject matter of the proceedings, had been made on the basis of the material available from the investigation case file and their estimated value at the moment of purchase in 1997 (in total estimated at approximately EUR 440,000), whereas the assessment of the value of the remainder of the real property had been made by the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office with regard to the information available in the land registry, although the records in the land registry did not contain information on the value of the property itself.
On 27 June 2012 a single judge of the Vukovar County Court ordered seizure of the applicant’s real property listed in the request of the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office so as to secure effective enforcement of a possible confiscation order in the amount of approximately EUR 1,060,000. No reasoning was provided with regard to the proportionality of the alleged pecuniary gain obtained and the value of the restrained real property.
On the basis of an order of the Vukovar County Court, the seizure of the applicant’s real property was registered in the land registry.
The applicant challenged the decision of the Vukovar County Court before the Supreme Court and on 5 September 2012 the Supreme Court quashed it and remitted the matter for re-examination on the grounds that the decision on seizure of the real property was not within the competence of a single judge but a panel of three judges.
On 17 October 2012 the applicant requested the Vukovar County Court that the quashed seizure order be removed from the land registry. He contended that he had taken a bank loan which was secured by a mortgage on his real property and that the loan would not be extended due to the seizure of his property, which could lead to his total bankruptcy and destruction of his business. In support of his request, the applicant submitted email correspondence with the bank asking him to clarify when the seizure order would be lifted, as it affected the management of his loan.
On 18 October 2012 the applicant’s representative received a summons by the Vukovar County Court to appear before a three-judge panel of that court on 30 October 2012, without specifying the exact reason for the summons. It was also indicated that the court session could be held in the absence of the defence.
On 30 October 2012 a three-judge panel of the Vukovar County Court examined the request of the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office for the seizure of the applicant’s real property. On the same day it accepted the request in full and ordered restraint of the applicant’s real property listed in the request of the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office (see paragraph 12 above) by prohibiting its alienation or encumbrance. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“The records from the land registry ... show that the accused Antun Džinić is the owner of the above listed items of real property.
Under section 11 § 1(A) in conjunction with section 31 § 2 of the Confiscation of the Proceeds of Crime Act (Official Gazette no. 145/2010), and also in view of section 12 of the Confiscation of the Proceeds of Crime Act, this panel finds that it is presumed that there is a danger that the claim of the Republic of Croatia with regard to confiscation of the proceeds of crime would not be enforceable or that its enforcement would be difficult without ordering of a restraint measure.
Under Article 82 of the Criminal Code no one can retain the proceeds of crime.
By the indictment of the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office ... the accused Antun Džinić is charged, under count 4 (a), (b) and (c), of having procured for himself a pecuniary gain in the amount of HRK 1,800,857.74.
...
[T]he proceedings at issue concern ... the confiscation of the proceeds of crime under section 11 § 1(A) in conjunction with section 31 § 2 of the Confiscation of the Proceeds of Crime Act. In view of the above, it is ordered to the land registry of the Županja Municipal Court to register the restraint of the listed property in the land registry.”
The restraint of the applicant’s real property was registered in the land registry on the basis of an order of the Vukovar County Court.
On 12 November 2012 the applicant lodged an appeal before the Supreme Court challenging the decision of the Vukovar County Court ordering the seizure of his property. He contended in particular that the value of the restrained property was according to his provisional estimate more than HRK 20,000,000 (approximately EUR 2,600,000), which significantly surpassed the pecuniary gain allegedly obtained by the commission of the offences which were the subject matter of the proceedings. He also stressed that it was reasonably expected from the Vukovar County Court to conduct at least a general assessment of the value of the property restrained and the pecuniary gain allegedly obtained by the commission of the offences in question. The applicant therefore submitted that by failing to make any such assessment, the Vukovar County Court had imposed an excessive individual burden on his property rights.
The Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on 27 December 2012. With regard to the applicant’s specific complaint concerning the lack of proportionality of the measure imposed, the Supreme Court noted:
“The Supreme Court finds that the principle of proportionality has not been breached since Antun Džinić is charged with having obtained a pecuniary gain in the amount of HRK 1,800,857.74, and the value of the restrained property does not justify [his] argument that the value of the restrained property listed in the operative part of the impugned decision significantly surpasses the [possible confiscation] claim.”
On 18 February 2013 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint before the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) challenging the decisions of the lower courts on the seizure of his property. He relied on the Convention and the Court’s case-law, contending that the decision on the seizure of his property had been disproportionate.
On 20 February 2013 the applicant requested the Vukovar County Court that the seizure order be lifted or reassessed. He argued that there were other less restrictive means of securing the enforcement of a possible confiscation order, and contended that it had not been alleged that the seized property had been obtained by a criminal activity. He also urged the Vukovar County Court to make an assessment of the value of the seized property so as to limit the scope of the restraint to the value of the pecuniary gain allegedly obtained. He also contended that the value of the seized property significantly surpassed the alleged pecuniary gain obtained, which had endangered the normal functioning of his business.
On 25 April 2013 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint of 18 February 2013 (see paragraph 23 above) inadmissible on the ground that the decisions of the lower courts did not concern a decision on the merits of any of the applicant’s rights or obligations or any criminal charge against him.
On 9 July 2013 a three-judge panel of the Vukovar County Court dismissed the applicant’s request that the seizure order be lifted or reassessed (see paragraph 24 above). The relevant part of the decision reads:
“The request for the lifting of the restraint and the request for its modification are unfounded.
It follows from the final indictment of the Vukovar County State Attorney’s Office ... that there is a reasonable suspicion that the accused Antun Džinić, by the offences listed in count 4 (a), (b) and (c) [of the indictment], obtained pecuniary gain in the total amount of HRK 1,800,857.
Since the [seizure order] is based, under section 12 § 1 of the Confiscation of the Proceeds of Crime Act, on the presumption that there is a danger that the confiscation of the proceeds from crime would not be enforceable or that its enforcement would be difficult without ordering of a restraint measure, it was decided as noted in the operative part of this decision.”
On 12 July 2013 the applicant challenged this decision by lodging an appeal before the Supreme Court. He complained that he had not had an effective opportunity to challenge the seizure order in a hearing before the Vukovar County Court and that the seizure of his property had been disproportionate and thus contrary to Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. The applicant further stressed that it was unclear for which amount of the alleged pecuniary gain the seizure order had been made given that the Vukovar County Court had only referred to one count of the indictment, alleging that he had obtained pecuniary gain in the amount of HRK 1,800,857, whereas it had ignored the other count of the indictment according to which he had obtained a pecuniary gain in the amount of HRK 6,169,977.35. The applicant, therefore, assuming that the overall amount of the pecuniary gain for which the seizure order had been made corresponded to the sum of the two amounts noted (approximately EUR 1,060,000), submitted a detailed estimate value of each item of the restrained property based on the information from a publicly available Internet portal on the market values of real properties in Croatia. According to this estimate, the total value of the seized property corresponded to some EUR 9,887,084. The applicant thus contended that there was a gross disproportionality between the alleged pecuniary gain obtained by the commission of the offences referred to in the indictment and the value of the seized property, which imposed on him an excessive individual burden.
On 17 October 2013 the Supreme Court, acting as the appeal court, dismissed the applicant’s appeal by noting the following:
“The same complaints had been made against the decision of 30 October 2012 ... and then it was answered to the appellant that the principle of proportionality had not been breached ... By a speculative assessment of the value of the real properties listed in the appeal, the appellant did not manage to put into doubt the findings of the first-instance court.
The appellant’s argument that it is not clear from the impugned decision which amount of the pecuniary gain he has allegedly obtained is unfounded.
The first-instance court stated in the impugned decision that the accused had obtained a pecuniary gain in the amount of HRK 1,800,857, as referred to in count 4 of the indictment, but it failed to cite the amount referred to in count 1 of the indictment of HRK 6,169,977.35, which is as such, in view of the status of the case, uncontested. There is therefore no doubt that the [seizure order] was made in respect of the overall amount of the possible pecuniary gain, as it was explained in the first decision by which the measure was ordered.”
The applicant challenged this decision before the Constitutional Court and on 7 February 2014 the Constitutional Court declared it inadmissible, reiterating its previous reasoning (see paragraph 25 above).
At a closing hearing in the criminal proceedings before the Vukovar County Court on 8 July 2014, the applicant again requested that the seizure order be lifted.
On 11 July 2014 the Vukovar County Court found the applicant guilty on the charges of misuse of the company M.’s assets and facilities by which he had allegedly obtained a pecuniary gain in the amount of HRK 1,800,857.74 (approximately EUR 240,000), and acquitted him on charges of misappropriation of company shares and one alleged event of misuse of the company M.’s assets and facilities. The applicant was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment and confiscation of the amount of HRK 1,800,857.74. The case is pending on appeal before the Supreme Court.
On the same day the Vukovar County Court dismissed the applicant’s request for lifting of the seizure order made at the hearing on 8 July 2014 (see paragraph 30 above) as ill-founded on the ground that the seizure of the property could be maintained for sixty days following the relevant procedures related to the finality of the judgment. As the judgment had not become final, the Vukovar County Court considered that there was no ground for lifting of the seizure order.
The relevant provision of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010 and 5/2014) reads as follows:
“The right of ownership shall be guaranteed ...“
The relevant provision of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 50/2000, 129/2000, 51/2001, 111/2003, 190/2003, 105/2004, 84/2005, 71/2006, 110/2007 and 152/2008), provided:
“(1)  No one can retain the proceeds of crime. The proceeds [of crime] shall be confiscated by a court decision finding that a criminal offence has been committed.
...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002 and 62/2003) provided:
“...
(2) Three-judge panels of the county courts shall be competent to hear cases as the second-instance courts and shall adopt [other] decisions out of the main hearing.”
The relevant parts of the Confiscation of the Proceeds of Crime Act (Zakon o postupku oduzimanja imovinske koristi ostvarene kaznenim djelom i prekršajem, Official Gazette no. 145/2010), which entered into force on 1 January 2011, provide:
“...
(2) Other legal provisions concerning identification, restraint and enforcement of orders of confiscation of the proceeds of criminal or minor offences shall be applicable in so far as this Act does not provide otherwise.”
“The terms used in this Act shall have the following meaning:
...
prosecutor is the competent State Attorney ...
...
claimant... is the prosecutor, ...”
“(1) In order to secure the possibility of confiscation of the proceeds of crime, the claimant is authorised, before or after the institution of the criminal proceedings ..., to request any restraint measure capable of achieving that aim, and in particular:
a) prohibition of alienation or encumbrance of real property ... with the registration of this prohibition in the land registry ...”
“(1) In the proceedings concerning the restraint measure under this Act it shall be presumed that there is a danger that the claim of the Republic of Croatia with regard to confiscation of the proceeds of crime would not be enforceable or that its enforcement would be difficult without ordering of a restraint measure.
(2) The restraint may be ordered before the respondent had a possibility of replying to the request made by the claimant.”
“...
(2) The restraint measure can be lifted or replaced by another measure before the expiry of the time-limit for which it was ordered ... if the court, based on a request of the respondent, finds that [the restraint] is no longer necessary or that [the same aim] can be achieved by another restraint measure, and if the respondent or a third party provides a surety deposit. The surety deposit will be always given in cash and exceptionally by providing objects or rights which can be, according to the assessment of the court, swiftly remunerated.”
“(1) The restraint may be ordered for a period of a maximum of sixty days after the court informs the claimant that the judgment ... has become final.
...”
“(1) The Republic of Croatia shall be responsible for damage related to the application of the restraint measure securing the confiscation of the proceeds of crime.
...
(3) The respondent may institute civil proceedings for damage before the competent court within one year following the finality of the judgment by which the accused was acquitted or charges were dismissed ... In the case under paragraph 1 of this section the respondent may institute civil proceedings within the thirty-day time-limit after he or she has learned that the State Attorney’s Office has declined his or her request for friendly settlement ...”
In its decisions nos. Kž-290/2012-3 and Kž-289/2012-3 of 5 June 2012, the Supreme Court held that, upon a request by the accused for the application of a less severe measure securing the enforcement of a possible confiscation order, the competent court was required to examine whether such a possibility existed. It also stressed that the surety deposit, under section 15 § 2 of the Confiscation of the Proceeds of Crime Act, could not be imposed cumulatively with the restraint measure.
The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (A/RES/55/25) in its relevant part provides:
“For the purposes of this Convention:
...
(d) “Property” shall mean assets of every kind, whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, and legal documents or instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such assets;
(e) “Proceeds of crime” shall mean any property derived from or obtained, directly or indirectly, through the commission of an offence;
(f) “Freezing” or “seizure” shall mean temporarily prohibiting the transfer, conversion, disposition or movement of property or temporarily assuming custody or control of property on the basis of an order issued by a court or other competent authority;
(g) “Confiscation”, which includes forfeiture where applicable, shall mean the permanent deprivation of property by order of a court or other competent authority; ...”
“1. States Parties shall adopt, to the greatest extent possible within their domestic legal systems, such measures as may be necessary to enable confiscation of:
(a) Proceeds of crime derived from offences covered by this Convention or property the value of which corresponds to that of such proceeds; ...”
The relevant part of the United Nations Convention against Corruption (A/58/422) reads:
“1. Each State Party shall take, to the greatest extent possible within its domestic legal system, such measures as may be necessary to enable confiscation of:
(a) Proceeds of crime derived from offences established in accordance with this Convention or property the value of which corresponds to that of such proceeds; ...”
The relevant provisions of the Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime (CETS No. 141) provide:
“Each Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to enable it to confiscate instrumentalities and proceeds or property the value of which corresponds to such proceeds.
Each Party may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, declare that paragraph 1 of this article applies only to offences or categories of offences specified in such declaration. “
“Each Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to enable it to identify and trace property which is liable to confiscation pursuant to Article 2, paragraph 1, and to prevent any dealing in, transfer or disposal of such property.”
The Directive 2014/42/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 April 2014 on the freezing and confiscation of instrumentalities and proceeds of crime in the European Union in its relevant part provides:
“1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to enable the freezing of property with a view to possible subsequent confiscation. Those measures, which shall be ordered by a competent authority, shall include urgent action to be taken when necessary in order to preserve property.
...”
“1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the persons affected by the measures provided for under this Directive have the right to an effective remedy and a fair trial in order to uphold their rights.
Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the freezing order is communicated to the affected person as soon as possible after its execution. Such communication shall indicate, at least briefly, the reason or reasons for the order concerned. When it is necessary to avoid jeopardising a criminal investigation, the competent authorities may postpone communicating the freezing order to the affected person.
The freezing order shall remain in force only for as long as it is necessary to preserve the property with a view to possible subsequent confiscation.
Member States shall provide for the effective possibility for the person whose property is affected to challenge the freezing order before a court, in accordance with procedures provided for in national law. Such procedures may provide that when the initial freezing order has been taken by a competent authority other than a judicial authority, such order shall first be submitted for validation or review to a judicial authority before it can be challenged before a court.
Frozen property which is not subsequently confiscated shall be returned immediately. The conditions or procedural rules under which such property is returned shall be determined by national law.
Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that reasons are given for any confiscation order and that the order is communicated to the person affected. Member States shall provide for the effective possibility for a person in respect of whom confiscation is ordered to challenge the order before a court.
...
In proceedings referred to in Article 5, the affected person shall have an effective possibility to challenge the circumstances of the case, including specific facts and available evidence on the basis of which the property concerned is considered to be property that is derived from criminal conduct.
...”