The case originated in two applications (nos. 4762/18 and 6140/18) against the Hellenic Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Greek nationals (“the applicants”), whose name appear in the annexed list, on 5 and 8 January 2018 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr V. Sotiropoulos, a lawyer practising in Athens. The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent’s delegates, Mr K. Georghiadis, Senior Advisor to the State Legal Council, and Mrs A. Magrippi, Legal Assistant at the State Legal Council.
The applicants alleged violations of Articles 8, 9 and 14 of the Convention and of Article 2 of Protocol No. 1.
On 26 March 2018 notice of the applications was given to the Government.
On 31 May and 14 June 2018, under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court, the Vice-President of the Section granted the National Secular Society, the Greek Helsinki Monitor and the Grassrootsmobilise Research Programme based at ELIAMEP leave to intervene as third parties in the proceedings.
The first two applicants in application no. 4762/18 are the parents of the third applicant, a school student who at the time of the application (during the school year 2017/18) was in the third and final grade of the General High School on the small island of Milos. The first applicant in application no. 6140/18 is the mother of the second applicant, a school student who at the time of the application was in the fourth grade of the only primary school on the small island of Sifnos.
The first two applicants in application no. 4762/18 and the first applicant in application no. 6140/18 never submitted, on behalf of their respective children, any application for exemption, either for the school year 2017/18 or for any of the previous school years, from the religious education course to be taught at each grade. Furthermore, they never took any legal action, by filing an application for annulment with the Supreme Administrative Court, against the circular of the Ministry of Education, Research and Religious Affairs dated 23 January 2015, which sets out the procedure for exemption from the religious education course.
However, in relation to two further decisions of the Minister of Education, Research and Religious Affairs, entitled “General and vocational high school religious education programme”, dated 13 June 2017, and “Primary and middle school religious education programme”, dated 16 June 2017, the applicants in both applications filed an application with the Supreme Administrative Court for annulment on 12 July 2017 – about two months before the start of the school year 2017/18 and during the courts’ summer recess between 1 July and 15 September. They challenged these decisions on the grounds that they did not provide for an objective, critical and pluralist religious education course that would not need the exemption procedure since it would involve all students, not because of a legal obligation, but because it would not harm their religious beliefs.
In their applications, the applicants also extensively argued that the procedure for exemption from the religious education course, as established by the above-mentioned circular, was contrary to Articles 8, 9 and 14 of the Convention.
On 12 and 24 July 2017 the applicants asked to have their cases examined by the Holidays Section under the urgent procedure, in accordance with Article 11 of Presidential Decree no. 18/1986, before the start of the new school year 2017/18 on 11 September 2017. However, the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the requests for lack of importance.
The application for annulment was scheduled to be heard before the Third Section on 12 October 2017. The hearing was adjourned several times and rescheduled to take place on 9 November 2017, 14 December 2017, 8 February 2018, 22 March 2018, 19 April 2018, 4 May 2018, 1 June 2018 and 21 September 2018.
The Government submitted that the Third Section had adjourned the hearing because it had anticipated the issuance of judgments by the Plenary on two applications for the annulment of two ministerial decisions regarding the primary, middle and high school religious education programme which had become effective as from the school year 2016/17. The applicants contended that in the decisions postponing the hearing, the Third Section had not mentioned the reason alleged by the Government and could not have done so since the other cases had involved other parties and concerned the curriculum for the school year 2016/17.
The Supreme Administrative Court, sitting in plenary, published judgments no. 660/2018 (concerning the primary and middle school religious education programme for the school year 2016/17) and no. 926/2018 (concerning the high school religious education programme for the school year 2016/17) in the above-mentioned cases on 20 March 2018, following an appeal led by the Greek Orthodox metropolitan bishop of Pireus, who had challenged the implementation of the reform of religious education classes proposed in the programme. The Plenary held that the ministerial decisions were contrary to Article 4 § 1, Article 13 § 1 and Article 16 § 2 of the Constitution, Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, and Article 14 taken in conjunction with Article 9 of the Convention, as they deprived students abiding by the Orthodox Christian dogma of the right to be exclusively taught the dogmas, moral values and traditions of the Eastern Orthodox Church.
Following publication of the above-mentioned judgments, the applicants’ application for annulment was struck off the list of the Third Section of the Supreme Administrative Court and brought for a hearing before its Grand Chamber on 4 May 2018. The application was subsequently adjourned anew and scheduled to be heard on 21 September 2018 before the Plenary due to its importance, so that it could be heard jointly with another two applications for annulment lodged by other individuals against the same ministerial decisions as those challenged by the applicants. The other applications, brought by parents of students, a theology teacher, a diocese, a metropolitan bishop and an association, requested the annulment of the same ministerial decisions and syllabuses, but on grounds that were diametrically opposed to those relied on by the applicants. In these applications, the applicants, identifying their religious affiliation as Orthodox Christian, complained, inter alia, that the disputed new religious education programme for the school year 2017/18 sought to “transform the course from an Orthodox confessional one into a ‘religiology’ course (θρησκειολογικό)”, in breach of Articles 4 and 13 of the Constitution and the applicable relevant legislation.
The Church of Greece intervened before the Supreme Administrative Court. In their intervention, the Church of Greece stated that their representatives had visited the official State committee six times during the drafting of the new religious education course. They also stated that they wanted the course to be of a confessional nature, as ruled by the Supreme Administrative Court in its judgment no. 660/2018.
The relevant Articles of the Constitution read as follows:
Article 3 § 1
“The dominant religion in Greece is that of the Eastern Orthodox Church ....”
Article 4 § 1
“All Greeks are equal before the law.”
Article 13 § 1
“Freedom of conscience in religious matters is inviolable. The enjoyment of personal and political rights shall not depend on an individual’s religious beliefs.
...”
Article 16 § 2
“Education constitutes a basic mission for the State and shall aim at the moral, intellectual, professional and physical training of Greeks, the development of national and religious conscience and at their formation as free and responsible citizens.”
The current Law on Education (Law no. 1566/1985 – “the Education Act”) states that the course entitled “Orthodox Christian Instruction” is mandatory for all schoolchildren throughout primary and secondary education and includes the objective that students should be helped:
“[to] develop into free, responsible, democratic citizens ... in whom is instilled faith in their homeland and the genuine elements of Orthodox Christian tradition. Freedom of their religious conscience is inviolable.”
Section 22 of Law no. 344/1976 on civil status reads as follows:
“1. A birth certificate ... shall contain:
...
	b. the place, time, day, month and year of birth.
	c. the sex of the infant and his or her birth order.
	...
	e. the name, surname, nationality, religion, occupation, residence and registration details in the parents’ register ...”
Parents must provide a copy of their child’s birth certificate to the school. “Religion” as a subject is compulsory in primary, middle and high school, as well as in certificates of studies, under the relevant ministerial decisions.
The relevant sections of Law no. 1599/1986 on relations between the State and its citizens provide as follows:
Section 8  Solemn Declaration (Υπεύθυνη δήλωση)
“1. Facts or elements not evidenced by an identity card or the corresponding documents referred to in section 6 may be brought before any public authority or department with a solemn declaration ...
...
Public sector services which are subject to a solemn declaration can check their accuracy by verifying them against the records of other services.”
Section 22(6)  False Solemn Declaration
“Any person knowingly declaring false facts or denying or concealing the truth with a written statement under section 8 shall be punished by imprisonment of at least three months ...”
Article 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure reads as follows:
“1. Investigating officials shall promptly inform the competent public prosecutor of any information that they have received in any way whatsoever of an offence [subject to public prosecution].
Other civil servants, as well those to whom the exercise of a public service has been assigned temporarily, are under the same obligation for the offences referred to in paragraph 1 if they have been informed of them in the exercise of their duties.”
Section 105 of the Introductory Law to the Civil Code reads as follows:
“The State shall be under a duty to make good any damage caused by the unlawful acts or omissions of its organs in the exercise of public authority, except where the unlawful act or omission is in breach of an existing provision but is intended to serve the public interest. The person responsible and the State shall be jointly and severally liable, without prejudice to the special provisions on ministerial responsibility.”
The “New School” programme was introduced in 2011 by the Minister of Education and Religious Affairs and brought about a series of reforms to the curriculum. In particular, in relation to religion, it sought to introduce a more open and pluralistic approach to its teaching, to reflect the increased religious diversity in Greece following mass immigration into the country. Due to political and social tension over the potential change to religious education classes, the “New School” programme was not formally implemented until the 2017/18 school year. In religious education, the programme included studying the Christian traditions of Europe as well as Judaism, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism, with a special focus on Judaism and Islam.
The sole Article of ministerial decision no. 99058 entitled “General and vocational high school religious education programme” sets out the objectives, teaching hours and methods of teaching of the religious education course as follows:
“1. General objectives of high school religious education
The design of the new high school religious education programme takes into account:
- The general and specific objectives of education, in line with the existing legal framework, which is based on the Greek Constitution and the basic laws on education. ...
- The scientific recommendations of modern religious teaching, combined with new theories of learning and teaching methodology.
- The pedagogical characteristics of teenage students ...
- ...
- The educational orientation and contents of the new primary and middle school religious education programme.
- The prevailing local religious tradition as a fundamental pillar of students’ religious literacy and its wider religious and cultural framework.
- The complexity of the contemporary social and cultural fabric, as formed at local, European and global level, and the specific learning and educational needs arising therefrom.
Therefore, the objectives of high school religious education are:
(a) to develop personal identity, with inputs from religiousness and its critical understanding, whether one is religiously affiliated or not. The perception of self-image and the role of the self in relation to others are important in adolescence and determine adulthood. Personal identity and the emergence of personality depend on “religious conscience”, which the school nurtures freely mainly through religious education. This brings into play the moral development and behaviour of the teenager, since religious education involves an acquaintance with the diverse and complex phenomenon of religion and discusses the moral and existential questions of teenage students ...
(b) to foster humanitarian and Hellenic education ...
(c) religious literacy ... Knowledge of the framework that generates and shapes the concepts, as well as of their cultural content, is the essence of religious literacy, which is part of multiculturalism in education ...
(d) critical religiousness, in the sense of development of holistic intelligence in the education process, in which mind and heart participate and which shapes humans with a “living desire” for justice and democracy. Since man is by nature a being that believes, religious education enables him to “believe well”.
(e) acquaintance and communication with the “other”. The student becomes familiar with the multicultural society he or she lives in, becomes aware of its religious elements, as well as the multiplicity of his/her personal identity and its developmental dynamics in its collective and social manifestations ...
(f) socialisation, not as passive adoption of the social system but as process of individualisation based on the relationship between personality development and social inclusion ...
(g) developing a learning community ... Religious education, through the pedagogical and teaching method as well as its theological content, has great potential to radically promote the creation and development of a community, which, as a concept, is related to the faith and tradition of the country ...”
The sole Article of ministerial decision no. 101470 entitled “Primary and middle school religious education programme” sets out the objectives, teaching hours and methods of teaching of the religious education course as follows:
“...
In particular, it is recognised that the religious [education] course needs to:
- provide knowledge and understanding of religious beliefs and experiences;
- gear students’ interest towards the variety of religious approaches and moral beliefs inherent in religious experiences; and
- encourage students to become sensitive to religion and religious aspects of life.
This approach, despite doing away with obsolete practices of confessional exceptionalism, does not give the religious education course a phenomenological cognitive orientation, or make it a formal religiological subject that does not meet the pedagogical characteristics, deeper questions and real interests of students ...
Ultimately, this view of the religious education course emphatically raises the question of religious literacy as a crucial aspect of religious education, which contributes to producing citizens with religious consciousness, open to dialogue and diversity. This religious literacy is based on the rules of pedagogical and scientific knowledge and aims at the critical development of students’ religious conscience through the knowledge, values and attitudes it provides about religions and faiths, applying an explorative, interpretative and interactive learning approach.
...
Organisation of the religious education course
The present proposal concerns a course that, while maintaining its traditional cognitive and pedagogical character, also opens up to the Christian traditions of Europe and other religions. By providing the orientations of this course, we are developing a programme that starts from, and focuses on, the country’s religious tradition, the tradition of the Orthodox Church, as embodied in the cultural monuments of the country. Every student, regardless of religious identity, needs to know the religion of their country of origin or domicile. This is the first and main orientation of the course. The second includes a basic acquaintance with the major Christian traditions in Europe and the world beyond Orthodoxy, such as Roman Catholicism and Protestantism with its main confessions. The third orientation includes elements from major religions beyond Christianity, especially those of most interest to Greek society, namely the monotheistic traditions of Judaism and Islam, as well as religions that occasionally present increased interest. Therefore, it is a broader, theologically documented course that examines in an explorative, critical and dialectical manner the contribution of each religious tradition to civilisation, aiming at promoting religious literacy and students’ awareness of, and speculation about, their own religious beliefs and how these are reflected in the dynamics of social relations. Certainly, it would not be possible for the Greek school not to have a strong focus on Orthodox theology and tradition, which through the religious education course is called on to go even beyond modernity, accepting pluralism and diversity, without however underrating, relativising or abandoning its self-consciousness ... In conclusion, the new programme promotes a religious education proposal that is pedagogically sensitive, has realistic learning objectives, and is flexible and multivalent, based on the applicable legislative framework and meeting modern social needs. It focuses on Orthodox tradition but differs from indoctrination, striking a fair balance between native tradition and otherness, while not turning religious education into a religiology course.
[The] general aims and orientations of the religious education course [are]:
to build a solid educational background in Christianity and Orthodoxy both as the cultural tradition of Greece and Europe and as a living source of inspiration, faith, morality and meaning ...
to provide students, regardless of religious affiliation, with satisfactory knowledge of the nature and the role of the phenomenon of religion, both as a whole and in its various manifestations ...
These general aims of the religious education course may be specified in the following educational orientations and objectives/priorities:
critically understanding the doctrinal, cultic, existential and cultural expressions of the Orthodox Church, other major Christian confessions, as well as other religions;
highlighting the universal values of both Christianity and the other religions of the world;
...
approaching religious faith in general and Christianity in particular through multiple criteria;
...
respecting everyone’s right to freedom of religion, quest [for religion] and religious self-determination;
recognising and respecting each student’s religious and cultural origins;
...”
Furthermore, two circulars of the Ministry of Education, Research and Religious Affairs, dated 9 and 20 October 2017 respectively, provided detailed teaching instructions concerning the religious education course in high schools and primary schools for the school year 2017/18.
The circular of the same Ministry dated 23 January 2015 sets out the procedure for exemption from the religious education course as follows:
“The religious education course is compulsory for all students (Article 16 § 2 of the Constitution). [It] is taught in primary and middle schools in accordance with the official syllabuses, pursues the general objectives of education and is addressed to all students. However, non-Orthodox Christian students, [that is to say] students with different religious or doctrinal affiliation or non-religious students, who rely on grounds of religious conscience, may be exempted from attending this course.
Therefore, exemption from the religious education course is legally granted solely to protect freedom of religious conscience, as enshrined in the Constitution and described in the relevant laws and judgments of the Greek and international courts.
Because there have been abuses of the right to exemption from the religious education course on grounds not associated with freedom of religious conscience, the attention of school principals is drawn to the need to verify the documentation [in support of] the grounds relied on by those seeking exemption, cautioning them about the seriousness of the solemn declaration they have filed, before granting the legal exemption to the student concerned, always within the prescribed time-limits.
It is necessary for the teacher to countersign the solemn declaration, so that he or she knows which students will be attending the religious education course.
Students exempted from the religious education course shall have no right to remain in the classroom during the teaching of the course and may under no circumstances roam inside or outside the school premises or be unjustifiably absent; they shall instead engage in the tasks indicated in this circular.
Exemption from the religious education course shall be granted following submission of a solemn declaration under Law 1599/1986 by the student him or herself, if he or she is [over the age of majority], or by both his or her parents (if he or she is a minor), stating that the student is not an Orthodox Christian and therefore relies on grounds of religious conscience, without being required to disclose their religious affiliation, unless they wish to do so.”
In February 2015 the Atheist Union, relying on the judgment in the case of Alexandridis v. Greece (no. 19516/06, 21 February 2008), requested the Hellenic Data Protection Authority’s intervention as regards the above circular to protect the rights of parents who, for reasons of conscience, wished their children to be granted an exemption. In August 2015 the Hellenic Data Protection Authority stated that since no religious or non-religious justification had to be provided in the exemption form, the current procedure did not violate Law no. 2472/1997 on the protection of the personal information of students.
On 25 September 2015 the then Alternate Minister of Education announced her intention to simplify the exemption process, adding that parents should be allowed to simply ask for their children not to attend religious education classes, with no reference – either positive or negative – to their religion. Following the reaction of the Archbishop of Greece, however, the Alternate Minister revoked her position. The above exemption procedure was maintained in force by Article 25 § 3 of a decision of the Minister of Education, Research and Religious Affairs dated 23 January 2018.
According to information provided by the Government, this right of exemption was exercised by 2,467 high school students and 799 primary school students during the school year 2015/16, 4,703 high school students and 978 primary school students during the school year 2016/17 and 2,859 high school students and 876 primary school students during the school year 2017/18.