The case originated in an application (no. 34098/11) against the Kingdom of Sweden lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Somali nationals, A.A. and his three children (“the applicants”), on 1 June 2011. The President of the Section acceded to the applicants’ request not to have their names disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were represented by Ms Maria Guzman, a lawyer practising in Askim. The Swedish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Hanna Kristiansson, of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the implementation of the deportation order to return them to Somaliland would be in violation of Article 3 of the Convention.
On 12 July 2011 the President of the Fifth Section decided to apply Rule 39, indicating to the Government that it was desirable in the interests of the parties and the proper conduct of the proceedings that the applicants should not be deported to Somalia until further notice.
On 8 November 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1964, 1990, 1994 and 1997 respectively and live in Gothenburg.
They entered Sweden on 1 June 2009, when they were respectively forty-five, nineteen, fifteen and twelve years old, and applied for asylum and residence permits the following day.
The first and second applicants were heard by the Migration Board (Migrationsverket) on 5 and 16 June and 26 August 2009. A language test was carried out by an analyst, who had been born and raised in Mogadishu and came to Sweden in 2003. After the initial interview, legal counsel was appointed to represent the applicants.
The first applicant submitted, among other things, that they were members of the Sheikal clan and that the family had lived together in a village called Hosingo in southern Somalia since 1999. The first applicant had a university degree from Saudi Arabia. On 16 June 2009, he explained to the Board that he had not visited Saudi Arabia since 1999. On 26 August 2009 he was confronted with the fact that his passport had been stamped on two occations, in 2000 and 2005 in Djibouti, situated northwest of Somalia, whereupon he explained that he had travelled via Djibouti to Saudi Arabia and that those trips must have been after 1999. Once he had visited his brother’s daughter in Saudi Arabia. He did not recall the other visit. There were also stamps in his passport up to 2005 from Lowyacado, Borama and Berbera, in Somaliland, but the first applicant maintained that he and his family had remained in Hosingo throughout that period.
Al Shabaab took over Hosingo when the Ethiopian army withdrew in the middle of 2008. On 5 June 2009, the first applicant explained to the Board that he had participated in a demonstration to protest against Al Shabaab taking over their village, and that therefore he was on their list of persons to kill. On 16 June 2009 he explained that the elders of the village decided that they would try to negotiate with Al Shabaab. The negotiation ended in disagreement and the spiritual leader of the village was killed immediately after the meeting by two masked men. The first applicant was listed as a person to be killed and shortly thereafter two armed and masked men came to his house and asked for him. On 26 August 2009 he explained that the leader of the village had been killed six days after the meeting with Al Shabaab. The applicants would not be able to move elsewhere in Somalia since their clan was not domiciled anywhere else in the country and Al Shabaab was present everywhere.
The second applicant stated initially that her mother and husband remained in Hosingo. Later she explained that her husband had left the village. She did not know where he was. She still had six siblings left in Hosingo, plus some uncles and cousins. In 2006 the family had problems with Al Shabaab, which burned down their house. The second applicant had burn scars on her upper body from that incident. In 2008 one of the village leaders was killed and her father and husband had to flee. She was afraid of being raped by Al Shabaab upon return.
On 11 September 2009 the Migration Board rejected the applicants’ request for asylum. It noted at the outset that it was difficult for Somali citizens to prove their identity since there was no authority that could issue passports or other acceptable identity documents. Accordingly, the applicants’ stories were decisive for determining their origin. The Board found that the first applicant had provided detailed information about Hosingo village, situated in southern Somalia. However, his pronunciation of some words was typical of that in northern Somalia. In addition he had stamps in his passport, dated 2000 to 2005, from airports in Somaliland. There were no entry or departure stamps from trips to or from southern Somalia. Finally, he had provided contradictory statements about the crucial event in 2008, notably whether the leader was killed immediately or six days after the negotiation with Al Shabaab, and why he was being sought by them, and he had been vague about the situation in south and central Somalia. The language analysis of the second applicant indicated that she originated from Somaliland. Moreover, she had not been able to give any detailed information about the village or her clan, which could be verified. In conclusion, the Migration Board did not find it credible that the applicants had been living in Hosingo until their departure from Somalia. It found it much more likely that the applicants’ most recent home had been in northern Somalia.
The applicants appealed against the decision to the Migration Court (Migrationsdomstolen), before which an oral hearing was held on 12 May 2010. The Migration Court refused to hear two witnesses on the applicants’ behalf, who allegedly could have certified that they were from Hosingo. However, their written testimony was allowed.
By a judgment of 2 June 2010 the Migration Court upheld the Migration Board’s decision. The Migration Court did not question that the first applicant originated from Hosingo in southern Somalia. Like the Migration Board, however, it found that the language analysis of the first and the second applicants, and their various explanations, did not support their contention that they had had their latest domicile in southern Somalia or that they should be considered refugees or otherwise in need of protection.
On 3 September 2010 the Migration Court of Appeal (Migrationsöverdomstolen) refused leave to appeal. Hence the deportation order became enforceable.
In autumn 2010 the applicants claimed that there were impediments to the enforcement of their deportation orders. On 19 October 2010 the Migration Board decided not to reconsider the case, finding that the applicants had failed to present new circumstances which could justify reconsideration of the case.
At the beginning of 2011, the applicants again requested a reexamination of their cases, which was refused by the Migration Board on 31 March 2011. The applicants appealed against this decision to the Migration Court, which rejected the appeal on 6 May 2011.
On 16 January 2012 the third applicant claimed that there were impediments to the enforcement of his deportation order. On 9 February 2012 the Migration Board decided not to reconsider the case, finding that no new circumstances justifying reconsideration had been presented.
Likewise, in March 2012 the first and the fourth applicants claimed that there were impediments to the enforcement of the deportation orders against them, claims which were rejected by the Migration Board on 29 March 2012.
The basic provisions applicable in the present case, concerning the right of aliens to enter and to remain in Sweden, are laid down in the 2005 Aliens Act (Utlänningslagen, 2005:716 – hereafter referred to as “the 2005 Act”).
An alien who is considered to be a refugee or otherwise in need of protection is, with certain exceptions, entitled to a residence permit in Sweden (Chapter 5, section 1 of the 2005 Act). The term “refugee” refers to an alien who is outside the country of his or her nationality owing to a wellfounded fear of being persecuted on grounds of race, nationality, religious or political beliefs, or on grounds of gender, sexual orientation or other membership of a particular social group and who is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country (Chapter 4, section 1). This applies irrespective of whether the persecution is at the hands of the authorities of the country or if those authorities cannot be expected to offer protection against persecution by private individuals. By “an alien otherwise in need of protection” is meant, inter alia, a person who has left the country of his or her nationality because of a well-founded fear of being sentenced to death or receiving corporal punishment, or of being subjected to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Chapter 4, section 2).
Moreover, if a residence permit cannot be granted on the above grounds, such a permit may be issued to an alien if, after an overall assessment of his or her situation, there are such particularly distressing circumstances (synnerligen ömmande omständigheter) to allow him or her to remain in Sweden (Chapter 5, section 6). Special consideration should be given, inter alia, to the alien’s health status. According to the preparatory works (Government Bill 2004/05:170, pp. 190-191), life-threatening physical or mental illness for which no treatment can be given in the alien’s home country could constitute a reason for the grant of a residence permit.
As regards the enforcement of a deportation or expulsion order, account has to be taken of the risk of capital punishment or torture and other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. According to a special provision on impediments to enforcement, an alien must not be sent to a country where there are reasonable grounds for believing that he or she would be in danger of suffering capital or corporal punishment or of being subjected to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Chapter 12, section 1). In addition, an alien must not, in principle, be sent to a country where he or she risks persecution (Chapter 12, section 2).
Under certain conditions, an alien may be granted a residence permit even if a deportation or expulsion order has gained legal force. This is the case where new circumstances have emerged which indicate that there are reasonable grounds for believing, inter alia, that enforcement would put the alien in danger of being subjected to capital or corporal punishment, torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or there are medical or other special reasons why the order should not be enforced (Chapter 12, section 18). If a residence permit cannot be granted under these criteria, the Migration Board may instead decide to re-examine the matter. Such a reexamination shall be carried out where it may be assumed, on the basis of new circumstances invoked by the alien, that there are lasting impediments to enforcement of the nature referred to in Chapter 12, sections 1 and 2, and these circumstances could not have been invoked previously or the alien shows that he or she has a valid excuse for not having done so. Should the applicable conditions not have been met, the Migration Board shall decide not to grant a re-examination (Chapter 12, section 19).
Under the 2005 Act, matters concerning the right of aliens to enter and remain in Sweden are dealt with by three instances: the Migration Board, the Migration Court and the Migration Court of Appeal.
Extensive information about Somalia can be found in Sufi and Elmi v. the United Kingdom, nos. 8319/07 and 11449/07, §§ 37-195, 28 June 2011, and in K.A.B. v. Sweden, no. 886/11, §§ 28 to 49. The information set out below concerns events and developments occurring after the delivery of the latter judgment on 5 September 2013.
The most recent UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Somalia (“the Eligibility Guidelines”) were published on 17 January 2014 (see ). In that connection, in a press release of 28 January 2014, UNHCR stated the following:
“As a result of the ongoing fighting and human rights abuses, thousands of civilians continue to be displaced both within and outside of Somalia. More than 57,800 people were newly displaced in Southern and Central Somalia between January and September 2013. As of 1 October 2013, the number of internally displaced people (IDPs) in this part of Somalia was estimated at 893,000, out of a total of 1.1 million IDPs countrywide.
UNHCR is appealing to all states to uphold their international obligations with regard to no forced returns, or non-refoulement. Somali nationals should not be forcibly returned to Somalia unless the returning state is convinced that the persons involved would not be at risk of persecution.
UNHCR’s new guidelines on the international protection needs of people fleeing Southern and Central Somalia include a number of risk profiles. Applications by Somali asylum seekers with such profiles require especially careful examination.
We consider the options for Somalis to find protection from persecution or serious harm within Southern and Central Somalia to be limited. This is especially true for large areas that remain under the control of Al-Shabaab and its allies. At the same time, in Mogadishu protection to people at risk of persecution at the hands of AlShabaab is also generally not available.”
More concretely, under the heading: III. Assessment of International Protection Needs of Asylum-seekers from Mogadishu and other areas of Southern and Central Somalia, the guidelines stated:
“Where applications for international protection of asylum-seekers who have fled Southern and Central Somalia are considered on an individual basis, they should be assessed carefully in accordance with established asylum or refugee status determination procedures. The evidence presented by the applicant must be taken into account, as well as reliable current information about the situation in Mogadishu and other areas of Southern and Central Somalia. UNHCR considers that persons with any of the profiles below, or a combination thereof, may be in need of international protection in the sense of the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (“1951 Convention”). Where relevant, particular consideration needs to be given to any past persecution to which applicants for refugee status may have been subjected. In light of the history of violent conflict and human rights abuses in Somalia, the applicability of the exclusion clauses may need to be considered in certain cases. The profiles listed here are not necessarily exhaustive; they are based on information available to UNHCR at the time of writing. Hence, a claim should not automatically be considered as without merit simply because it does not fall within any of the profiles identified here. In the forthcoming eligibility guidelines these profiles will be further updated as needed and analyzed in detail.
Potential Risk Profiles:
Individuals associated with, or (perceived as) supportive of the SFG and the international community, including the AMISOM forces;
Individuals (perceived as) contravening Islamic Sharia and decrees imposed by Al-Shabaab, including converts from Islam, other “apostates” and moderate Islamic scholars who have criticized Al-Shabaab extremism;
Individuals (perceived as) opposing the SFG and related interests and individuals (suspected of) supporting armed anti-Government groups;
Individuals in certain professions such as journalists, members of the judiciary, humanitarian workers and human rights activists, teachers and staff of educational facilities, business people and other people (perceived to be) of means;
Individuals (at risk of being) forcibly recruited;
Members of minority groups such as members of the Christian religious minority and members of minority clans;
Individuals belonging to a clan engaged in a blood feud;
Women and girls;
Children;
Victims and persons at risk of trafficking;
Sexual and/or gender non-conforming persons (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) individuals);
Persons with a mental disability or suffering from mental illness.”
On 9 April 2014, the UK Home Office issued a country information and guidance report on Somalia which under the heading: Module 1. Security and humanitarian situation in south and central Somalia, included the following:
 “Introduction
At present it is only possible to remove nationals of Somalia to Mogadishu; or in some cases to Puntland or Somaliland for those formerly resident or having clan connections in those areas. Therefore, unless the person can be removed to Somaliland or Puntland, the first consideration is whether the person would be at risk on return to Mogadishu and, if so, whether they can reasonably be expected to relocate to another area in Somalia. That will, in part, depend on whether the person can get to that area safely and, if so, the general humanitarian situation in that area.”
...
Security situation in Somaliland
2.66 The UN Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in Somalia reported that compared to south and central Somalia there are clear signs of social and economic progress in Somaliland, though political conflict, security concerns and the fight against terrorism are having a negative impact on some basic human rights, including the rights to justice and to freedom of expression and of the media.
2.67 The UN Secretary-General reported that between 16 May and 15 August 2013, the situation in Somaliland remained relatively stable despite continued tension over the disputed Sool, Sanaag and Cayn regions, and periodic clashes between Somaliland forces and the self-proclaimed Khatumo State militias. The Somaliland authorities also reportedly undertook a number of successful actions to arrest AlShabaab operatives. In late August 2013, the visit of the Vice-President of Puntland to Talh (Sool) reignited local clan tensions, which escalated into two clashes between pro-Khatumo militias and Somaliland forces at Gambadhe (Sool) on 13 and 15 September. Episodes of civil unrest, some of which turned violent, were also reported in Sanaag in mid-to-late September, following the ban by the Somaliland authorities on the old local currency owing to continuing claims of counterfeit Somali currency circulating in Somaliland. The Somaliland authorities reported an alarming incidence of about 239 rape cases for the months of September and October. Most victims in southern and central Somalia are displaced women and girls. In Somaliland, victims are not only from the settlements for internally displaced persons, but also from the host communities, and include children of affluent families.
2.68 The UN Secretary General noted for the period 16 November 2013 to 15 February 2014 that Somaliland was relatively calm. Isolated armed clashes were reported in the disputed Sool, Sanaag, and Cayn regions on 27 and 28 November. Tension was high in early December following reports of a military build-up along the border between Somaliland and Puntland, but no further incidents were reported. Further information see: Report of the Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in Somalia, 16 August 2013; and UN Secretary General reports to the Security Council of January, May, September and December 2013.
Heading, Module 3, Women, set out, among other things:
“Somaliland
2.6 UNHCR’s Guidelines, published in May 2009 found that women from Somaliland, with the specific profiles [victims of FGM and sexual and gender-based violence], are at risk, on account of their membership of a particular social group.
2.7 With regard to FGM, the US Department of State reported that the Somaliland administration worked with the UN FGM/C task force to develop an FGM/C policy for Somaliland, but the policy was not completed by year’s end [2012].
2.8 With regard to sexual violence, the US Department of State report noted that ... gang rape continued to be a problem in urban areas, primarily perpetrated by youth gangs and male students. Many of these cases occurred in poorer neighborhoods and among immigrants, returned refugees, and displaced rural populations living in urban areas. According to a local Hargeisa-based NGO, gang rapes constituted 30 percent of reported rape cases and 55 percent of reported cases involved a minor as the victim. Many cases went unreported. In May 2013 IRIN reported that stiffer penalties and reduced reliance on traditional justice systems could help end the rising incidence of rape in Somaliland, with an estimated 5,000 rape cases to have taken place in 2012. The same news article noted that the extent of rape in Somaliland remains difficult to measure, with most cases going unreported or being resolved between families. While rape is punishable with a jail term of five to 15 years in Somaliland, cases are often settled outside the courts by traditional leaders, with perpetrators typically paying compensation or marrying the victim. The UN Secretary-General’s report on Somalia of December 2013 reported that the Somaliland authorities reported an ... alarming incidence of about 239 rape cases for the months of September and October with victims coming from IDP settlements and host communities, including children of affluent families.”
Heading, Module 5, Actors of Protection, set out, among other things:
“5.2.19 The US State Department noted that, in Somaliland functional courts existed, although there was a serious shortage of trained judges and legal documentation upon which to build judicial precedent. There was reportedly widespread interference in the judicial process by officials. International NGOs reported local officials often interfered in legal matters and the public order law was often invoked to detain and incarcerate persons without trial. For information about the police force and judicial system see: Swedish Migration Board, Government and Clan system in Somalia. Report from Fact Finding Mission to Nairobi, Kenya, and Mogadishu, Hargeisa and Boosaaso in Somalia in June 2012, dated 5 March 2013. Section 3.4 US State Department, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012: Somalia, 19 April 2013; and Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012: Somalia, 27 February 2014.”
Heading, Module 6, Internal relocation, set out, inter alia:
“Somaliland and Puntland
2.16 In its May 2010 Eligibility Guidelines, UNHCR considered that the generally deplorable living conditions of displaced persons in Puntland and Somaliland indicates that internal relocation was generally not available for individuals from southern and central Somalia in these territories. However, it also stated that whether an internal flight argument exists in Puntland or Somaliland will depend on the circumstances of the individual case, including whether the individual is a member of a majority or minority clan and whether the individual originates from the territory to which they are seeking to relocate. The US State Department noted that Somaliland prohibited federal officials, including those of Somaliland origin, from entering Somaliland. It also prevented traditional elders in Somaliland from travelling to Mogadishu to participate in federal government processes.”
The Danish Immigration Service and the Norwegian Landinfo Fact Finding Mission report, Update on security and protection issues in Mogadishu and South-Central Somalia, 1-15 November 2013, released on 3 March 2014 (see www.newtodenmark.dk and www.landinfo.no), stated among other things:
“2.3 Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and refugees
UNHCR explained that it looks in parallel at Somali IDPs and Somali refugees. UNHCR is closely cooperating with the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) and the Danish Refugee Council (DRC) on issues related to Somali IDPs and Somali refugees. UNHCR explained that the Tripartite Agreement is a tool of dialogue to regulate and consult.
UNHCR added that there are a number of Ethiopian asylum seekers and refugees in Somalia, mainly in Puntland and Somaliland. However, they have limited freedom of movement in these locations.
UNHCR also explained that since the beginning of 2013 but especially since August 2013, there has been a strong push for IDPs to leave the central districts of Mogadishu and settle in KM 7 and KM 11. The process is ongoing. There have also been thousands of forced evictions of IDPs. One of the consequences is that there are several new settlements on the outskirts of Mogadishu as well as in the Afgoye Corridor; they are all managed by gatekeepers.”