The case originated in five applications (nos. 37926/05, 25784/09, 36002/09, 44410/09 and 65546/09) against the Czech Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”). The applicants are Czech four natural persons and one corporation whose particulars are specified in Annex I.
The names of the applicants’ representatives are also listed in Annex I. The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Vít A. Schorm, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their right to property had been breached as a result of the rent-control legislation.
On 29 November 2011 the applications were communicated to the Government.
Mr Karel Jungwiert, the judge elected in respect of the Czech Republic, was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28). Accordingly, the President of the Chamber decided to appoint Mr Zdeněk Kühn to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 1(b)).
The first applicant is a limited liability company with its registered seat in Brno. It owns a five-storey tenement house in Brno, which it bought in 1994 for 1,450,000 Czech korunas (CZK 52,920 euros (EUR)). There is a shop on the ground floor and one flat on each remaining floor. In three of these four flats the rent was regulated. The rent in those three flats was CZK 2,037 (EUR 74), CZK 2,007 (EUR 73) and CZK 1,392 (EUR 50.80) respectively per month. The monthly rent for the fourth flat was fixed at CZK 5,200 (EUR 190).
On 10 February 2004 the first applicant sued the State for damages in the amount of CZK 229,563 (EUR 8,378) corresponding to the difference between the regulated rent and the usual rent in the given area as estimated by the first applicant for the period between February 2002 and end of January 2004.
On 22 December 2004 the Prague 1 District Court (obvodní soud) dismissed the first applicant’s action. It held that it was not possible to award damages under the State Liability Act since failure to enact deregulating legislation could not be qualified as an “incorrect official procedure” within the meaning of the Act. Moreover, the adoption by the Ministry of Finance of decrees nos. 01/2002 and 06/2002 could not be qualified as an incorrect official procedure either.
On 28 February 2006 the Prague Municipal Court (městský soud) dismissed an appeal by the first applicant. It held that the impossibility of reaching an agreement on deregulating legislation in Parliament could not be qualified as an “incorrect official procedure” within the meaning of the State Liability Act. The court added that in respect of the period from February 2002 to 20 March 2003 rents had been regulated by Government Decree no. 567/2002. Although that decree had subsequently been repealed by the Constitutional Court, the latter’s judgments were not of retroactive effect and thus previous contractual relationships remained unchanged. Accordingly, there was no legal basis for compensation for that period.
On 24 October 2007 the Supreme Court (Nejvyšší soud) dismissed an appeal on points of law lodged by the first applicant. It found that the legislative procedure in Parliament could not be described as an “administrative procedure” under the State Liability Act and that it was impossible to engage liability on the part of the State for the result of voting in Parliament.
On 27 November 2008 the Constitutional Court (Ústavní soud) dismissed a constitutional appeal lodged by the first applicant as manifestly ill-founded, holding that actions for damages against the State had a subsidiary character and that the applicant company should have started by bringing an action for rent increase.
The applicant owns a tenement house in Prague consisting of eleven flats and three non-residential premises. The application concerns seven of these flats for which the applicant collected regulated rent in the total amount of CZK 398,196 (EUR 14,533) for the period between 1 January 2002 and 31 December 2004 while the usual rent in the given locality would have amounted to CZK 1,757,160 (EUR 64,130) according to an expert report commissioned by the applicant. The applicant and his sister acquired the house under the restitution law in 1992. The applicant’s sister later transferred her share to the applicant.
On 4 January 2005 the applicant sued the State for damages in the amount of CZK 1,358,964 (EUR 49,597) corresponding to the difference between the regulated rent and the usual rent in the given locality for the period between 1 January 2002 and 31 December 2004.
On 12 October 2005 the Prague 1 District Court dismissed the applicant’s action. It held that it was not possible to qualify the failure by Parliament to enact deregulating legislation as an “incorrect official procedure”. While the previous regulations had been repealed by the Constitutional Court, this did not produce a retroactive effect and thus no damages could be awarded for the period of time during which they were in force. The applicant should have brought an action against the tenant requesting the court to determine the amount of rent according to the local and material conditions (nahrazení projevu vůle nájemců k určení výše nájemného, které by odpovídalo všem místním i věcným podmínkám).
On 2 February 2006 the Prague Municipal Court dismissed an appeal by the applicant. It held that the impossibility of reaching an agreement on deregulating legislation in Parliament could not be qualified as an “incorrect official procedure” within the meaning of the State Liability Act. As regards the period until 20 March 2003, the court added that rents had been regulated by Government Decree no. 567/2002. Although it had subsequently been repealed by the Constitutional Court, the latter’s judgments did not have retroactive effect and thus the previous contractual relationships remained unchanged. Accordingly, there was no legal basis for compensation for that period.
On 28 February 2008 the Supreme Court declared inadmissible an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant.
On 30 October 2008 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional appeal as manifestly ill-founded, holding that actions for damages against the State had a subsidiary character and that the applicant should have started by bringing an action for rent increase.
The applicant owns a tenement house in Brno consisting of seven flats and two non-residential premises. She became the sole owner of the house on 11 July 2004 as a result of restitution (in March 1992), gifts (in October 1994), inheritance (in September 1997) and purchases from five other family members (July 2004). She collected regulated rent for three of those flats in the total amount of CZK 251,484 (EUR 9,178) for the period between 1 July 2002 and 31 August 2005 while the usual rent in the given locality would have amounted to CZK 1,158,059 (EUR 42,265) according to an expert report commissioned by the applicant. The applicant occupied one flat and let two flats to her son and daughter.
On 14 October 2005 the applicant sued the State for damages in the amount of CZK 906,575 (EUR 33,087) corresponding to the difference between the regulated rent and the usual rent in the given locality for the period between 1 July 2002 and 31 August 2005. On 19 January 2006 she withdrew her claim in respect of an amount of CZK 166,077 (EUR 6,061).
On 9 May 2006 the Prague 1 District Court dismissed the applicant’s action. It held that it was not possible to qualify the failure by Parliament to enact deregulating legislation as an “incorrect official procedure”. The applicant should have brought an action against the tenant requesting the court to determine the amount of rent according to the local and material conditions.
On 24 January 2007 the Prague Municipal Court upheld that decision. In respect of the period up to 20 March 2003, it held that rents had been regulated by several regulations. Although these had subsequently been repealed by the Constitutional Court, its judgments were not of retroactive effect and thus the previous contractual relationships remained unchanged. As a result, no compensation could be awarded for that period. As regards the subsequent period, the court held that the impossibility of reaching an agreement on deregulating legislation by Parliament could not be qualified as an “incorrect official procedure” within the meaning of the State Liability Act. State responsibility could however flow from general liability under civil law. Yet, it would be very difficult to establish a causal link between the damage and an unconstitutional failure on the part of the State to enact deregulating legislation. Referring to the Constitutional Court’s judgments nos. Pl. ÚS 20/05 and I. ÚS 489/05 (see paragraphs 105 and 118 of Annex II), the court held that as of 2 June 2006 at the latest the applicant could have brought an action pro futuro. As regards the period between 20 March 2003 and 2 June 2006 the Municipal Court stated that the applicant should have brought an action against the tenants for forfeiture of the proceeds of unjust enrichment. Given that the litigation stemmed from an unlawful situation which was to a substantial extent caused by the State’s inactivity, and the persisting evolution of the case-law, which had not yet been settled, the applicant was exempted from payment of the costs of the proceedings incurred by the State both for the first-instance and the appellate proceedings.
On 26 March 2008 the Supreme Court declared inadmissible the applicant’s appeal on points of law. It found that the legislative procedure in Parliament could not be described as an “administrative procedure” within the meaning of the State Liability Act and that it was impossible to engage liability on the part of the State for the result of voting in Parliament.
On 21 April 2008 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal. She explained, inter alia, that an action against the State was the only avenue she could use. It was not possible to bring an action against the tenants. First of all, the lower courts had been dismissing such actions between 1 July 2002 and 31 August 2005, which was the period to which her claim related. Moreover, that judicial practice corresponded to the established case-law of the Supreme Court (see paragraph 167 of Annex II) and the result of any action against the tenant was thus fully foreseeable. Further, the possibility of bringing an action for rent increase had been created by the Constitutional Court only in its landmark judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05 of 2 June 2006. In any event, contrary to the opinion of the Municipal Court, it was not possible to use that avenue in the applicant’s case. Referring to the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. I. ÚS 489/05 (see paragraph 118 of Annex II), the applicant argued that her only option was to bring actions against the tenant pro futuro whereas her action concerned the past.
On 18 December 2008 the Constitutional Court dismissed a constitutional appeal by the applicant as manifestly ill-founded, holding that actions for damages against the State had a subsidiary character, and the applicant should have started by bringing an action for rent increase.
On 15 May 2003 the applicant bought a tenement house in Domašov nad Bystřicí at public auction. The rent was regulated in nine out of the twelve flats. The rent in one of the flats was set at CZK 1,081 (EUR 39) per month. The non-regulated rent for a smaller flat was CZK 2,000 (EUR 73). Had there been no rent regulation, then rent in a flat affected by the control would be CZK 2,541 (EUR 93) a month (calculation based by compering yield per sq. m. of regulated and non-regulated flat).
On 26 April 2006 the Olomouc District Court (okresní soud) ordered the tenant of that flat to vacate it. On 30 August 2006 the applicant filed a request for enforcement of that decision.
On 9 October 2007 he lodged an action for payment of CZK 14,650 (EUR 530) corresponding to the outstanding rent for the period between 1 July 2006 and 30 April 2007. On 14 December 2007 the District Court dismissed that action on the ground that the tenant had actually vacated the flat on 30 June 2006.
In 2008 the applicant lodged an action for payment of CZK 14,514 (EUR 530) for the period between 1 February and 31 July 2006 corresponding to the difference between the regulated rent and the rent that he considered usual in the given locality.
On 28 April 2008 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s claim. It referred to the case-law of the Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court and held that rent could be increased only pro futuro. Moreover, the applicant’s action could not be granted on the basis of forfeiture of the proceeds of unjust enrichment either because the parties had concluded a valid tenancy agreement.
On 4 December 2008 the Ostrava Regional Court (krajský soud) upheld the District Court’s analysis and dismissed an appeal by the applicant.
On 21 May 2009 the Constitutional Court dismissed a constitutional appeal lodged by the applicant, holding that landlords were not entitled to claim retroactively from tenants the difference between the regulated rent and the usual rent in the given locality. It noted that previous opinions to the effect that it was possible to lodge retroactive claims against tenants had been overruled by its Opinion no. 27/09 of 28 April 2009.
The applicant owns numerous other tenement houses where the rent was regulated. He introduced separate domestic proceedings regarding those houses and ultimately lodged eleven other applications (nos. 25463/05, 32090/06, 36658/09, 36687/09, 38720/09, 39868/09, 43750/09, 46064/09, 53957/09, 3968/10, 8463/10) before the Court where he complains of the rent regulation scheme in the Czech Republic.
The applicants own a tenement house in Prague consisting of six flats, one of which was rented under the rent-control scheme. The rent was set at CZK 2,396 (EUR 87) per month. The applicants bought the house in May 2001 for CZK 4,000,000 (EUR 145,985).
On 17 July 2003 the applicants informed the tenants of an increase in rent that would newly be CZK 9,000 (EUR 328) monthly, which the tenants refused to pay. On 22 September 2003 they sent a letter of reminder to the tenants, who, on 5 October 2003, again refused to pay the increased rent.
On an unspecified date the applicants brought the case before the Prague 8 District Office, which was empowered to determine the level of the rent according to the rent agreement (dohoda o užívání bytu). On an unspecified date the District Office had declined jurisdiction and informed the applicants that they should bring an action before the courts. The final reminder before the court action was sent to the tenants by the applicants on 19 June 2005.
On 30 June 2005 the applicants thus lodged an action for payment of the increase in rent for the period from July 2003 to December 2004 amounting to CZK 118,874 (EUR 4,338).
On 22 February 2006 the Prague 8 District Court dismissed their action.
On 25 October 2006 the Prague Municipal Court upheld the first-instance judgment. Referring to the case-law of the Constitutional Court, and especially its judgment no. I. ÚS 489/05 of 6 April 2006 (see paragraph 118 of Annex II), it held that rent could not be increased retroactively.
On 8 April 2009 the Supreme Court declared inadmissible an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicants.
On 16 July 2009 the Constitutional Court, referring to its Opinion no. 27/09 of 28 April 2009, dismissed a constitutional appeal lodged by the applicants, holding that a rent increase could be claimed only pro futuro from the date of lodging the action against the tenants.
On 2 January 2008 the applicants also lodged a claim for damages against the State under the State Liability Act for the period from July 2004 to December 2006. The proceedings are pending before the Prague 1 District Court.
The relevant domestic law and practice are described in the decision in the case of Vomočil and Art 38, a.s. v. Czech Republic (dec.), nos. 38817/04 and 1458/07, paragraphs 21-26, 5 March 2013 and in Annex II.
Under Article 89 § 1 of the Constitution, decisions of the Constitutional Court are enforceable as soon as they are delivered in the manner provided for by statute, unless the Constitutional Court decides otherwise with regard to enforcement. Under § 2 enforceable decisions of the Constitutional Court shall be binding for all authorities and individuals.
Article 2 § 2 of the Charter stipulates that State authority may be asserted only in cases and within the limits provided for by law and only in the manner prescribed by law.
Under Article 3 § 1 everyone is guaranteed the enjoyment of his or her fundamental rights and freedoms without regard to gender, race, colour of skin, language, faith and religion, political or other convictions, national or social origin, membership of a national or ethnic minority, property, birth, or other status.
Article 4 § 1 provides that duties may be imposed upon persons only on the basis of and within the limits of the law, and must respect the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual. Under the second paragraph, limitations may be placed upon fundamental rights and freedoms only by law and under the conditions prescribed in the Charter. Under the third paragraph, any statutory limitation on fundamental rights and freedoms applies in the same way to all cases which meet the specified conditions. The fourth paragraph states that in implementing the provisions concerning limitations on fundamental rights and freedoms, the essence and significance of those rights and freedoms must be preserved. Such limitations are not to be applied for purposes other than those for which they were laid down.
Under Article 11 § 1 everyone has a right to own property. The property rights of each owner shall have the same subject matter and enjoy the same protection. Under the fourth paragraph, expropriation of property or any interference with property is permissible only in the public interest, on the basis of a statute, and against compensation.
Under Article 11 § 4 expropriation or forced restriction on ownership rights is allowed in general interest, on the basis of a law and against indemnification.
Under Article 871 § 2, introduced by the amendment to the Civil Code (Act no. 509/1991) which entered into force on 1 January 1992, the right to personal use of a dwelling was in future to be regarded as a tenancy. A legal relationship based on mutual consent between contracting parties was thereby instituted in contract law, replacing consent to an administrative decision by virtue of which a national authority granted the use of a flat to an individual. The term “personal use of property” ceased to exist with this amendment. Some of the restrictions imposed on landlords by the Civil Code of 1964 concerning, in particular, succession to the tenancy of a flat, rent ceilings, landlords’ obligations in respect of property maintenance and termination of leases, remained in force.
Under Article 685 § 1, a tenancy in respect of a flat was created by means of a tenancy agreement, under which a landlord handed over a flat to a tenant for his or her use for a definite or indefinite period of time.
The Civil Code granted the right to succeed to a tenancy to the relatives of tenants and to persons living with them in flats rented by them. Article 706 § 1 provided as follows:
“Upon a tenant’s death, where a flat is not rented jointly by a married couple, the right to lease the property shall pass to the deceased’s children, grandchildren, parents, siblings, son-in-law or daughter-in-law, if they can prove that they were living with him or her in a shared household on the date of his or her death and do not have their own flat. The same right shall be enjoyed by persons who were looking after the shared household and had been living with the tenant in a shared household for at least three years and do not have their own flat.”
Article 707 § 1 provided:
“The surviving spouse shall become the sole tenant of a common flat upon the other spouse’s death.”
Article 708 provided:
“The provisions of Article 706 §§ 1 and 2 and Article 707 shall also apply in the event that a tenant permanently leaves a shared household.”
Article 686 § 1 stipulated, inter alia, that the written tenancy agreement should provide details of the flat, its facilities, the scope of its use and the method of calculating the rent and service charges related to use of the flat, or the amounts thereof.
Under Article 671 § 1 a tenant had to pay the rent laid down in the tenancy agreement, or the rent usually payable at the time the lease was agreed, regard being had to the value of the leased property and the mode of its use.
Article 696 § 1 provided, inter alia, that the method of calculating the rent, the service charges related to the use of the flat, the method of paying the rent and service charges, and the conditions under which a landlord was entitled unilaterally to increase the rent and service charges and amend other terms of the tenancy agreement, were governed by a special Act.
Article 877 read as follows:
“1.  Prices, payments and other pecuniary transactions governed by this Act, and falling within the scope of application of the generally binding Act on prices, shall be considered to constitute prices within the meaning of this Act.
Where the term ‘generally binding legal Act’ is used herein, it shall be taken to mean Act no. 526/1990 on prices.”
Under Article 687, a landlord had to hand over a flat to a tenant in a fit state for normal use and to secure to the tenant the full and uninterrupted enjoyment of the rights linked to the use of the flat. Where an occupational tenancy agreement did not provide otherwise, small repairs to the flat linked with its use and the costs associated with ordinary maintenance were met by the tenant. The terms “small repairs” and “ordinary maintenance” were defined in a special law (Government Decree no. 258/1995).
Under Article 695 a landlord was entitled to make structural alterations to a flat with the approval of the tenant.
Under Article 493 § 1 no obligation could be modified without the mutual consent of the parties, unless the law stipulated otherwise.
Under Article 685 § 1 the tenancy was protected. The landlord could terminate it only on the grounds provided for by law.
Under Article 686 § 2 if a tenancy agreement did not indicate its duration, its term was presumed to be indefinite.
Article 710 stated that the tenancy could cease on the basis of a written agreement between the landlord and the tenant, or on written notice of termination of the lease given by the tenant or the landlord. If the tenancy agreement was entered into for a fixed period of time, the tenancy ceased on the expiry of that period. The written notice had to give the date on which the lease was to be terminated and the notice period had to be at least three months.
Article 711 § 1 specified the grounds that would justify the serving of notice on a tenant and made such notice subject to prior approval by a court. The lease could be terminated if:
(a)  the landlord needed the flat for himself or herself, his or her spouse, his or her children, grandchildren, son- or daughter-in-law, parents or siblings;
(b)  the tenant ceased to work for the landlord and the latter needed the flat for the replacement worker;
(c)  the tenant, or persons sharing the flat with him, acted contra bonos mores, despite a prior written warning;
(d)  the tenant substantially contravened his duties under the tenancy agreement, in particular by a failure for more than three months to pay rent or charges for use of the flat;
(e)  the use of the flat or house was precluded in the public interest or owing to reconstruction;
(f)  the flat was connected to premises designed for commercial use and the landlord or tenant of such premises intended to use it;
(g)  the tenant had two or more flats, except where their use was justified on exceptional grounds;
(h)  the tenant did not use the flat, or used it only occasionally, without any serious justification; or
(i)  the tenant of a specially-assigned flat was not a disabled person.
Under Article 711 § 2 if the court approved the notice of termination of a lease, it also fixed the date on which the tenancy relationship was to end, taking into account the period of notice which commenced as late as the first day of the calendar month following that in which the judgment became final. At the same time the court decided that the tenant was obliged to vacate the flat within 15 days at the latest after the expiry of the period of notice. If the tenant was entitled to a substitute flat or accommodation, the court held that the tenant was obliged to vacate the flat within 15 days after the provision of the substitute flat, and if provision of the substitution accommodation was sufficient, then within 15 days after its provision.
Under Article 712, a person whose tenancy agreement was terminated under Article 711 § 1(a),(b),(e),(f) or (i) was entitled to be provided with substitute housing in the form of a flat or other accommodation.
Under Article 715 tenants could, with their landlords’ assent, agree in writing to exchange their respective flats. If either landlord disagreed with the exchange, the tenant could appeal to a court; a ruling by the court in the tenant’s favour replaced the consent of the landlord to the exchange.
Section 2(2) provides, inter alia, that the Ministry of Finance issues legal acts to regulate and negotiate prices, to define disproportionate economic profit and unjust enrichment in connection with violations of price regulations, and to control prices.
With effect from 16 January 1992 the decree as amended stipulated in section 1(1) the method of calculating the rent for a flat and the manner of negotiating and paying for the rent and for the service charges for the use of the flat between the owners, or housekeepers as landlords, and the tenants.
The decree did not apply to flats built with financial, credit or other assistance provided under regulations on financial and credit assistance to cooperative housing construction, or to flats under the Administration of Diplomatic Services (Správa služeb diplomatického sboru).
Section 5(2) stated that the amount of rent determined under section 5(1) should be increased by 100% starting with the rent for July 1992. The landlord had to notify the new rent, in a manner that was standard in the place concerned, within 60 days at the latest from the entry into force of the decree.
Section 16 provided for the rent and prices for services in dwelling houses owned by natural persons, with a limited number of dwelling rooms or a limited floor area. Under subsection 1 the amount of rent for a dwelling house with 5 rooms at most, excluding the kitchen, or with more dwelling rooms but with a floor area not exceeding 120 square metres, should be negotiated in an agreement between the landlord and the tenant. As to the kitchen, the floor area should include kitchens exceeding 12 square metres. Under section 16(2) if the rent for dwelling houses under subsection 1 did not reach the amount determined under section 5, the landlord could increase the rent up to the latter amount.
The decree established rent ceilings, provided guidelines on how to calculate them and laid down rules regulating certain aspects of the conduct of landlords and tenants. It did not apply to flats in housing cooperatives established after 1958, if built with financial, credit and other assistance provided under regulations on financial, credit or other assistance for cooperative housing construction, for which the rent was determined under separate regulations, and the decree did not apply to flats managed by the Administration of Diplomatic Services.
Moreover, under section 2, flats owned by housing cooperatives, leased by foreign legal persons or built after 30 June 1993, or those in family houses for which a tenancy agreement had been concluded with a new tenant, fell outside its scope of application (except in cases involving the legal transfer of tenancy, the exchange of flats and substitute housing). The exception concerning family houses was later extended to all flats. This amendment took effect on 1 July 1995.
The break-up of flats into the categories stipulated in section 4 was, except for minor differences, essentially the same as under Decree no. 60/1964, flats being classified into four categories according to their quality.
Sections 5 and 6 provided for two types of basic rent: maximum basic rent and cost-based regulated basic rent. Rent was regulated on a cost basis for flats whose construction was approved after 30 June 1993 where public funds were used in their financing, and for flats whose reconstruction or modernisation was approved after 30 June where public funds were used in their financing.
For the first case of cost-based regulated rent, it was calculated by multiplying the purchase price of the flat by a monthly coefficient (k = 0.00375), while the purchase price of the flat was to be calculated from the actual purchase costs for the building of the house according to the ratio of the flat’s floor area to the floor areas of all flats and commercial premises. This rent could not exceed double the maximum basic rent determined under section 5.
In the second case, the rent was calculated by multiplying the replacement purchase price of the flat by a monthly coefficient (k = 0.00375), while the replacement purchase price of the flat was the price of the flat according to its category before the reconstruction or modernisation as determined under section 3a of Ministry of Finance Decree no. 393/1991, as amended, and raised by the actual costs of the reconstruction or modernisation of the flat. This rent could not exceed double the maximum basic rent for the category of a flat after reconstruction or modernisation as determined under section 5. The provisions on cost-based regulated basic rent came into force on 1 July 1993.
The maximum basic rent was calculated by multiplying the flat’s floor area by the maximum basic monthly rent per square metre of floor, as set for each category and listed in the annex to the decree as follows:
- first-category dwelling (flats with central heating in all dwelling rooms and basic accessories): CZK 6 (EUR 0.24) per square metre;
- second-category dwelling (flats without central heating, with basic accessories, or flats with central heating and partial basic accessories): CZK 4.50 (EUR 0.18) per square metre;
- third-category dwelling (flats without central heating with partial basic accessories or flats with central heating without basic accessories): CZK 3.50 (EUR 0.14) per square metre;
- fourth category dwelling (flats without central heating and without basic accessories): CZK 2.50 (EUR 0.101) per square metre.
Both maximum and cost-based regulated basic rent calculated under sections 5 and 6 could be modified depending on the quality of the flat, the location of the building and the flat’s equipment. The prices of services were not included in the rent.
Section 5a provided for annual rent-ceiling increases in line with the average monthly index of price growth in the construction industry, as assessed by the Ministry of Finance.
Under section 9, municipalities were empowered to increase or decrease rents by up to 20%, to reflect an “advantageous or disadvantageous” location of the housing. According to the applicant, between 1998 and 2002 the rents were increased only by amounts reflecting the annual rate of inflation. Since 2002 the real value of controlled rents has decreased due to inflation, being now significantly below the reconstruction costs of the housing resources.
Under section 16(2), the rent control under sections 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10 also applied to rents originating before 1 January 1994. If the controlled rent applying as of 31 December 1993 was higher than the rent calculated under the decree, the higher rent was applicable and it was considered to be the maximum until the change in conditions for rent calculation provided for in sections 6(2), 9, 10, 12(3), 15 and 16(1)(b). Under section 16(1) the landlord could enter into an agreement with the tenant on the new rent under agreements concluded prior to 1 July 1993 in family houses with 5 dwelling rooms at most, excluding the kitchen, or with more dwelling rooms but with a floor area not exceeding 120 square metres, including a kitchen area exceeding 12 square metres, and for which the area of commercial premises was not more than one third of the total of all areas, both residential and commercial. If they did not reach an agreement, then the landlord could increase the rent:
(a)  up to the rent determined under section 5, modified under sections 8 and 9 and then increased by the rent for the flat equipment under section 10, from 1 January 1994 at the earliest,
(b)  on the basis of a valuation authority’s decision, to a maximum level of double the rent determined under section 5, modified under sections 8 and 9 and then increased by the rent for the flat equipment under section 10, and at the earliest from the first day of the month after twelve months from the landlord’s written notice to the tenant concerning the change in rent.
The new section 5a entered into force on 1 March 1995. Under its subsection 1 the maximum level of the basic monthly rent per square metre of the floor area of a flat of the relevant category under section 5 was annually determined according to the following formula with effect from 1 July to 30 June of the subsequent year:
Nt+1 = Nt x Ki x Kv x Kr, where
Nt+1 was the new maximum level of basic monthly rent per square metre of the flat’s floor area as valid from 1 July of the current year,
Nt was the maximum level of basic monthly rent per square metre of the flat’s floor area as valid until 30 June of the current year,
Ki was the coefficient of rent increase reflecting the rate of inflation for the whole previous calendar year,
Kv was the coefficient of rent increase depending on the size of the municipality,
Kr was the decision coefficient.
The coefficient of rent increase reflecting the rate of inflation Ki was calculated from the running average of change in the level of consumer prices (the rate of inflation) for the previous calendar year according to the index of the Czech Statistical Office; the Ministry of Finance determined the coefficient Ki in its decision and published it in the Price Journal until 1 March (incl.) of the current year. The value of the coefficient Kr was 1.00. The Ministry fixed the coefficient Kr at a level lower than 1.00, if the rate of inflation expressed as coefficient Ki was higher than 1.15, or at a level higher than 1.00, if the rate of inflation expressed as coefficient Ki was lower than 1.10. The maximum coefficient of rent increase depending on the size of the municipality Kv was determined in the following way:
The municipality falling under the relevant group according to its number of inhabitants fixed the specific amount of the coefficient Kv for the whole territory of the municipality in a generally binding decree that came into effect on 1 July of the current year at the latest; the municipality could decrease the maximum coefficient Kv applicable to it to a minimum value of 1.00 or in justified cases it could use the coefficient fixed for the next highest category of municipalities up to its maximum value.
Under the amended section 9 of the decree, the municipality could also, in a generally binding decree, change the basic rent modified under section 8 of the decree in parts of the municipality or in individual houses chosen for their advantageous or disadvantageous location, especially from the point of view of traffic access, technical and civic amenities and environment, in the following way:
(a)  increase it by 20% at most or decrease it by 15% at most in municipalities with at least 50,000 inhabitants, in Františkovy Lázně, Luhačovice, Mariánské Lázně and Poděbrady,
(b)  increase it by 10% at most or decrease it by 10% at most in municipalities with at least 1,000 inhabitants and less than 50,000 inhabitants,
(c)  increase it by 10% at most in the territory of national parks and zone one protected landscape areas.
With effect from 1 July 1995, Decree no. 30/1995 amended the existing section 2(2)(b) of Decree no. 176/1993. In consequence, the rent regulation under this decree, in effect from 1 July 1995, did not apply from that date onwards to all flats in respect of which a tenancy agreement was negotiated with a new tenant, with the exception of statutory transfer of tenancy, exchange of flats, replacement flats and more recently also service flats for professional soldiers. With the exception provided for in the amended section 2(2)(b) of Decree no. 176/1993, the rent regulation under Decree no. 30/1995 also applied to tenancies that existed on 1 March 1995.
From 1 July 1995 rent was regulated on a cost basis in the relevant manner for flats whose reconstruction or modernisation was approved after 30 June 1993 with the help of public funds, and for flats whose reconstruction or modernisation was approved after 30 June 1993. If the cost-based regulated basic rent determined under section 6(1) and (2) was lower than the maximum basic rent determined under sections 5 and 5a, then the rent control under these sections applied.
The decree further amended and supplemented Decree no. 176/1993. Under the previous section 3(8), public funds meant above all financial means provided from the State budget and funds, municipal budgets, and budgets of district offices or of organisations dependent on these resources, while it also meant resources, credits in particular, in which such offices or organisations participated. These latter resources were no longer mentioned and, by contrast, in the new section 3(9) it was explicitly stipulated that public funds did not refer to funds provided under the Act on building savings and State subsidies for building savings or under the Government order requiring State financial support for mortgage credit in respect of flat construction.
At the same time, for the flats subject to cost-based regulated basic rent under section 6(1), the maximum limit of cost-based regulated rent changed from double to triple the maximum basic rent. Moreover, the rent regulation under this decree applied also to tenancies originating before the entry into force of this decree.
The decree again amended Decree no. 176/1993. Section 5a(5) newly stipulated that for the period from 1 July 1997 to 30 June 1998 the maximum coefficient of rent increase Kv would be 1.67 for Prague and 1.35 for municipalities with at least 100,000 inhabitants. Moreover, Prague could, from 1 July 1998 onwards, use a maximum coefficient Kv higher than 1.19 and up to 1.30. Section 6(1) of the decree was amended so that the cost-based regulated rent under this provision applied to flats whose construction or completion was approved after 30 June 1993 and public funds were used in the financing thereof, or approved even before this date and public funds were used in the financing thereof from 1995. Furthermore, the rent regulation under this decree also applied to tenancies originating before its entry into force.
The decree amended in particular section 5a of Decree no. 176/1993. The maximum level of basic monthly rent per square metre of the floor area of a flat of the relevant category under section 5 of the Decree was now to be determined annually according to the following formula, with effect from 1 July to 30 June of the following year:
Nt+1 = Nt x Ki, where
Nt+1 was the new maximum level of basic monthly rent per square metre of the flat’s floor area as valid from 1 July of the current year,
Nt was the maximum level of basic monthly rent per square metre of the flat’s floor area as valid until 30 June of the current year,
Ki was the coefficient of rent increase.
The maximum coefficient of rent increase Ki reflecting the average monthly index of price growth in the construction industry in the previous year was fixed by the Ministry of Finance and published in the Price Journal until 1 March of the current year. The specific amount of this coefficient for the whole territory of a municipality was to be determined by the municipality in a generally binding decree that would come into effect on 1 July of the current year at the latest; the municipality could decrease the maximum coefficient Ki to a minimum value of 1.00.
The ordinance introduced, inter alia, a maximum level of monthly rent and service charges to be paid by tenants occupying flats which had been subject to the controlled rent scheme on 31 December 2001. It stipulated, inter alia, as follows:
“1.  From 1 January 2002 to 30 June 2002 the maximum level of monthly rent for a flat including a flat in a family house ..., for which on 31 December 2001 the rent was regulated by a maximum price under Decree no. 176/1993 ... is the rent as valid on 31 December 2001 with appropriate modifications under points 5 to 7.
With effect from 1 July 2002 the maximum level of basic monthly rent in a flat mentioned in point 1 shall be determined by multiplying the flat’s floor area by the maximum level of basic monthly rent in the municipality per square metre of the relevant flat category under point 3.
The maximum level of basic monthly rent in the municipality per square metre of the floor area of a flat of the relevant category as valid from 1 July 2002 shall be determined according to the following formula:
Nt+1 = Nt x Ki
Nt+1 = the new maximum level of basic monthly rent in the municipality per square metre of the floor area of a flat of the relevant category as valid from 1 July 2002,
Nt = the maximum level of basic monthly rent in the municipality per square metre of the floor area of a flat of the relevant category as valid on 31 December 2001,
Ki = the coefficient of rent increase reflecting the average monthly index of price growth in the construction industry in the previous year, determined by the decision of the Ministry of Finance and published in the Price Journal until 1 March 2002. ...”
From 1 July 2002 to 31 December 2002 the coefficient of rent increase Ki reflecting the rate of inflation was determined in Ministry of Finance Ordinance no. 02/2002 at 1.04.
The Ordinance fixed a new maximum level of monthly rent and maintenance costs in respect of flats which had been subject to the controlled rent scheme under Ordinance no. 01/2002 on 14 November 2002. Point 1 of the Ordinance stipulated, inter alia, the following:
“1.  From 15 July 2002 to 30 June 2003 the maximum level of basic monthly rent in a flat, including a flat in a family house with one flat (hereinafter “in a flat”), in which as of 14 November 2002 the rent was regulated by the maximum level under Ministry of Finance Ordinance no. 01/2002 on the list of goods with controlled prices, shall be the rent determined by multiplying the flat’s floor area by the maximum level of basic monthly rent in the municipality per square metre for a flat of the relevant category as valid from 1 July 2002 with the appropriate modifications under points 6 and 7.
With effect from 1 July 2003 the maximum level of basic monthly rent in a flat mentioned in point 1 shall be calculated by multiplying the flat’s floor area by the maximum level of basic monthly rent in the municipality per square metre for a flat of the relevant category under point 4. ...
The maximum level of basic monthly rent in the municipality per square metre of the floor area of a flat of the relevant category as valid from 1 July 2003 shall be determined according to the formula:
Nt+1 = Nt x Ki
Nt+1 = the new maximum level of basic monthly rent in the municipality per square metre of the floor area of a flat of the relevant category as valid from 1 July 2003
Nt = the maximum level of basic monthly rent in the municipality per square metre of the floor area of a flat of the relevant category as valid on 30 June 2003
Ki = the coefficient of rent increase reflecting the average monthly index of price growth in the construction industry in the previous year, determined by the decision of the Ministry of Finance and published in the Price Journal until 1 March 2003.”
Reacting to the judgment of the Constitutional Court no. Pl. ÚS 8/02 of 20 November 2002, the Government ordered that rents which, on 17 December 2002, were fixed and unchangeable under binding regulations, and rents paid in respect of flats whose extension, completion or reconstruction had been approved after 30 June 1993 using public funds, could not be increased for a period of three months after the entry into force of this decree.
Article 685 § 1 of the Civil Code provides that a tenancy agreement may be concluded for the period of the tenant’s work for the landlord.
Article 685a § 1 of the Civil Code states that when the lease is agreed the landlord is entitled to request the tenant to provide funds as security for the rent and service charges for the use of the flat and as payment for other liabilities in connection with the lease.
Article 687 § 2 of the Civil Code provides that in the tenancy agreement it may be stipulated that the landlord will hand the flat over to the tenant in a condition that is not fit for proper use, if the tenant has agreed with the landlord that the former would carry out the renovation of the flat.
Article 711 § 1 of the Civil Code continues to specify the grounds for which the landlord may serve notice of termination of the tenancy. Its subparagraph newly provides that the landlord may do so without the court’s approval if:
“(a)  the tenant or persons residing with him/her, have acted contra bonos mores in the house, despite a prior written warning;
(b)  the tenant has grossly violated his/her obligations arising under the tenancy, in particular by a failure to pay rent or charges for the use of the flat in an amount corresponding to triple the monthly rent and service charges for the use of the flat or if he has not supplied funds to the account under Article 686a § 3;
(c)  the tenant has two or more flats, except where he cannot be fairly requested to use only one flat;
(d)  the tenant leaves the flat unused without any serious justification or uses it only occasionally;
(e)  the flat is specially-assigned or in a specially-assigned house and if the tenant is not a disabled person.”
Article 711 § 3 of the Civil Code specifies that the landlord’s written notice must be served on the tenant and it must include the ground for the notice, the period of notice, advice to the tenant concerning the possibility, within sixty days, of bringing an action before a court for a declaration that the notice is void, and if the tenant is entitled to a replacement flat under this Act then it must also mention the landlord’s obligation to secure to the tenant a corresponding replacement flat.
Under Article 711a § 1 of the Civil Code the landlord may serve notice of termination of the tenancy only with the court’s approval in the following cases:
“(a)  the landlord needs the flat for him-/herself, his/her spouse, his children, grandchildren, son-in-law or daughter-in-law, his/her parents or siblings;
(b)  the tenant has ceased to be employed by the landlord and the flat was tied to this employment and the latter needs the flat for his/her replacement;
(c)  owing to public interest the flat or the house needs to be disposed of in a way that the flat cannot be used, or if the flat or the house need repairs during which the flat or the house cannot be used for an extended period of time;
(d)  the flat is connected to premises designed for the purpose of a shop or other commercial use and the tenant or owner of these commercial premises wants to use this flat.”
Under Article 711 § 4 of the Civil Code if the tenant is entitled to a substitute flat or substitute accommodation, then he is obliged to vacate the flat within 15 days from the moment the corresponding substitute flat or accommodation is secured. Subparagraph 5 provides that the tenant is not obliged to vacate the flat, if, within 60 days from the service of the notice, he brings an action seeking to declare the notice null and void and the proceedings are not terminated by a final court decision.
Under the amended Article 706 § 1 of the Civil Code if the tenant dies and if the tenancy does not concern a flat in spouses’ joint tenancy, then the tenant’s children, parents, siblings, son-in-law and daughter-in-law become its tenants (joint tenants), if they can prove that they lived with the original tenant in a common household on the day of his/her death and that they do not have their own flat.
Under the new Article 706 § 2 of the Civil Code, the tenant’s grandchildren and persons taking care of the common household of the deceased tenant or persons dependent on him/her as regards their upbringing also become tenants (joint tenants), if they can prove that they had lived with him/her in the common household continuously for at least three years prior to his/her death and if they do not have their own flat. In the case of the tenant’s grandchildren, the court may decide for reasons worthy of special consideration that they could become the tenants, even if their stay in the common household with the tenant had not lasted for three years. In the case of persons whom the flat tenant housed after the conclusion of the tenancy agreement, the first sentence applies to them only if the tenant and the landlord concluded a written agreement on that matter; this condition does not apply in the case of the tenant’s grandchildren. Under Act no. 115/2006 partners of the deceased tenant are also covered by paragraph 1 with effect from 1 July 2006.
Article 696 of the Civil Code newly provides as follows:
“1.  The rent at the time the lease is agreed or any change in the rent during the tenancy relationship shall be provided for in an agreement between the landlord and the tenant, unless this Act or a separate regulation stipulate otherwise.
The method of calculating the amount of service charges for the use of the flat and the method of their payment shall be stipulated by a separate regulation.”
Section 1 of Act no. 107/2006 provides for a procedure for unilateral rent increase; nevertheless, it does not apply to rent for the flats mentioned in subsection 2, i.e. flats:
“(a)  leased to partners, members or founders of a legal entity created for the purpose of becoming an owner of a house containing flats,
(b)  of housing cooperatives established after 1958, if the flats in question have been built with financial, credit or other assistance provided under regulations on financial, credit and other assistance to cooperative housing construction, these flats being leased to their members,
(c)  of housing cooperatives labelled under the regulations at the material time as people’s housing cooperatives, these flats being leased to their members,
(d)  whose construction or completion was approved after 30 June 1993 and the municipalities received subsidies for their construction from the State budget or from State funds for the construction of tenement flats for the period of validity of the conditions of the provided subsidy,
(e)  that are specially assigned and in flats in specially-assigned houses whose construction was approved before 30 June 1993.”
Section 3 defines the method of unilateral rent increase as follows:
“1.  Unilateral rent increases by the landlord can be applied in the period starting on the date of the entry into effect of this Act and ending on 31 December 2010.
The landlord shall be entitled to increase the rent unilaterally once a year, from 1 January 2007 onwards and in subsequent years from 1 January, or from a later date, but not retroactively to cover the period since 1 January of the year in question, unless the landlord agrees on a different arrangement with the tenant.
Unilateral rent increases in each of the specified periods of 12 months may not be higher than the maximum increase in the monthly rent determined for each specific value of the present rent per square metre of the flat’s floor area in relation to the corresponding target value of the monthly rent per square metre of the flat’s floor area.
The method of calculating target values of the monthly rent per square metre of the flat’s floor area and maximum increases in monthly rent is stipulated in the annex to this Act.
The landlord’s notice of unilateral rent increase must be done in writing and it must include justification that the rent was duly determined on the basis of a maximum increase in monthly rent.
The obligation to pay the increased rent shall come into existence on the date given in the notice of increase, but no sooner than the first day of the calendar month three months after the delivery of the notice to the tenant. Within this time limit the tenant is entitled to bring an action before a court for a declaration that the rent increase is void.”
Under section 4 the Ministry for Regional Development issues and publishes in the form of a notice in the Collection of Laws, with effect from 1 July every year, the following information:
“(a)  basic prices per square metre of a flat’s floor area reflecting average rates of purchase prices of real estate based on statistics of real-estate prices,
(b)  target monthly rents per square metre of a flat’s floor area calculated using the formula stipulated in the annex to this Act, according to classification into size groups of the municipalities for individual regions, and in the case of Prague and Brno according to classification based on town districts,
(c)  the maximum increases in monthly rent calculated using the formula stipulated in the annex to the present Act,
(d)  regional classification of municipalities by grouping cadastral areas taken over from the classification used for the purpose of property valuation,
(e)  classification of municipalities into size categories according to the number of inhabitants,
(f)  procedure for establishing the maximum increase in monthly rent in the case of a specific flat.”
To date, the Ministry of Regional Development has issued four notices (nos. 333/2006, 151/2007, 214/2008 and 180/2009) which entered into force on 1 January 2007, 1 January 2008, 1 January 2009 and 1 January 2010 respectively, and were repealed on 1 January 2008, 1 January 2009 and 1 January 2010 respectively.
Section 1(1) provides that if a landlord who gave notice of termination with the court’s approval, or a person in whose favour the court has decided on another person’s obligation to vacate a flat, cannot secure replacement accommodation, then he may request the provision of such accommodation from the municipality on whose territory the flat to be vacated is located.
Under section 2(1) the municipality provides a replacement flat by offering the tenant a tenancy agreement concerning a flat or a room in a house owned by it, or by concluding a tenancy agreement in respect of a flat in a house of another legal or natural person for the benefit of the person who is obliged to vacate the flat.
The Act came into effect on 5 March 1992 and Part One thereof, providing inter alia for the competence of the municipalities in securing replacement flats, has not been amended since then.
Section 5 defines the term “minor repairs in the flat”, as mentioned in Article 687 § 2 of the Civil Code, as amended by Act no. 509/1991, as follows:
“1.  Repairs to the flat and its interior equipment, if this equipment forms part of the flat and is owned by the landlord, are considered to be minor repairs according to their physical definition or according to the amount of costs.
The following repairs and replacements are considered to be minor repairs according to the physical definition:
(a)  repairs to individual top parts of floors, repairs to floor coverings and replacements of thresholds and mouldings,
(b)  repairs to individual parts of windows and doors and their components and replacements of locks, hardware, handles, shades and Venetian blinds,
(c)  replacements of switches, sockets, circuit-breakers, bells, illuminators and house telephones, including electric locks,
(d)  replacements of cocks in the gas plumbing with the exception of the main gas seal for the flat,
(e)  repairs to stop valves on water plumbing, replacement of water and grease traps,
(f)  repairs to heat metres and hot water metres.
The following repairs are considered minor: repairs to water plumbing outlets, siphons, hoods, mixer taps, showers, water heaters, bidets, basins, baths, sinks, kitchen sinks, flushing systems, cooking stoves, baking ovens, cookers, infrared radiators, kitchen units, fitted wardrobes and wardrobes. In the case of heating equipment the following repairs are considered minor: repairs to gas, electric and solid fuel fires, solid, liquid and gas fuel boilers for floor heating, including stop and regulation fittings and thermostat controls in floor heating; however repairs to radiators and central heating plumbing are not considered minor.”
Section 6 defines the term “costs related to the routine maintenance of the flat” under Article 687 § 2 of the Civil Code as follows:
“Costs related to the routine maintenance of the flat are costs for maintaining and cleaning the flat usually carried out in cases of long-term use of the flat. These include, in particular, regular checks and cleaning of objects mentioned in section 5(3) (gas appliances etc.), painting including plaster repairs, wallpapering and cleaning of floors including floor coverings, wall facing, cleaning of clogged waste pipes up to ascending pipes and interior painting.”
Under section 1, subject to the conditions stipulated by this Act, the State shall be liable for damage caused during the exercise of the State’s power. Under section 2, this liability cannot be excluded.
Under section 3, the State shall be liable for damage caused by:
(a)  the State authorities,
(b)  legal and natural persons in the exercise of public administration that has been conferred on them by law or on the basis of law,
(c)  authorities of autonomous regional governments, if the damage occurred during the exercise of public administration that was transferred to them by law or on the basis of law.
Under section 5 as amended, subject to stipulated conditions, the State is liable for damage caused by:
(a)  a decision delivered in civil court proceedings, in administrative proceedings, in proceedings pursuant to the Administrative Code or in criminal proceedings,
(b)  incorrect official procedure.
Section 13(1) provides that the State is liable for damage caused by an incorrect official procedure (first sentence), while incorrect official procedure consists also in non-compliance with an obligation to perform an act or deliver a decision within the statutory time limit (second sentence). The third sentence newly incorporated by Act no. 160/2006 specifies that provided there is no statutory time limit for performing an act or delivering a decision, an incorrect official procedure shall include a failure to comply with an obligation to perform an act or deliver a decision within a reasonable time.
Under section 14(1) the claim for damages shall be raised with the authority specified in section 6 of the Act (prior to the entry into effect of Act no. 160/2006 this “preliminary hearing” of the claim before the competent authority was not required for claims for compensation for damage caused by incorrect official procedure). Under subsection 3, the raising of the claim for damages under this Act is a pre-requisite for the eventual raising of the claim for damages before a court.
Under section 15(2) the aggrieved party may claim damages before a court only if the claim is not fully satisfied by the competent authority within six months after the filing of the request.
Section 26 provides that certain aspects of the nature and extent of damages to be paid are specified in sections 27 to 31 of the Act; the Civil Code is then applied subsidiarily.
Section 31a(1), newly incorporated by Act no. 160/2006, provides that reasonable satisfaction for non-pecuniary damage suffered shall be also awarded, regardless of whether any damage was caused by an unlawful decision or an incorrect official procedure.
Under section 32(1) the limitation period for claiming damages under this Act is three years from the date when the aggrieved party learned about the damage and about the person liable for it. If the quashing of a decision is a precondition for claiming a right to damages, then the limitation period commences on the date of delivery (notification) of the quashing decision. Nevertheless, the latest that the aggrieved party can claim his/her right is ten years from the date when he/she received (was notified of) the unlawful decision whereby he/she suffered damage; this does not apply in case of damage to health (section 32(2)).
The limitation period for claiming compensation for non-pecuniary damage under this Act is six months from the date the aggrieved party learned about the non-pecuniary damage, but not later than ten years from the date of legal fact as a result of which the non-pecuniary damage occurred; if non-pecuniary damage was caused by incorrect official procedure under section 13(1), second and third sentences, or under section 22(1), second and third sentences, then the limitation period ends no sooner than six months after the termination of the proceedings in the course of which this incorrect official procedure occurred (section 32(3)).
Under section 35 the limitation period is frozen from the date the claim for damages is filed until the end of the preliminary hearing, but for no longer than six months.
Section 36 provides that liability under this Act relates to damage caused by decisions delivered after the date of entry into effect of this Act and to damage caused by incorrect official procedure after the date of entry into effect of this Act; the liability for damage caused by decisions delivered prior to the entry into effect of this Act and damage caused by incorrect official procedure prior to the entry into effect of this Act is governed by existing regulations (Act no. 58/1969).
The Act extends the period during which the “target rent” is to be reached until 2012 (from the originally expected 2010). This amendment concerns flats in Prague, in municipalities in Central Bohemia with a population of more than 9,999 as at 1 January 2009, and in the cities of České Budějovice, Plzeň, Karlovy Vary, Liberec, Hradec Králové, Pardubice, Jihlava, Brno, Olomouc and Zlín. The reasons for this distribution of the last stage of the deregulation over three years was the fact that in the above locations excessive levels would be reached owing to increases in the prices of flats from which the target rent is calculated.
An amendment to the Civil Code came into force on 25 May 2011. Selected amended provisions read now as follows:
(1)  The landlord shall have the right to request that the number of persons living in the flat is such that it is adequate to the surface area of the flat and does not prevent any of these persons from using the flat duly and living in satisfactory sanitary conditions.
(2)  The landlord shall have the right to reserve, in the lease contract, his consent to the acceptance of additional persons to the flat. This shall not apply if it concerns a closely connected person or other cases worthy of special consideration.
(3)  The tenant shall inform the landlord in writing and without undue delay of changes in the number, first names, surnames and dates of birth of persons in the flat if it can be assumed that such change will last for more than two months; the tenant shall also inform the landlord of his marriage or passage of tenancy. If the tenant fails to do so within two months from the day on which the change occurred it shall be understood that he has grossly violated his obligation.
(4)  If the tenant is aware in advance of his long-lasting absence from the flat, combined with complicated contacts with him, he shall inform the landlord thereof. At the same time he shall specify a person who will provide for the possibility of entering the flat if necessary.
[...]
(1)  The rent at the moment of conclusion of the lease contract or change in the rent during the tenancy relationship shall be arranged for in an agreement between the landlord and the tenant, unless this Act or a separate regulation stipulate otherwise.
(2)  If the rent is not agreed, the landlord can propose a rent increase to the tenant in writing. If the tenant agrees with the proposed rent increase, the rent shall be increased as of the third calendar month following the delivery of the proposal. If the tenant does not notify the landlord in writing, within two months of the delivery of the proposal, that he agrees with the rent increase the landlord shall have the right to propose, within another period of three months, that the rent be determined by a court. Upon the landlord’s motion the court shall decide on the determination of the rent that is customary at the given place and time. The court shall determine the rent as from the day on which the motion was filed with the court.
(3)  The court can decide, pursuant to subsection 2, also in the case of tenancy in which the rent was agreed and which is a tenancy for an indefinite period of time if the circumstances that formed the basis from which the landlord or tenant proceeded when agreeing on the rent have changed substantially.
(4)  If the tenant proposes a rent decrease, subsections 2 and 3 shall apply mutatis mutandis.
(5)  Subsections 2 to 4 shall not apply when determining rents in the case of flats in housing cooperatives.
(6)  The method of calculating the amount of service charges for the use of the flat and the method of their payment shall be stipulated by a separate regulation, unless the landlord and the tenant agree otherwise.
[...]
(1)  If the tenant dies and the flat is not in spouses’ joint tenancy, then the rights and obligations under the tenancy shall pass to the person who lived with the original tenant in a common household on the day of the tenant’s death and who does not have his own flat. If that person is not the tenant’s spouse, partner, parent, sibling, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, child or grandchild, the rights and obligations under the tenancy shall pass to that person only if the landlord had consented to that person’s living in the flat. The consent shall be given in writing.
(2)  After its passage under subsection 1, the lease of the flat shall end in two years from the moment of the passage of the tenancy at the latest. This provision shall not apply if the person to whom the tenancy has passed is at least 70 years old at the moment of the passage of the tenancy. This provision shall not apply also if the person to whom the tenancy has passed is less than 18 years old at the moment of the passage of the tenancy; in that case the tenancy shall end on the day when that person is 20 years old at the latest, unless the landlord and the tenant agree otherwise.
(3)  If several persons satisfy the conditions for passage of the tenancy, then the rights and obligations under the tenancy shall pass to all of them jointly and severally. However, if there is the tenant’s child among those persons, then the rights and obligations under the tenancy shall pass to that child.
(4)  Everyone satisfying the conditions for passage of the tenancy can notify the landlord in writing within one month of the tenant’s death that he does not intend to continue with the tenancy; that person’s tenancy shall end on the day of the notification.
(5)  If the tenant of a flat in a housing cooperative dies and this flat is not in spouses’ joint tenancy, then upon the tenant’s death his membership of the housing cooperative and the tenancy of the flat shall pass to the heir to whom the membership share was conveyed.”
Ruling on a constitutional appeal lodged by fourteen Senators, the Constitutional Court found Ministry of Finance Decree no. 176/1993 to be contrary to Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and Article 11 § 1 of the Charter. It held, inter alia:
“The major challenges faced and the substantive restrictions on property rights adopted from 1950 to 1980 made it necessary to put an end to discrimination against certain classes of owners so as to restore their right to the peaceful enjoyment of their possession within the meaning of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and Article 11 § 1 of the [Charter]. The essence of the discrimination lies in the fact that, in contrast with other owners, some of the substantive aspects of their property rights are denied to the aforementioned owners and, further, ... in the fact that in many cases, where their only income is derived from rent, those owners are being obliged to subsidise what in the Constitutional Court’s view is a major social problem, ... that is, a burden which cannot be shouldered by a certain section of society but requires a reasonable and balanced solution by the State and society as a whole. ...
In other words ... as a result of existing legislation, certain groups in our society are bearing costs which ... should be covered by the State. The rent-ceiling scheme, if it is to be compatible with the Constitution, must not keep rents at a level which eliminates any possibility of an economic return on all the established and necessary costs. [Otherwise]... it would imply the denial of all the principles of ownership.”
The decree was repealed on 31 December 2001 in order to provide the legislature with time to legislate on the subject anew.
The Ombudsman and a group of senators challenged the constitutionality of Ordinance no. 01/2002 of the Ministry of Finance. They argued, inter alia, that the new regulation had been extending the unconstitutionality declared by the Constitutional Court in its judgment no. Pl. ÚS 3/2000 because the content of the new regulation was almost the same as the repealed regulation.
On 11 November 2002, during the examination of this constitutional appeal, the Ministry of Finance informed the Constitutional Court that it intended to amend the rent control regulations, which it did on 15 November 2002 by Ordinance no. 06/2002. Under section 67(1) of the Constitutional Court Act the Constitutional Court shall terminate the proceedings requesting repeal of a provision if that provision loses effect during the proceedings before the Constitutional Court.
The Constitutional Court, however, considered Ordinance no. 06/2002 to be practically identical to the relevant parts of Ordinance no. 01/2002 and thus acceded to request of the Ombudsman and the group of senators to consider repealing the latter Ordinance instead.
Regarding the adoption of new Ordinance no. 06/2002 the Constitutional Court noted that it considered the conduct of the Ministry of Finance as a clear attempt to circumvent the objective of section 67(1) of the Constitutional Court Act and an attempt to prevent the exercise of constitutional justice.
Regarding the merits it repealed the Ministry of Finance Ordinance no. 06/2002 reaffirming its conclusions in Judgment no. Pl. ÚS 3/2000 and noting that the new regulation is in the important parts identical with the part of the previous regulation that was repealed as unconstitutional. In this context it agreed with the group of senators that previous opinion of the Constitutional Court had not been respected in breach of Article 89 § 2 of the Constitution.
It found also that the Ministry had not been empowered to regulate rents for dwellings by means of that form of secondary legislation. The ordinance violated Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, Article 2 § 2 of the Charter and Articles 1, 2 § 3 and 15 of the Constitution read in conjunction with Articles 1, 4 §§ 3, 4 and 11 § 1 of the Charter, as the rent ceilings which they introduced froze the rent-control scheme in force before 1 January 2002.
As regards the procedure used for the adoption of the ordinance, the Constitutional Court noted that the Ministry, in issuing the ordinance, had relied on Act no. 265/1991 on the powers of the authorities of the Czech Republic in relation to prices and Act no. 526/1990 on prices. Whilst these legal acts empowered certain State authorities to adopt measures regulating the prices of goods defined therein, they did not entitle them to regulate the conduct of landlords and tenants subject to the legislation in any other manner.
The court found that the Ministry had acted beyond and contrary to these laws when imposing its regulations across the board on landlords and tenants within the meaning of the Civil Code and in regulating certain aspects of their conduct in a manner which was reserved only for statutory regulations in accordance with the Charter, and which infringed the principle of contractual autonomy of private parties.
Moreover, the court ruled that the impugned ordinance lacked proportionality and discriminated against a certain class of owners. In its reasoning it stated, inter alia, that a rent-control scheme could generally be said to be in conformity with constitutional law if it reflected market prices based on the location of dwellings and if it struck a fair balance between the public interest and the fundamental rights of individuals.
Relying on differences between Czech law and the European standards, the court further held that, although the legal concept of personal use of dwellings had been replaced by the concept of lease within the meaning of the Civil Code, effective reform of the lease-control scheme to reflect the free-market economy had not yet been introduced. With regard to the rent-control scheme, it observed that it was based on so-called command prices which were fixed administratively, whereas in other European countries controlled rents were related to market prices.
According to the Constitutional Court, the Ministry of Finance Ordinance, which reflected only the trend in costs and inflation, had ignored the trend in prices on the market.
Ruling on a constitutional appeal by twenty-five Senators, the Constitutional Court repealed Government Decree no. 567/2002, finding in particular:
“... in general, it can be said that the object [of the regulation] is to ‘freeze’ rents for a definite period of time. The regulation does not apply to all rents but only to those which were subject to rent ceilings on 17 December 2002, that is, rents within the meaning of Section 1 of Ordinance no. 06/2002, annulled on 18 December 2002 by Constitutional Court judgment no. 528/2002, and to those paid for dwellings with regulated rent ... On the basis of these findings, it can be observed that this moratorium represents continuity with Ordinance no. 06/2002 and that the objectives of both regulations are basically identical. ...
In that respect the question arises what is the current state; more exactly at what level are rents currently regulated. It can be presumed that the Ordinance no. 06/2002 ceased to be in force as of 18 December 2002 and since that date nothing prevented the contractual parties from agreeing on rent by mutual consent; to the contrary, unilateral rent increases ceased to be permissible... Another possibility should not be omitted i.e. that one of the contractual parties would bring the issue of rent to a court; this would concern cases of disagreement over level of rent namely when the landlord would claim the level of rent common in the given locality on the ground that the parties did not agree on the price (§ 671 Civil Code); this would however not be the case of rent increase properly speaking... It is possible to presume that it was not possible to increase rent unilaterally after the repeal of Ordinance no. 06/2002, unless the parties agreed so by mutual consent. This is, however, rather a theoretical possibility, owing not only to the limited time available to negotiate such a tenancy agreement but also – and most importantly – to the obvious economic disadvantage of such an arrangement for tenants. It follows that the impugned regulation effectively freezes in time the rent-control scheme which was declared unconstitutional by Constitutional Court judgment no. 528/2002 and also no. 231/2000 on the ground of the rent ceilings it imposed and the method of their calculation. ...
In this situation the factual correspondence as regards the contents between the interference under consideration concerning the amount of rent and cases declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court in the past, account being taken of the fact that the form of this interference was again a secondary regulation issued beyond the limits of statutory delegation, which the Constitutional Court found unconstitutional in the previous cases as well, constitutes unconstitutionality for the reasons mentioned in the cited findings, in particular for the reason of violation of Article 2 § 2 of the Charter and Article 2 § 3 of the Constitution taken together with Article 1, Article 4 §§ 3 and 4 and Article 11 § 1 of the Charter and Article 1 of Protocol no. 1 to the Convention taken together with Article 14 of the Convention. Therefore the Constitutional Court holds that Government Order no. 567/2002, on a price moratorium over rents, is contrary to the constitutional order and the Czech Republic’s international obligations. For this reason the Constitutional Court was compelled to repeal it pursuant to Section 70, subsection 1 of the Constitutional Court Act. The Constitutional Court shares the claimants’ opinion that Article 89 § 2 of the Constitution was violated, because in their actions the Government were bound by previous findings of the Constitutional Court, when the decisive legal reasoning expressed in the above findings constituted a sufficient basis for the Government’s further actions (...) irrespective of the fact that respect for opinions of a Constitutional Court is a usual component of a political and legal culture in developed countries. ...”
It further noted in an obiter dictum that should a rent control scheme compliant with the Constitution not be adopted by the legislator, the Constitutional Court would have no other possibility than to fulfil its duties and assure observation of principles guaranteed by the Constitution and international treaties at least in individual cases, although such solution would be insufficient and provisory, the only satisfactory solution being adoption of a regulation.
The Municipal Court in Prague, in the context of proceedings where a plaintiff was claiming the payment of outstanding rent for July 2003 corresponding to the difference between the regulated rent and usual rent as determined by an expert opinion, asked the Constitutional Court to repeal several provisions of the Civil Code. After having rejected the request, the Constitutional Court nevertheless declared unconstitutional the long-lasting inactivity of the legislator to adopt a special law regulating circumstances under which an owner was allowed to unilaterally increase the rent:
“The Constitutional Court notes that the decision in the case no. Pl. ÚS 8/02 was adopted more than three years ago (20 November 2002) and it is clear that the situation in the housing market could not have changed much. The legislature, instead of responding flexibly in cooperation with the government to the findings in which the Constitutional Court strongly criticized the legislation of severe rent control violating property rights of owners of flats and unfinished transformation of tenancies, failed to this day to fulfil the intentions of Article 696 paragraph 1 of the Civil Code. The result of this activity, respectively inactivity, is the actual freezing of regulated rents, thereby further exacerbating the violation of property rights of the owners of the flats subject to the regulation. The balance cannot be provided otherwise than by adopting envisaged legislation. By not adopting it, the legislature created an unconstitutional situation, which is in stark contrast with the Charter, ...”
The Constitutional Court urged the ordinary courts to fulfil their essential role and not to reject the landlords’ actions for rent increase on the ground of absence of legal basis. It held that the ordinary courts had to decide on rent increase notwithstanding the absence of special legislation:
“On the basis of these facts the Constitutional Court, in the recalled role of the constitutionality protector, cannot restrict its function to the mere position of a ‘negative’ legislator and must, within the balance of individual components of power characteristic of a State based on the rule of law and respect for the rights and freedoms of a man and citizen (Article 1 § 1 of the Constitution of the Czech Republic), create space for the respect for fundamental rights and freedoms. The issue at stake is that the ordinary courts, despite the absence of presumed specific regulation, must decide on the rent increase and they must do so depending on the local conditions so that the discrimination mentioned above does not occur. With regard to the fact that in such cases it would concern finding and applying simple law, which does not appertain to the Constitutional Court, as it repeatedly emphasises in its case-law, it refrains from offering specific decision making procedures and thus substituting the ordinary courts’ function. It would only note that it is necessary to avoid arbitrariness; a decision must be based on rational arguments and thorough assessment of all circumstances of the case, the use of common principles and practice of civic life, the work of legal theorists and the courts’ established case law that is in conformity with the Constitution.
Attention should be also paid to the second level of the claimant’s objections, which is based on the assertion that there is an unconstitutional vacuum legis consisting in that so far the envisaged regulation has not been adopted. In consequence of the legislator’s failure to act it can cause an unconstitutional situation if the legislator is obligated to adopt certain statutory regulations and does not do so, and thus interferes with an interest protected by law – the Constitution. The legislator’s obligation may follow directly from the constitutional level (e.g. in securing the realisation of the fundamental rights and freedoms or their protection), and also from the level of ‘ordinary’ acts, where it imposed this obligation upon itself expressis verbis. It is a well-known fact that in the activities of the constitutional courts the protection against failure to act was developed especially in the case of the German Federal Constitutional Court. Also the Czech Republic’s constitutional judiciary dealt with the issue of vacuum legis (...). Therefore it can be concluded that under certain conditions the consequences of vacuum legis (legislative vacuum) are unconstitutional, especially in a case when the legislator has decided that it would regulate in a certain field, and expresses this intention in an act, but does not adopt the envisaged regulation. The same conclusion holds true in a case when Parliament has adopted the declared regulation, but it has been repealed because it did not satisfy criteria of conformity with the Constitution and the legislator has not adopted a replacement that would be in conformity with the Constitution, although the Constitutional Court has provided the legislator with sufficient time (18 months). Moreover, it remained inactive also after the lapse of this time limit and to this day it has not adopted the requisite regulation (not even after more than four years).”
The Constitutional Court found that Czech rent law was based on a high level of protection for tenants, prompted in particular by social considerations, as housing served a basic human need. However, it was unacceptable simply to transfer a social burden from one group of persons (tenants) to another (landlords). In the current housing market, landlords did not have any legal means of obtaining a rent-controlled flat as substitute housing for a tenant whose tenancy they sought to terminate.
Moreover, the fact that there was no rent-control law leading to rent deregulation should not be detrimental to landlords. The distortion of the market in consequence of the long-term failure to solve the problem of rent-controlled flats could not be perpetuated by the national courts’ case-law. It was not permissible to create inequality between tenants of rent-controlled flats and those renting flats not subject to rent control, or between landlords who owned flats with controlled rents and those who owned flats not subject to control.
Some landlords lodged a constitutional appeal against the decisions of ordinary courts dismissing their action for vacation of a flat against a deceased tenant’s granddaughter, who had claimed that the right of tenancy had passed to her on the basis of the Civil Code. The Constitutional Court held as follows:
“On the basis of the constitutional appeal under consideration the Constitutional Court was called to decide whether the ordinary courts, by making an extreme interpretation of Article 706 § 1 of the Civil Code, had interfered with the applicants’ ownership rights, which are guaranteed by Article 11 § 1 of the Charter and which did not receive judicial protection contrary to Article 36 § 1 of the Charter. ...
A fortiori, it cannot be accepted in a case where the facts, ascertained in such a careless way, are to be subsumed under Article 706(1) of the Civil Code which, as explained above, significantly restricts the applicants’ basic ownership right in relation to the flat. By this course of action not only is Article 36 § 1 of the Charter violated, but Article 11 § 1 of the Charter, which provides protection to ownership rights at the constitutional level, is also violated in consequence of the extension of the purpose of Article 706 § 1 of the Civil Code (i.e. in consequence of a failure to observe Article 4 § 4 of the Charter). From the constitutionality perspective it is true that not even an established practice is enough to justify an expansive interpretation of grounds for succession to tenancy by which landlords’ ownership rights are restricted beyond the law. If such interpretation is to protect the right to housing, then the Constitutional Court must observe that in its finding of 21 June 2000 no. Pl. ÚS 3/2000 it held that although the European Social Charter embodied the right to housing, in case of competition of this right with other rights these clashes need to be measured against the principles of fair balance and proportionality ... In case of a clash between the right to housing, which is a social right (the fact that it arises under international law does not alter this in any way), and the ownership right it is necessary to apply principles that are also valid in respect of other social rights ... It cannot be neglected that the content of social rights – contrary to the classical fundamental rights – depends on the wealth of society and on economic development, including fluctuations in the economic cycle. This characteristic, i.e. this condition, often leads to the classification of social rights as constitutional soft law (in contrast to classical fundamental rights). In testing the proportionality and fair balance the ‘right’ of an actual tenant, who may resort to ‘feigned’ cohabitation or may move in for a short period of time solely to acquire favourable housing conditions, would not stand in relation to the ownership right. The expedience of the conduct may, for example, be determined from a comparison of the situations in which the person lived prior to his/her move, in relation to which he/she asserts that it was motivated exclusively by the care of a relative. Furthermore, the case-law of the Supreme Court of the Czech Republic satisfies this requirement, when it bases its decision-making on the following opinion: ‘Although for persons specified in Article 706 § 1, first sentence of the Civil Code, the condition of a community of consumption is not required for succession to tenancy of a flat, from the point of view of satisfying the condition of there being a common household, it is necessary for the cohabitation in the flat with the tenant to be characterised by permanency. The cohabitation is considered permanent if there are circumstances that can be objectively ascertained and that show that the flat tenant and the person living with him/her in his/her flat agreed upon the intention to cohabitate permanently.’ (cf. decision of 16 January 2001 no. 26 Cdo 1867/2000, no. 42/2001 in the Collection of Decisions of the Supreme Court). ...
From the point of view of Article 4 § 4 and Article 11 § 1 of the Charter it is not acceptable for Article 706 § 1 of the Civil Code to provide protection to relatives of the deceased tenant specified in this provision who make use of this unique opportunity contrary to its narrow purpose. The Constitution obliges the courts to verify carefully whether the person asserting the satisfaction of conditions for succession to tenancy is not abusing the law to the detriment of the owner. This holds true a fortiori if a short period of only several months has passed from the moment of the beginning of the cohabitation to the death of the original tenant and during this period the original tenant was mainly in hospitals or other health-care facilities. The decisions of the ordinary courts are based on an interpretation of the law that does not observe the constitutional protection of the applicants’ ownership rights and furthermore the ordinary courts reached their conclusions via a course of action in assessing the evidence that is contrary to the rules of a fair trial. ...”
In this judgment the Constitutional Court quashed the judgment of the appellate court upholding a first-instance judgment in which an applicant’s action against tenants for the surrender of unjust enrichment had been rejected. The unjust enrichment consisted in the fact that the tenants had used a flat in the applicant’s building without legal entitlement and they had paid her, for the use of the flat, the amount of the “controlled rent” for a second-category flat. The Constitutional Court stated, inter alia, as follows:
“In the case under consideration the applicant requested, before the ordinary courts, the enjoined party to surrender the unjust enrichment which that party had allegedly gained to the detriment of the applicant by refusing to vacate the flat, in relation to which that party’s right of lease had ended upon a notice of termination, despite having been provided with a substitute flat. In the Constitutional Court’s view it is not possible to accept the interpretation according to which until the time of a decision of the court on the enforcement of a decision the relationship between the former landlord and tenant is regulated by Article 712a of the Civil Code, i.e. that until that time the former tenant is obliged to pay to the landlord rent as determined by Decree no. 176/1993, i.e. the ‘controlled rent’. Such a broad interpretation does not even observe the protection of the right to housing, but it protects housing ‘for a price subsidised by the owner’ and that is a consideration that is markedly outside a reasonable interpretation of the right to housing. In the Constitutional Court’s opinion such interpretation does not observe the essence and objective of the protection of ownership rights and consequentially it creates an entirely disproportionate restriction, or even negation of ownership rights, which are already inadmissibly restricted during the tenancy by the mere nature and form of the rent regulation, as the Constitutional Court has repeatedly held in the past (cf. judgments nos. Pl. ÚS 3/2000, Pl. ÚS 8/02 and Pl. ÚS 2/03). ...
In other words, Article 712a of the Civil Code must be interpreted in a way that it affects the relationship between the former landlord and tenant only until the time when the former landlord secures a replacement flat for the tenant. It is then up to the owner of the flat to show, in evidential proceedings before the ordinary courts, on what date he secured the replacement flat. From that moment the former tenant uses the flat without legal entitlement and this relationship is no longer governed by Article 712a of the Civil Code. After this time the right of the owner ... to the surrender of unjust enrichment comes into existence, while the amount of the unjust enrichment should correspond to the amount of usual rent in the given place and time. The interpretation by the ordinary courts, which does not respect the limits stipulated in Article 4 § 4 of the Charter, represents a disproportionate restriction of the ownership rights of the flat owner and is therefore contrary to Article 11 § 1 of the Charter.”
As no statute providing for controlled rents had been enacted after Constitutional Court judgment no. 84/2003 and the ordinary courts had failed to provide landlords with any remedy in respect of controlled rents, the Constitutional Court, with reference to the case-law of the Court (Kruslin v. France, 24 April 1990, Series A no. 176A) and to the principle of non-interference with property rights other than on a statutory basis, reiterated its intention to apply the principles enshrined in its previous judgments in individual cases until the existing vacuum legis was filled. It held:
“... it is incumbent upon the courts to fill the vacuum legis by their case-law... while taking into consideration the Constitutional Court’s case-law...”
The court further found:
“The interpretation [by the ordinary courts] of the Constitutional Court’s case-law ... in such a way as to deny the protection of property rights of landlords cannot be accepted. The objective of this case-law was not to freeze and set in stone the unconstitutional interference with property rights, but to eliminate unconstitutional restrictions on landlords’ property rights. The distortion of the market caused by the long-lasting lack of a solution to the problem of dwellings subject to the rent-control scheme cannot be perpetuated by the courts’ practice. Pending action by the legislature it is incumbent upon the ordinary courts to safeguard the rights ... of individuals. ... The courts cannot refuse to protect individuals’ fundamental rights by referring to the vacuum legis. On the contrary, they are obliged to provide such protection. They are requested to do so in a way that will protect the very substance and objective of ownership within the meaning of Article 4 § 4 of the Charter.”
The Constitutional Court then quashed the judgments of the Pardubice District Court of 7 October 2004 and Hradec Králové Regional Court of 16 June 2005 dismissing an action by J.K. seeking an order for his tenant to pay outstanding rent. The appellate court had inter alia held that the tenant was not receiving unjust enrichment because she had a legal title to live in the flat and was paying a rent in the same amount as when that legal title had been established.
On 6 August 2003, the plaintiff lodged an action to declare null and void regulated tenancies and order the tenant to pay a newly fixed increased rent as of 1 April 2003, which was rejected by ordinary courts. In its judgment the Constitutional Court reiterated the principles articulated in judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05 of 28 February 2006 and quashed the lower courts decisions.
The Constitutional Court criticised the Supreme Court’s decision in that case which applied judgment no. 26 Cdo 867/2004 of 31 August 2005 referred to in judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05 of 28 February 2006. It urged the Supreme Court to lay down the basis for unification of the ordinary courts’ jurisprudence.
The Constitutional Court further noted that the issue of declaring null and void the contractual provisions regarding the level of rent was new in jurisprudence which led to a legal uncertainty for the landlord. In consequence, the Supreme Court would have to refrain from rejecting the action on the ground that the landlord failed to comply with formal requirements for formulating such an action but allow the lower courts to give him sufficient possibility to reformulate his action in compliance with the Supreme Court’s perception, if need be.
One of the three judges composing the chamber of the Constitutional Court, Vojen Güttler, formulated a partly dissenting opinion where he expressed the view that judicial solution of the regulated rent issue was very risky due to the possibility that ordinary courts would decide randomly and inconsistently. He esteemed that the reasoning should have indicated that the duty of ordinary courts to decide on rent increase would end as of the day of taking of effect of a new legislation regulating rent increases. He also pointed out that the ordinary courts would have to consider whether the increased rent should be granted as of the day of lodging the action for rent increase or of the courts’ decision becoming final.
On 5 August 2004, the plaintiff introduced an action for payment of outstanding rent for the period between 18 December 2002 and 31 July 2004 representing the difference between the usual and the controlled rent for a flat. His action was rejected by lower courts whose decisions were subsequently quashed by the Constitutional Court.
The Constitutional Court stated that it had affirmed the lower courts’ obligation to decide on rent increase notwithstanding the absence of legislation for the first time in its judgment Pl. ÚS 20/05 above.
It further held that when deciding on increases in rent, the ordinary courts were empowered to act only pro futuro and that it was not possible to claim payment of the difference between regulated rent and the rent common in the given locality for the past.
Given the extraordinary character of this procedure created by the judgment Pl. ÚS 20/05 above the courts must provide the parties with sufficient space to take account of the applicable principles and to use adequate instruments including a possible modification of the formulation of the petition and the possibility of concluding a settlement. The plaintiff must be provided by the courts with sufficient instructions even outside the general obligation to provide advice embodied in Article 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The court further held that if the landlord’s founded claims were not fully satisfied, he would have no choice but to sue the State for damages.
In this judgment the Constitutional Court quashed lower courts’ decisions having rejected an action for payment of outstanding rent. It reiterated the opinion that if the landlord’s founded claims of rent increase were not fully satisfied, he would have no choice but to sue the State for damages.
In this judgment, the Constitutional Court quashed the lower courts decisions having rejected the landlord’s action for surrender of unjust enrichment in the amount of the difference between the controlled rent and the rent corresponding to the local conditions. The Constitutional Court esteemed that this action was “the only imaginable for the landlord”; by rejecting it the lower courts deprived him of the right to a fair trial and his right to peaceful enjoyment of property.
In this judgment the Constitutional Court reiterated the principles articulated in its previous judgments and quashed the lower courts’ decisions by which they rejected a landlord’s action requesting the payment of additional rent, corresponding to the difference between the regulated and market rent, for a past period of time.
Subsequently, lower courts rejected again the action referring to judgment no. I. ÚS 489/05. They considered that a rent increase was only possible pro futuro. Their decisions were quashed again by the Constitutional Court on 5 February 2009 (see judgment no. III. ÚS 696/07 (paragraphs 132-134 below)) holding that it was possible to claim rent increase for the past.
On 12 July 2004, the plaintiff filed an action for payment of usual rent for the period from 21 March 2003 until delivery of the court’s decision, which was rejected by ordinary courts. The Constitutional Court reiterated the opinion that the landlords could only claim rent increase pro futuro. Ordinary courts were obliged to provide the plaintiff with adequate space to be allowed to take account of applicable principles and to use adequate instruments including modification of the formulation of the petition, and with adequate instructions even outside the general obligation to provide advice embodied in Article 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the landlord’s founded claims of rent increase were not fully satisfied, he would have no choice but to sue the State for damages.
In this judgment, the Constitutional Court granted a landlady’s constitutional appeal against the judgments of the lower courts which had dismissed her action to pay the difference between the rent paid by the defendants for August 2003 in the amount last determined under the repealed regulations in the domain of rent control and the usual rent, specified in an expert opinion. It found, inter alia, as follows:
“The fact that the applicant’s constitutional appeal was granted does not mean that the ordinary courts would accept the amount of rent requested by her without further examination. The specific amount of rent must result from the process of evidence in particular, during which the ordinary courts must provide sufficient opportunity to the litigants to enable them to present relevant background information that may influence the amount of rent. Given the exceptional nature of this procedure in which the law is developed, the claimant and the defendant must receive appropriate advice from the ordinary court, even outside the general obligation to provide advice embodied in Article 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure.”
In this judgment the Constitutional Court specified that the ordinary courts could decide on actions for rent increase only until valid legislation regulating rent increase as of 1 January 2007 becomes effective.
In this decision the Constitutional Court specified, in an obiter dictum and referring to its decisions Pl. ÚS 20/05, I. ÚS 719/2005, IV. ÚS 611/05, II. ÚS 93/05, the meaning of pro futuro. It can only mean from the date on which the civil action for rent increase was lodged or the date indicated by the claimant, and for the period indicated in the action or until the date on which the court decides on the action.
In this judgment the Constitutional Court reiterated the opinion that the landlords could only claim rent increase pro futuro and indicated that the meaning of pro futuro was as of the date of lodging the action. Should the landlord’s founded claims of rent increase not be fully satisfied, he would have no choice but to sue the State for damages.
In these decisions the Constitutional Court observed that all previous cases in which the Constitutional Court had quashed lower courts’ decisions concerned an issue of rent increase for a past period of time (inter alia judgments nos. I. ÚS 489/05, II. ÚS 361/06, IV. ÚS 111/06). It followed that the lower courts’ obligation to decide on rent increase, affirmed in judgment Pl. ÚS 20/05 of 28 February 2006, could not be reduced only to future tenancy relationships; it was possible to apply it also to past relationships and to order the payment of additional rent for a past period of time (surrender of unjust enrichment).
The court further held that claims for damages against the State had a subsidiary character with respect to the landlords rent claims against the tenants (rent increase, payment of additional rent).
One of the three judges composing the chamber, Jan Musil, expressed the same dissenting opinion in all five cases where he esteemed that the rent increase was only conceivable as of the day of lodging the action for rent increase against the tenant. He noted that the judgment Pl. ÚS 20/05 contained no explicit reference as to the point of time from which it was possible to increase rent. While the judgment no. I. ÚS 489/05 referred to an increase pro futuro, excluding at the same time any increases for the past, judgment no. IV. ÚS 175/08 considered that the increase could be granted as of the day of lodging the action for rent increase pro futuro.
In this judgment the Constitutional Court held that the opinion that the rent increase could not be granted for the past, expressed in judgment no. I. ÚS 489/05, had been overcome and quashed the lower courts’ judgments which had rejected an action for surrender of unjust enrichment lodged by a landlord.
The Constitutional Court decided that the ordinary courts could grant rent increases for a period from the date of the lodging of the action until 31 December 2006. The rent could not be increased for the period preceding the lodging of the action. Nor could it be increased for the period after 1 January 2007 since unilateral rent increases were authorized by Act no. 107/2006.
For the abovementioned period of time the action for damages against the State on the ground of the long-lasting unconstitutional inactivity of the Parliament regarding the failure to adopt a special regulation on conditions under which the owners were authorized to increase rents, charges, or other conditions of rent agreements unilaterally, had subsidiary character and could only be lodged if the action for rent increase against the tenant failed. As regards the period preceding the date of the lodging of the action, the owner could claim damages directly against the State.
In that respect, the Constitutional Court precised that the right to damages from the State could in no way be deduced from its judgment no. Pl. 20/05 of 28 February 2006 where it had held that the long-lasting inactivity of the legislator had been unconstitutional. Responsibility for legislative competence was primarily political. Although the margin of appreciation of the legislator was limited by the constitutional order, if these boundaries were not respected it was possible either to repeal the relevant act or to declare its unconstitutionality by the Constitutional Court. Such intervention by the Constitutional Court could under some circumstances impact the rights of an individual which had been restricted (e.g. inapplicability of an act in a particular case). Nonetheless, it did not create the individual’s claim for compensation. As regards judgments nos. I. ÚS 489/05 of 6 April 2006 and IV. ÚS 175/08 of 9 September 2008, the subsidiary claim of damages was based on the ordinary courts’ unfounded refusal to grant an action for rent increase, not the legislator’s inactivity.
The Constitutional Court further considered that claims for damages filed against the State under the State Liability Act on the ground of the long-lasting unconstitutional inactivity of the Parliament were to be analyzed by lower courts as claims for damages under Article 11 § 4 of the Charter. Since the Charter did not regulate practical details of such law suit such as competent authority, time-bars etc., the court esteemed that it was necessary to apply the State Liability Act per analogiam.
The Constitutional Court urged the legislator to deal with the issue of rent control and to take into consideration different measures adopted in Poland as a result of the Court’s judgment in the case of Hutten-Czapska v. Poland (no. 35014/97, ECHR 2006VIII).
There are dozens of decisions of the Constitutional Court delivered after this plenary opinion in which reference was made to this opinion and the landlords’ constitutional appeals against ordinary courts’ decisions on actions in which these landlords sought compensation for damage that had allegedly been caused by rent control, were granted.
The plaintiff sued the state for damages in the amount of the difference between regulated rent and market rent for the period between February 2002 and January 2004. In its judgment the Constitutional Court ruled that the “possibility to pursue an action for rent increase against the tenant was created only by judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05”. Thus, the action for damages against the State did not have subsidiary character regarding the period concerned by the action. In other words, the owner was entitled to sue the State for damages directly regarding the period of time prior to that judgment.
The Court further held that the amount of indemnification to be paid by the State was not necessarily identical to the difference between the regulated rent and the rent that was common in the given locality.
In this case the owner filed an action for damages against the State on 29 August 2006. The action concerned the period from 1 September 2004 until 31 August 2006, i.e. both before judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05 but also after it became final, for which the owner was claiming payment of damages in the amount of the difference between regulated and usual rent.
The Constitutional Court reiterated that the “possibility to pursue an action for rent increase against the tenant was created only by judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05”. Consequently, the action for damages against the State did not have a subsidiary character until the day of publication of that judgment and the owners were entitled to sue the State for damages directly regarding the period of time preceding that date.
Nonetheless, the Constitutional Court esteemed that pursuant to the principle vigilantibus iura, the plaintiff should have introduced an action for rent increase for the period after the latter judgment became final. Although this fact did not entirely exclude the possibility of receiving compensation from the State, lower courts were obliged to take into account the amount which the owner could have successfully requested from the tenant.
The Court further held that the amount of indemnification to be paid by the State was not necessarily identical to the difference between the regulated rent and the rent that was common in the given locality.
The Constitutional Court further clarified that the court of appeal was manifestly mistaken when it considered that it was not possible to sue the State after the adoption of Act no. 107/2006 i.e. 31 March 2006. Restrictions on property rights had been removed first – although only progressively and partly – on 1 January 2007 when it became possible to increase rent unilaterally, not when the act had been adopted, nor when it took effect. This did not however exclude its subsidiary character after the publication of judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05.
In these rulings the Constitutional Court referred to its findings in opinion no. Pl. ÚS 27/09. It held that the ordinary courts could grant rent increases only for a period from the date of lodging of the action until 31 December 2006. For that period the action for damages against the State had subsidiary character and could only be lodged if the action for rent increase against the tenant failed; for the period preceding the date of the lodging of the action, the owner could claim damages directly against the State.
In this judgment the Constitutional Court applied its judgment no. Pl. ÚS 27/09 of 28 April 2009 and quashed the Supreme Court’s judgment no. 25 Cdo 1124/2005 of 31 January 2007 (see paragraph 170 below).
The Court further held that the amount of indemnification to be paid by the State was not necessarily identical to the difference between the regulated rent and the rent that was common in the given locality.
In these decisions the Constitutional Court, referring to its judgments nos. I. ÚS 489/05 and Pl. ÚS 27/09, refused to quash lower courts’ decisions considering that the owner could not request the courts to order a tenant to pay the difference between a regulated rent and a rent that was common in the given locality (or “minimal economic rent”) for a past period of time, whatever the legal ground e.g. surrender of unjust enrichment or compensation for limitation of property rights, but only claim a rent increase pro futuro from the date of lodging of such an action.
In this case the owners filed an action for damages against the State on 18 July 2007. Their action concerned the period from 1 May 2004 until 31 December 2006, i.e. both before judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05 but also after it became final, for which the owners were claiming payment of damages in the amount of the difference between regulated and economic rent.
The Constitutional Court ruled that the “possibility to pursue an action for rent increase against the tenant was created only by judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05”. Thus, the plaintiffs had the possibility to sue the tenant as of the day of publication of that judgment in the Official gazette. Regarding the period preceding that date, the owners were entitled to sue the State for damages directly.
Therefore, the Constitutional Court esteemed that pursuant to the principle vigilantibus iura, they could have introduced an action for rent increase for the period after the latter judgment became final. Although this fact did not exclude the possibility of receiving compensation from the State for that period without prior action against the tenants entirely, lower courts were obliged to take into account the amount which the owner could have successfully requested from the tenant.
The court rejected the owners’ argument that due to the entry into force of Act no. 107/2006 it would have been useless to introduce an action for rent increase after 2 June 2006. The court esteemed that the day of taking of effect of that law was not decisive but 1 January 2007 – the first day as of which it was possible to increase rent unilaterally.
The Court further held that the amount of indemnification to be paid by the State was not necessarily identical to the difference between the regulated rent and the rent that was common in the given locality.
These decisions confirmed that the approach developed in decision no. Pl. ÚS 27/09 was only applicable until 31 December 2006. Afterwards, it was necessary to apply Act no. 107/2006 which provides for a unilateral increase of rents.
On 8 December 2006, the owner sued the State for damages in the amount of the difference between regulated and market rent for the period between 22 December 2004 and 21 December 2006. In its judgment the Constitutional Court reiterated that the “possibility to pursue an action for rent increase against the tenant was created only by judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05.” Consequently, the Court ruled that the owner could claim rent increase from the tenant only for the period after 2 June 2006, the date on which the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05 was published. Regarding the period preceding that date, actions for damages against the State could be lodged directly.
For the period after the latter judgment had been published the possibility of receiving compensation directly from the State without prior suing of the tenants for rent increase was not excluded, but lower courts were obliged to take into account the amount which the owner could have successfully requested from the tenant.
The Court further reiterated that the amount of indemnification to be paid by the State was not necessarily identical to the difference between the regulated rent and the rent that was common in the given locality.
In this case, the landlord repeatedly requested a tenant to increase rent between 1 November and 31 July 2005. The tenant refused the landlord’s proposals. In consequence, the landlord introduced an action for surrender of unjust enrichment, or alternatively for payment of compensation for limitation of property rights, against the tenant for the abovementioned period. His action was rejected by lower courts with a reference to the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. I. ÚS 489/05. In his constitutional appeal, he complained that the legal opinion applied by lower courts was erroneous since the limitation of rent increase pro futuro made it impossible to obtain redress for the period which was relevant in his case. The Constitutional Court rejected his complaint applying decision no. I. ÚS 489/05 and opinion Pl. ÚS 27/09.
This decision was adopted in the same law suit as judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05 of 28 February 2006. After the adoption of the Constitutional Court’s latter judgment, which quashed the lower courts’ decisions by which the landlord’s action for payment of the difference between the regulated rent and the rent common in the given locality for a past period of time had been rejected, the lower courts informed the applicant that in the light of judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05 of 28 February 2006 he was entitled to claim a rent increase only pro futuro and gave him the possibility to reformulate his action. The applicant did not comply with that invitation esteeming that he should be given a possibility to obtain redress not only for future but also for the past. Moreover, if he had complied, his reformulated action would either have been rejected on the ground that as of 31 December 2006 the new Act on unilateral rent increase was applicable, or such rent increase would only cover a period of 25 days between 6 December and 31 December 2006.
The Constitutional Court applying its judgment no I. ÚS 489/05 and opinion Pl. ÚS-st 27/09 rejected the new constitutional appeal considering that a rent increase could only be granted pro futuro.
This judgment was adopted in the same case as the judgment no.  I. ÚS 717/05 of 21 March 2006 (constitutional appeal lodged on 20 December 2005), where the plaintiff’s action to declare null and void regulated tenancies and order the tenant to pay a newly fixed increased rent as of 1 April 2003, lodged on 6 August 2003, had been rejected by ordinary courts. These decisions were subsequently quashed by the Constitutional Court in the abovementioned judgment and the case was remitted to the lower courts which, yet again, rejected the owner’s request to increase the rent.
Applying judgment no. I. ÚS 489/05, they considered that the owner could not claim rent increase for a past period of time, therefore any rent increase could be effective only as of the day of delivery of the court’s decision, in this particular case 27 June 2007. The plaintiff however demanded rent increase from 1 April 2003 until 21 December 2006. Thus, more than five years following the applicant’s initial constitutional appeal and almost 8 years after he lodged his initial action, the Constitutional Court remitted the case, again, before the lower courts.
The Constitutional Court approved the approach of the lower courts to the extent that they had rejected the plaintiff’s action for rent increase for the period between 1 April 2003 and 5 August 2003. Nonetheless, the lower courts’ opinion that it was possible to increase rent only as of the date of delivery of their decision was unconstitutional. Regarding the period between 6 August 2003, when the applicant lodged his action, and 21 December 2006, when he transferred the property of the building, the lower courts should have decided on the rent increase.
In these decisions the Constitutional Court rejected the idea that by its opinion no. Pl. ÚS –st 27/09 it had created a completely new action against the State. It had only held that action lodged before under Act no. 82/1998 should be considered as actions lodged under Article 11 § 4 of the Charter. Therefore it cannot be considered that the limitation period started to run only from the plenary opinion. In the decision no. II. ÚS 3685/12 it upheld the conclusions of the ordinary courts that for the claim against the State under Article 11 § 4 of the Carter the general three year prescription period applied running from 2006 and not from the date of adoption of the plenary opinion no. Pl. ÚS –st 27/09.
In these judgments the Supreme Court held that the Civil Code (and any other statute) did not allow a court to interfere with the contractual tenancy or to modify one of its components, including the rent, and that this entitlement was confined to the legislative and executive powers in which courts could not intervene and for which they could not substitute themselves.
In these judgments, the Supreme Court applied the binding opinion of the Constitutional Court expressed in its judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/2005 and held that if there was no agreement on an amendment to the tenancy agreement and there was no special law allowing the unilateral increase in rent as provided for in Article 696 § 1 of the Civil Code, general courts were empowered to intervene in the rent relationship and to increase (fix) the rent.
In these judgments the Supreme Court held, with reference to the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. I. ÚS 489/05, that the rent could be increased only pro futuro, not for the past.
The Supreme Court dealt with an appeal on points of law brought against a decision of the appellate court upholding the first-instance judgment by which the claimant’s action for damages against the State had been dismissed. The court dismissed the appeal on points of law, but noted the following:
“In the case under consideration the appellate court was dealing with a legal issue – whether the Parliament’s activities in voting on an Act constituted an official procedure within the meaning of section 13 of Act no. 82/1998. Since this legal issue has never been dealt with in the case-law of the appellate review court, in this respect the challenged appellate court judgment represents a decision that is of fundamental importance for its precedent value and in this regard the appeal on a point of law is admissible under Article 237 § 1(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure. ...
State liability under Act no. 82/1998 is in principle related to incorrect official procedure of executive and judicial authorities. With regard to the fact that the Parliament, consisting of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, is the supreme authority of the legislative power ... which decides, in a representative democracy, by the voting of its members – Deputies and Senators – whether or not to enact legislation, while there is no rule or regulation and there cannot be any rule or regulation on how the individual Deputy, Senator or a group of Deputies or Senators should vote on bills ..., the procedure for the enactment of legislation by voting in the Chamber of Deputies or the Senate cannot be considered an official procedure within the meaning of section 13 of Act no. 82/1998 and – if the rules of procedure of the Chamber of Deputies or the Senate were observed – it would furthermore be impossible to consider a ‘judicial’ review as to whether the outcome of the voting was correct or incorrect. It is part of the constitutional sovereignty of the legislative authority, which is accountable to the people. ...
The result of votes by the Deputies or Senators in their respective legislative body does not constitute an official procedure and therefore liability on the part of the State for damage in relation to individual voters cannot result from it.
The appellate court’s legal reasoning that for State liability for damage to be established, first of all, the requirement of incorrect official procedure of a State authority in applying State power was not met is correct. This reason per se is sufficient to reject an action for damages. With regard to this, the other objections in the appeal on points of law cannot influence the overall conclusion of the appellate court.”
In these decisions the Supreme Court applying its judgment no. 25 Cdo 1124/2005 of 31 January 2007 refused to admit that the landlord could sue the State for damages on the ground that the Parliament failed to adopt a law. It further held that the Constitutional Court’s judgments nos. Pl. ÚS 20/05 of 6 April 2006 and I. ÚS 489/05 of 6 April 2006 did not have any effect on that conclusion.
In this decision the Supreme Court held that judicial rent increase could be granted only until the date of taking of effect of a new legislation allowing for unilateral rent increase.
The plaintiff filed an action for rent increase as of 4 August 2006 which was rejected by ordinary courts. The court of appeal in particular held that the plaintiff could have increased rent pursuant to the Act 107/2006 at the material time.
The Supreme Court rejected the appeal on points of law. Referring to judgment no. II. ÚS 361/06 it held that rent increase by ordinary courts had been possible only exceptionally during the period of absence of a legal norm authorizing rent increases. This period however ended on 31 March 2006 when Act no. 107/2006 took effect. Indeed, owners were entitled to increase rents pursuant to this Act from 31 March 2006 until 31 December 2010.
In these decisions the Supreme Court held that rent increase by ordinary courts was possible only exceptionally during the period of absence of a legal norm authorizing rent increases. According to the Supreme Court this period however ended on 31 March 2006 when Act no. 107/2006 took effect. Indeed, owners were entitled to increase rents pursuant to this Act from 31 March 2006 until 31 December 2010.
On 31 July 2006, the plaintiffs filed an action for rent increase as of July 2006 which was rejected by ordinary courts. The court of appeal in particular confirmed the first instance court’s view that it was not possible to grant rent increase after 31 March 2006 when Act no. 107/2006 took effect. Indeed, if the courts granted rent increase, they would decide against valid and applicable legislation.
The Supreme Court recalled its jurisprudence according to which it was not possible to grant rent increase after a new legislation on rent increase had taken effect and declared the appeal on points of law inadmissible.
In these decisions the Supreme Court applying the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. Pl. ÚS 27/09 of 28 April 2009 quashed the lower courts’ decisions which had rejected the landlords’ actions for damages against the State. It maintained that the State Liability Act was not applicable to the Parliament’s inactivity as legislator. Nonetheless, claims for damages against the State filed under the State Liability Act were to be analyzed as claims for damages for forced restriction of ownership rights within the meaning of Article 11 § 4 of the Charter.
In this judgment the Supreme Court recalled both its jurisprudence, according to which judicial rent increase could only be granted until 31 March 2006, and the Constitutional Court’s opinion no. Pl. 27/09 according to which this was possible until 31 December 2006.
In these decisions the Supreme Court applied the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. Pl. 27/09 and held that the ordinary courts were entitled to grant rent increases for a period from the date of lodging of the action for rent increase until 31 December 2006.
In this decision the Supreme Court recalled both its jurisprudence, according to which judicial rent increase could only be granted until 31 March 2006 and the Constitutional Court’s opinion no. Pl. 27/09 according to which this was possible until 31 December 2006.
It declared the appeal on points of law inadmissible confirming the appellate court’s view that “the landlord could not claim rent increase for a period when Act no. 107/2006 had already been effective.”
In this decision the Supreme Court, notwithstanding the fact that it referred to the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. Pl. ÚS 27/09, approved the appellate court’s decision which had dismissed an action for rent increase filed after 31 March 2006, date of taking of effect of Act no. 107/2006.
This decision was confirmed by the Constitutional Court on 26 August 2010 (decision no. I. ÚS 96/10).
In this judgment the Supreme Court applied the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. Pl.-st 27/09 and held that it was not true that a judicial rent increase could take effect only after the delivery of the court decision on rent increase but that it took effect as of the date of lodging of the action for rent increase.
The plenum of the Civil and Commercial Division of the Supreme Court decided to publish, and thus implicitly agree with, the judgment of the Prague Municipal Court no. 13 Co 578/2011 of 22 February 2012 in which the Municipal Court had held that the action for compensation under Article 11 § 4 of the Charter was subject to three year period of limitation running from the time when the property rights of landlords had been interfered with.
In this decision the Supreme Court, referring to the decision of the Constitutional Court no. I. ÚS 1896/12, held that the action for compensation under Article 11 § 4 of the Charter is subject to three year period of limitation running from the time when the landlords suffered the damage. Moreover it held that the rejection of the plea of limitation period of the Government can happen only in strictly exceptional circumstances.
In this judgment the Supreme Court dealt with the question how to calculate the amount of compensation for forcible restriction of ownership rights under Article 11 § 4 of the Charter to be paid by the State because of rent control. It held that courts must always take into account the individual circumstances of each case, including how long the flat or flats were subjected to rent regulations; whether all the flats in the house were regulated or whether the owner could have received sufficient income from flats or business premises in the house not subject to rent regulation; and the concrete cost of maintenance of the house. On the other hand the manner of acquiring the ownership was not relevant for the purposes of calculating the amount of due compensation.
In these decisions the Prague 1 District Court and the Prague Municipal Court refused to admit that the Parliament’s legislative inactivity could be regarded as a cause of the State’s liability under the State Liability Act.
In this judgment the District Court held inter alia that adoption of a generally binding legal act cannot constitute an incorrect official procedure for which damages could be requested pursuant to the State Liability Act.
On 28 January 2005, the landlord introduced an action for rent increase pro futuro as of the day on which the court’s decision becomes final. On 21 April 2005, the District Court partly granted the action (it increased the rent but fixed it at a lower level than the one requested by the landlord) in application of the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. 2/03 of 19 March 2003. This decision was confirmed by the court of appeal and by the Supreme Court in its judgment no. 26 Cdo 32/2006 of 7 July 2006 which however referred to the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/2005 (see paragraph 163 above).
In this judgment the Prague Municipal Court held inter alia that regarding the period before 20 March 2003, i.e. the date as of which the last regulation fixing rent ceilings was repealed, the action for damages against the State could not be granted due to the fact that rights and obligations created before repeal of a legal act remain unaffected.
A similar approach was adopted by the Prague 1 District Court in its decisions nos. 20 Co 218/2005 of 29 August 2005, 24 C 3/2005 of 12 October 2005, 24 C 189/2004 of 9 February 2005, 24 C 171/2005 of 20 December 2006, and the Prague Municipal Court in judgments nos. 20 Co 2/2006 of 2 February 2006, 20 Co 270/2006 of 26 October 2006, 13 Co 218/2006-49 of 29 November 2006, 13 Co 178/2007 of 20 June 2007.
The landlord introduced an action for surrender of unjust enrichment for the period between 1 November 2003 and 28 February 2004 in the amount of the difference between the rent paid by the tenant and usual rent. The district court rejected this action on 17 September 2004 but its decision was quashed by the Prague Regional Court on 3 March 2005. Subsequently, the district court partly granted the action (in a lower amount) and its decision was confirmed by the Prague Regional Court.
The District Court rejected a landlord’s action for rent increase considering that it was not empowered to interfere with the contractual relationship. Referring to the Supreme Court’s decision 26 Cdo 32/2006 and to the evolution in Constitutional Court’s and Supreme Court’s case-law, the Regional Court quashed that decision considering that the District Court’s approach was not admissible any more. Subsequently, the parties concluded a settlement agreement.
In this decision the Prague Municipal Court quashed the first instance court’s judgment and ruled that in the light of the evolving Constitutional Court’s case-law (inter alia decisions nos. I. ÚS 489/05 and I. ÚS 717/05) the Parliament’s legislative inactivity was to be regarded as a cause of the State’s liability under the State Liability Act.
This decision was adopted in the same case as the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. IV. ÚS 611/05 of 8 February 2006. After the case was remitted by the Constitutional Court to the District Court, the plaintiff extended his action and claimed rent increase from 10 March 2003 until 10 March 2006. The defendant accepted to conclude settlement agreement with the plaintiff whereby she accepted to pay the whole sum requested by the landlord. In its decision the District Court approved the settlement.
The plaintiff introduced an action for surrender of unjust enrichment in the amount of the rent paid and the market rent. On 1 November 2005, the action was rejected by the District Court which considered that in the absence of special legislation allowing for rent increase it was not possible to increase rent unilaterally. On 25 May 2006, the Prague Regional Court applied the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. Pl. ÚS 20/05 and quashed the District Court’s decision. Both courts considered however that the landlord did not have a claim regarding unjust enrichment but payment of rent. On 15 September 2006, the District Court accepted that view and granted the action. On 26 April 2007, the Regional Court confirmed this decision.
Referring to the Supreme Court’s decision 26 Cdo 32/2006, the Municipal Court ordered the tenant to sign an amendment to the lease agreement whereby she agrees to a rent increase.
In this decision the District Court partly granted an action for rent increase pro futuro. It rejected the action for the period preceding the date of lodging of the action.
In this decision, the Prague Municipal Court intervened again in the same case as in decision no. 14 Co 102/2006-56 of 14 April 2006 referenced above. Since the first instance court had not applied its opinion expressed in the latter decision, the Prague Municipal Court quashed the first instance court’s second decision. It explained that although the Supreme Court had been refusing to admit the State’s liability for the Parliament’s inactivity under the State Liability Act, this approach had to change in the light of the Constitutional Court’s case-law (inter alia decisions nos. I. ÚS 489/05, IV. ÚS 111/06, I. ÚS 123/06).
In this decision, the Prague Municipal Court applied the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. Pl. ÚS-st. 27/09 of 28 April 2009 and quashed the first instance court’s decision rejecting the action for damages against the State.
On 31 March 2006, the landlord lodged a rent increase action for the period from 1 January 2002 onwards. The District Court applied plenary opinion no. Pl. ÚS-st 20/05 of 28 April 2009 and granted the action only for the period between 1 April 2006 (day of lodging) and 31 December 2006. It rejected it for the period between the day of lodging and after 31 December 2006.