The application concerns the applicant’s request for the establishment of his purported father’s paternity based on DNA testing methods which only became available many years after the domestic courts had already ruled on the issue.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Ečka. The applicant was represented by Mr A. Mandić, a lawyer practising in Belgrade.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Zorana Jadrijević Mladar.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 23 November 1971 the Zrenjanin District Court (Okružni sud u Zrenjaninu) held that a certain Mr A was not the applicant’s biological father. Furthermore, the Titograd Municipal Registrar (matičar SO Titograd) was ordered by the court to amend the official register of births accordingly. At the time, Titograd (now called Podgorica) was the capital of Montenegro, which was, like Serbia, a constituent part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The case had been brought by Mr A against the applicant and his mother and concerned only the paternity issue. The applicant, who was a minor, was represented by a guardian, a lawyer from Zrenjanin, who had been appointed by the local social care centre (organ starateljstva) in order to protect his interests. In its reasoning, the District Court held that Mr A and the applicant’s mother had met between 10 and 13 July 1969. It further noted that they had got married on 11 August 1969 and that the applicant had been born on 25 December 1969, some four months later. Since the available medical documentation did not indicate that the birth had been premature, it followed, according to the District Court, that Mr A could not have been the applicant’s biological father. The court essentially reached that conclusion on the basis of witness testimony as to when the applicant’s mother and Mr A had met. The applicant’s mother, for her part, maintained throughout the proceedings that she had had sexual relations with Mr A from the spring of 1969 onwards, that is before they were married. A number of other witnesses were also examined by the court, but their statements were deemed irrelevant. Lastly, although blood tests were carried out, they were ultimately considered inconclusive in terms of establishing whether Mr A was the applicant’s biological father.
Following an appeal lodged by the applicant and his mother, on 31 August 1972 the Vojvodina Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Vojvodine) upheld the District Court’s judgment, as well as its reasoning, and it thereby became final. The Supreme Court also noted, inter alia, that it had not been necessary to examine one witness, even though she had apparently been invited to the wedding of Mr A and the applicant’s mother, which had allegedly been initially planned for 1 May 1969. In the Supreme Court’s view, this witness’s testimony would have been irrelevant as her statement would have had no bearing on when the sexual relations between Mr A and the applicant’s mother might have taken place. The applicant was again represented by the same appointed guardian in the course of the appeal proceedings.
The applicant alleges that he only found out about the above-mentioned judgments in the course of the inheritance-related proceedings brought following the death of Mr A (in 2011 or 2012 according to the case file). Up until that point in time, the applicant considered it undisputed that Mr A was his biological father. The latter, according to the applicant, never did anything that might have cast any doubt on this.
On 4 January 2012 the applicant and his mother requested the reopening of the proceedings (podneli predlog za ponavljanje postupka) concluded by the judgment of the Vojvodina Supreme Court of 31 August 1972 (see paragraph 6 above). Since the applicant’s purported father had died, the request was directed against his legal heirs. The applicant and his mother informed the court as to when and how the applicant had learned of the existence of that judgment and of the Zrenjanin District Court’s judgment of 23 November 1971 (see paragraphs 4 and 7 above), and noted that notwithstanding those judgments, Mr A had always been recognised as the applicant’s father in the official register of births (matična knjiga rođenih). Neither Mr A nor the applicant’s mother had ever informed the applicant of the judgments. Finally, the applicant and his mother observed that DNA testing had not been possible in the 1970s, but that such a test could now be carried out on the basis of a court order. All of the above, according to them, warranted the reopening of the civil proceedings in question in order to confirm that Mr A was the applicant’s biological father.
On 9 January 2012 the Zrenjanin High Court (Viši sud u Zrenjaninu) rejected the applicant’s request for reopening on procedural grounds. It stated, inter alia, that: (i) the impugned judgments had been adopted in 1971 and 1972, hence many years ago; (ii) the applicant as a minor had, in any event, had a guardian appointed to represent him in the proceedings before the Zrenjanin District Court; (iii) the guardian had also subsequently lodged an appeal with the Vojvodina Supreme Court; (iv) there was no evidence to the effect that the courts in question had acted unlawfully or had otherwise restricted the participation of the applicant through his guardian in the course of the proceedings; and (v) the claim that the applicant’s mother had failed to inform him of the judgments in question at the relevant time was not in and of itself sufficient to justify the reopening sought by the applicant. In those circumstances, the Zrenjanin High Court concluded that the applicant had failed to prove that his request had been lodged in compliance with the deadline set out in the Civil Procedure Act.
On 18 January 2012 the applicant and his mother lodged an appeal against that decision. In their appeal, they reiterated, inter alia, the arguments set out in their request of 4 January 2012 (see paragraph 8 above), adding that the applicant’s mother had never tried to conceal the truth from the applicant to his detriment but did not want to “burden him with the judicial injustice” in question. Admittedly, as a lay person, she had not fully understood the legal consequences of such a decision. In any event, the original proceedings had been deeply flawed, the facts had not been established properly, the forensic science at the time (involving a blood test) had been inconclusive, witnesses who had been heard had perjured themselves in court and the applicant’s mother had not been given an opportunity to put questions to them. Finally, the applicant and his mother noted that Mr A had never attempted to amend the information contained in the official register of births, in which he was still recognised as the applicant’s father, and that the applicant’s State-appointed guardian himself had also failed to inform the applicant subsequently of his rights regarding the establishment of Mr A’s paternity.
On 31 January 2012 the Novi Sad Court of Appeal (Apelacioni sud u Novom Sadu) upheld the Zrenjanin High Court’s decision of 9 January 2012 (see paragraph 9 above), as well as its reasoning. The appellate court noted, in particular, that the applicant’s claim that he had been informed of the impugned judgments only recently was irrelevant since in the original proceedings he had been represented by an appointed guardian at two levels of jurisdiction.
On 21 March 2012 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud). In the appeal, he essentially reiterated his earlier arguments and alleged that he had been denied the right to establish the true identity of his biological father by means of a DNA test, in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights and the Protocols thereto. The applicant also maintained that he had suffered a violation of his right to a fair trial and a breach of his rights to a legal remedy and equal protection before the courts, as enshrined in the Constitution (see paragraphs 16-17 below).
On 23 January 2014 the Constitutional Court ruled against the applicant. In so doing, it rejected, firstly, the applicant’s procedural-fairness complaint as incompatible ratione materiae with the provisions of the Constitution since the impugned decisions of the ordinary courts had merely concerned their refusal to reopen proceedings which had already been terminated by means of a final court judgment. Secondly, the Constitutional Court noted that the applicant’s request for the reopening of the proceedings in question had been considered at two levels of jurisdiction and that the Constitution did not guarantee a favourable outcome in each and every case. Thirdly, as regards the applicant’s complaint with respect to the equal protection of his rights before the courts and the right of a child to know the identity of his or her father, the Constitutional Court held that these rights could not, considered constitutionally, be deemed to have been impacted in any way by the impugned court decisions, given both their content and their legal nature.
In its judgment of 23 November 1971 (see paragraph 4 above) the District Court noted, inter alia, that following the applicant’s birth, Mr A had been recorded as his father. The applicant’s birth certificates (izvodi iz matičnog registra rođenih) issued by the Montenegrin authorities on 2 September 2014 and 14 June 2019 both still identified Mr A as the applicant’s father.
Article 18 provides, inter alia, that “human and minority rights guaranteed by the Constitution shall be implemented directly”, as are rights that are “secured by the generally accepted rules of international law ... [and] ratified international treaties”. Human and minority rights are also to “be interpreted ... pursuant to valid international standards on human and minority rights, as well as the practice of international institutions which supervise their implementation”.
Article 32 provides, inter alia, for a right to a fair trial in civil and criminal proceedings.
Article 36 enshrines, inter alia, the principle of equal protection of rights before the courts, as well as the right of everyone to an appeal or another legal remedy in respect of any decision involving the determination of his or her rights, obligations or lawful interests.
Article 170 provides that “a constitutional appeal may be lodged against individual decisions or actions of State bodies or organisations exercising delegated public powers that violate or deny human or minority rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, if other legal remedies [for the protection of those rights or freedoms] have already been exhausted or have not been prescribed”.
At the material time Article 279 § 1 of the Civil Procedure Act provided, inter alia, that a civil court would reject a claim as inadmissible were it to conclude that the matter before it had already been adjudicated by means of a final decision.
Article 422 provided, inter alia, that a case concluded by means of a final court decision could be reopened: (i) if a party to the proceedings in question had unlawfully been denied an opportunity to participate in them; (ii) if a person who did not have standing to be a party to the proceedings had in fact participated as such, or if there were other relevant issues in terms of the parties’ authorisation and/or legal representation; (iii) if the impugned final decision was based on false testimony of a witness or a forensic expert, or on forged documents; (iv) if the decision had been adopted as a result of a crime committed by a judge, a lay judge, a party to the proceedings, a party’s legal guardian and/or legal representative or indeed by any third person; (v) if subsequently an opportunity arose for a party to the proceedings to rely on another final court decision adopted on the same issue and between the same parties but on an earlier date; (vi) if the impugned final decision was based on another decision adopted by a court of law or an administrative body that had in the meantime been overturned, quashed or annulled; (vii) if the impugned final decision was based on the determination of a preliminary legal issue which itself had subsequently been adjudicated differently by another authority; (viii) if a party to the proceedings had subsequently learned of new facts or evidence which could have resulted in a more favourable outcome of the proceedings had they been known before; (ix) if the European Court of Human Rights had subsequently rendered a decision pertaining to the same or a similar legal issue in respect of the respondent State; and (x) if the Constitutional Court had subsequently found, in connection with the proceedings in question, a violation of the rights and/or freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution.
Article 424 provided, inter alia, that with regard to the grounds referred to under (i) and (viii) above, a request could be lodged within a period of thirty days from when the party seeking the reopening had been served with the final decision in question or could have informed the court of the new facts or evidence. In any event, once five years had elapsed after the impugned decision had become final no reopening could be sought, except in respect of the grounds referred to under (i), (ii), (ix) and (x) above.
Article 426 provides, inter alia, that civil proceedings concluded by means of a final court decision may be reopened, following an application by a party thereto, if a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights has been delivered “in which a violation of human rights, relevant to the more favourable outcome of the proceedings in question, has been established”.
This legislation repealed and replaced the 2004 Civil Procedure Act on 1 February 2012.
Article 55 § 1 and Article 251 § 1 of the Family Act provide, inter alia, that if need be, a child may at any time bring paternity proceedings, that is without any deadlines being applicable. Article 255 of the same Act provides that if a child lodges a paternity claim after his or her purported father’s death, it is the latter’s heirs who would be the defendants in the proceedings or, if there are no such persons, that the defendant would be the Republic of Serbia itself.