The application was declared partly admissible by the Commission on 26 February 1996. Delegates of the Commission then took oral evidence at a hearing in  between 28 June and 2 July 1999.
The case was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1999 in accordance with Article 5 § 3, second sentence, of Protocol No. 11 to the Convention, the Commission not having completed its examination of the case by that date.
Facts as presented by the applicants
Facts as presented by the Government
The parties submitted various documents to the Court. While delivering its judgment, the Court had particular regard to the following documents:
Incident report dated 22 November 1993 concerning the events at Abdülkadir İkincisoy's apartment
Report dated 23 November 1993 concerning the anonymous telephone call received by the police
The report states that following information from an anonymous telephone call at about 3 a.m. that two armed men were hiding in a hut near the , a police operation was carried out. Taking the necessary safety precautions, the officers positioned themselves 15 metres away from the hut and ordered the two men to surrender. Shots were fired from the hut in the direction of the security forces and a clash broke out. The clash lasted approximately twenty minutes. When the firing ceased, police officers entered the hut and found two dead bodies. One of the bodies had an ammunition belt with four cartridge clip holders, a Kalashnikov rifle and a cartridge clip. A Browning pistol was found on the second body. There were no identity cards on the bodies, which were subsequently taken to the  morgue.
The autopsy report stated that rigor mortis had set in and bruising had appeared on the body. Two bullet entrance holes on the back side of the neck and two exit holes in the chest were noted. The report further stated that no other signs were observed. As the gunshot wounds were the certain cause of death, it was not considered necessary to carry out a full post-mortem examination. Finally, the estimated time of death was given as thirty-six hours before the autopsy was carried out.
The Government have provided the photographs of the three dead bodies and photographs taken in the hut where Mehmet Şah was shot.
The custody records of the Diyarbakır Security Directorate concerning the period of 21 November and 26 November 1993 do not contain the name of Mehmet Şah İkincisoy. They further indicate that Adile, Nefise, Bilgin, Garipşah, Makbule, Sabriye, Halil, Abdülkadir, Abdurrazak, Nasır and Hüseyin İkincisoy were taken in custody on 22 November 1993 at 3 a.m.
Police statements of Abdurrazak İkincisoy1, Makbule İkincisoy, Hüseyin İkincisoy and Garipşah İkincisoy dated 25 November 1993
Medical report dated 25 November 1993
Police statements of Halil İkincisoy, Abdülkadir İkincisoy, Nasır İkincisoy and Sabriye İkincisoy dated 1 December 1993
Medical report dated 3 December 1993
Statements of Halil İkincisoy, Abdülkadir İkincisoy, Nasır İkincisoy and Sabriye İkincisoy taken by the public prosecutor, dated 3 December 1993
Statements of Nasir İkincisoy and Abdülkadir İkincisoy taken by the Diyarbakır State Security Court, dated 3 December 1993
Ballistic report dated 3 December 1993
Identification report dated 6 December 1993
Petition of Abdurrazak İkincisoy to the Diyarbakır Public Prosecutor, dated 13 December 1993
Petition of Abdurrazak İkincisoy1 to the Diyarbakır State Security Court Public Prosecutor, dated 13 December 1993
Petition of Abdurrazak İkincisoy1 to the State Minister responsible for human rights, dated 13 December 1993
Response of the Minister dated 5 April 1994
Letter of the Ministry of Justice International Law and Foreign Affairs Directorate to the Diyarbakır Public Prosecutor, dated 25 May 1995
Statement of the first applicant dated 6 June 1995, taken by the  Public Prosecutor
Statement of the first applicant dated 31 October 1995, taken by the  Human Rights Association
The facts of the case being in dispute between the parties, three Delegates of the Commission took oral evidence in  between 28 June and 2 July 1999 from ten witnesses, including the applicants. The evidence of those who attended the hearing may be summarised as follows:
Abdurrazak İkincisoy
Halil İkincisoy
Nasır İkincisoy
The witness, who is the daughter of the first applicant and the sister of the second, was at her father's house on the night of the incident. She said that while they were sleeping at home, some police officers came to their house and asked about her brother Mehmet Şah. When her father explained to the police officers that Mehmet Şah was staying at his uncle's house, the police officers left the house, taking Halil with them. Some time after, the police officers came back and arrested everyone in the house, including the witness. They were first taken to Çarşı Police Station and then to the police headquarters. The witness explained that she had not seen Mehmet Şah in the Çarşı Station but she had seen him at the police headquarters. When they arrived at the police headquarters, they walked upstairs and were taken into a hall. Their eyes were not covered but they were forced to hold their hands behind the back of their necks. They were made to stand facing the wall. When the witness glanced over her shoulder, she saw that Mehmet Şah was standing next to her. This was the last time she saw him. However she recalled hearing his voice at the Rapid Intervention Force, which was the third place they were taken to. He was moaning. She was kept in a cell, together with Makbule, Nefise, Adile, Bilge and Sabriye İkincisoy. At some point, Sabriye and Makbule were taken out of the cell and when they came back they were shivering. They therefore requested a blanket from the guardians and the guardians gave them a brown leather jacket which belonged to Mehmet Şah.
The witness affirmed that he was a police officer at the Anti-Terrorism Branch of Diyarbakır Security Directorate at the time of the events. He recalled that after receiving information from Feyzi Tatlı, a person who was under custody, that Mehmet Şah had been aiding and abetting the PKK, an operation was prepared. Feyzi Tatlı was asked to point out the house of Mehmet Şah to a group of five police officers, including the witness. On 22 November 1993 at about 1 a.m. they arrived at the apartment of Abdurrazak, the father of Mehmet Şah. Abdurrazak1 told them that his son was staying at his uncle's house. Accordingly, taking a young person with them to show them the way, and leaving one police officer in the house of Abdurrazak1, they left. When they arrived at Mehmet Şah's uncle's house, one police officer remained near the patrol car, and the witness stayed outside the building. Two police officers went upstairs. A few minutes later the witness heard gun shots from upstairs. One of the police officers, Mustafa Hünerlitürkoğlu, came downstairs, holding someone by the wrist. He told the witness that the third police officer, Alişan, had been shot. The witness entered the building to help his colleague. At that time Mustafa went outside, still holding the detainee by the wrist. The witness then heard footsteps and he hid under the stairs. A person fired a Kalashnikov rifle at the witness and wounded him in the abdomen. The witness fired back and killed the person who had fired at him. He then went out of the building to get help. When officer Mustafa saw that the witness was wounded, he left the detainee and ran towards him. The person who had been in custody ran away. The witness was subsequently taken to hospital, where he underwent an operation. When he regained consciousness in the hospital, his colleagues asked him to sign the incident report they had prepared. The public prosecutor further took his statement while he was still in intensive care. The witness accepted that there had been a mistake in the names that appeared in the incident report. He agreed that instead of Hanefi İkincisoy, the name should have read Mehmet Şah İkincisoy. The witness further explained that he had not been involved in the arrests or interrogations of the people who had been in the house at the time of the incident.
Mustafa Hünerlitürkoğlu
Dr. Lokman Eğilmez
Ramazan Sürücü
Mustafa Taner Şentürk
Mustafa Atagun
A full description of the relevant domestic law may be found in Tanli v. Turkey (no. 26129/95, §§ 92-105, ECHR 2001-III) and Dalkılıç v. Turkey (no. 25756/94, §§ 15-16, 5 December 2002).