The case originated in an application (no. 24271/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Georgiy Alekseyevich Bykov (“the applicant”), on 20 May 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Manov and Mr I. Sivoldayev, lawyers practising in Moscow and . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented Mrs V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been subjected to ill-treatment by the police after his arrest and that there had been no effective investigation into the events.
On 13 June 2007 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1963 and lived in  until his arrest. He is now serving his sentence in the correctional colony in the town of , Voronezh Region. The applicant is a former military officer.
On 12 July 2001 the bodies of two military officers were found at the checkpoint of a military unit. The officers had been brutally killed with an axe. The service gun of one of the officers had been stolen.
Four days later, on 16 July 2001, the applicant was arrested on suspicion of two counts of murder. He was taken to the Sovetskiy District police department in  where police officers allegedly spent several hours beating him up. According to the applicant, policemen offered him contaminated alcohol. While under the influence of alcohol he signed a statement confessing to the murder of the military officers.
Later on 16 July 2001 the applicant was placed in the Police department temporary detention centre. As follows from a letter sent by the head of the detention centre to the applicant’s lawyer on 21 November 2001, on admission to the centre the applicant was examined by a doctor, who recorded bruises on his nose and under both eyes. The doctor also noted that the injuries had been acquired prior to the applicant’s admission to the centre and that the applicant had not requested any medical assistance.
On the same day the applicant, questioned as a suspect in the murder investigation, complained to a military prosecutor that he had written the confession statement under violent duress by the police officers. The applicant, supported by his lawyer, Ms Bautina, requested the investigator to authorise a medical examination for him.
On 20 July 2001 a senior military prosecution investigator and a doctor examined the applicant in the presence of two attesting witnesses. According to the applicant, a police officer who had taken part in the beatings on 16 July 2001 escorted him to that medical examination and observed it. The senior investigator drew up a report, which in the relevant part read as follows:
“The examination established:
... fading bruises on the skin of the median third of the both shoulders, a fading bruise on the left infrascapular region, ([the bruise] was inflicted three to seven days ago). There is a subconjunctival haemorrhage in the pericorneal zone of the right eye ...”
On 19 December 2001 the case was committed for trial to the Military Court of the Fourth Circuit.
At the hearing on 4 July 2002 the applicant complained to the  that he had been beaten up after his arrest and that the confession had been extracted from him under torture. In particular, the applicant stated that on 16 July 2001 he had been taken to the police department where three policemen had struck him and kicked him in the face and stomach. They had also thrown him against a wall several times. He had had no choice but to write that confession. After he had signed the statement, he had been given some vodka. A military prosecutor had questioned him in the presence of his lawyer and he had renounced the confession, alleging that it had been extracted under duress. On 20 July 2001 he had written another confession statement. The applicant stressed that he had not been beaten up, but he had been afraid that torture would have been applied if he had not confessed.
On 16 July 2002 the Military Court of the Fourth Circuit found the applicant guilty of two counts of manslaughter and theft of a weapon and sentenced him to fifteen years’ imprisonment. The  excluded the applicant’s confession made on 16 July 2001. In particular, it held as follows:
“Having examined [the applicant’s] complaints that between 16 and 25 July 2001 he was beaten up by police officers of the Sovetskiy District police department of Voronezh, who allegedly kicked and hit him on the head, face and body, and threw him against a wall, the court finds as follows.
Witnesses, Mr B., Mr N., Mr P., Mr Y., Mr V., Mr S., [and] Mr O., testified that they had not used physical force or psychological pressure against [the applicant] when he had been kept in the Sovetskiy District police department in Voronezh and no one had beaten [the applicant] up in their presence.
An official investigation carried out by the Internal Security Division of the Voronezh Regional police department did not establish as fact that the applicant had been beaten up by police officers of the Sovetskiy District police department of .
However, as it follows from the statement of the head of the temporary detention centre of the police department in , on 16 July 2001, on admission to the centre [the applicant] was diagnosed with haematomas on his nose and under his left and right eyes.
In such circumstances, the court accepts that before his admission to the temporary detention centre physical force was used against [the applicant], but it was not applied to the extent described by [the applicant] at the court hearings.
Having regard to the above-mentioned matters and taking into account that on 16 July 2001, after writing the confession, [the applicant] was offered some vodka, the court excludes the confession statement from the evidence which confirms [the applicant] as guilty of the murder of [the victims].
As regards the confession statement and the interviews conducted on 20, 21 and 23 July 2001, [the applicant] stated at a court hearing that he had written that confession voluntarily, had answered the investigator’s questions and had described his actions during an investigation experiment in the presence of his lawyer, Ms Bautina; physical and psychological pressure had not been applied to him. The applicant and his lawyer did not make any complaints or representations about any unlawful methods of criminal investigation. The court did not establish any data showing that on 20, 21 and 23 July 2001 [the applicant] had been pressurised, either physically or psychologically, by the investigating authorities into making those statements.”
The applicant appealed against the conviction, arguing, inter alia, that the trial court had not properly addressed his complaints of illtreatment. He also asked the appeal court to ensure his presence at the appeal hearing.
On 10 January 2003 the Military Section of the Supreme Court of the  upheld the judgment of 16 July 2002. Having addressed the applicant’s argument as regards the beatings by the police officers after his arrest, the Supreme Court held as follows:
“At the same time the [Military] Court made the correct assessment that there had been a violation of procedural norms by the police officers when they received a confession statement from [the applicant] on 16 July 2001; [the Military Court] rightly excluded [the confession statement] from evidence in the case.
Moreover, [the police officers V., K. and A.], who had seen [the applicant] directly after his arrest, stated in open court that the applicant had no injuries on the face and no police officers had hit the applicant...
A [police officer], Mr Sh. who had participated as a specialist during an investigating experiment on 23 July 2001, ... had not noticed any injuries on the applicant’s face.”
The applicant’s lawyer attended the appeal hearing; however, the applicant was not summoned to it.
In the meantime, as follows from documents submitted by the applicant, on an unspecified date his father, acting in the applicant’s interest, complained to various prosecution, police and military authorities that the applicant had been severely beaten up by the police officers after the arrest.
The Internal Security Division of the Voronezh Regional police department opened an internal inquiry into the complaints, which resulted in a finding of no criminal conduct in the officers’ actions. In May 2002 the applicant’s father was informed of the results of the inquiry. At the same time he was notified of the transfer of his complaints to the , which was to examine the criminal case against the applicant. The police authorities reasoned that under Russian law, after the applicant had been committed to stand trial, the trial court had exclusive jurisdiction over any complaints related to the case. The applicant’s father received a similar response from the Prosecutor General’s office.
The Government argued that the first complaint of ill-treatment had only been lodged by the applicant’s father with the Internal Security Division of the Ministry of Internal Affairs a month after the judgment of 16 July 2002. The Government did not support their assertion with any evidence. They also did not produce any document from the file of the investigation into the applicant’s alleged ill-treatment, despite the Court’s direct request to that effect.
On 8 August 2002 an investigator of the Sovetskiy District Prosecutor’s office refused to institute criminal proceedings in connection with the applicant’s complaints of ill-treatment. Having examined the results of the internal police inquiry, the investigator found that on 15 July 2001, while preventing the applicant’s attempt to commit suicide, his fellow officer had hit the applicant on the ear. Having studied a record of the medical examination of the applicant on his admission to the temporary detention centre on 16 July 2001 (see paragraph 8 above), the investigator concluded that the injuries on the applicant’s face “could have been caused by the applicant’s fellow officers” during the prevention of the attempted suicide. The reasoning of the two-page decision was founded on statements by the police officers who had questioned the applicant on 16 July 2001 and had disputed any use of violence against him, and the applicant’s father, who had insisted that the applicant had been beaten up at the police department. All these statements were received during the internal police inquiry.
The applicant appealed against the decision of 8 August 2002. On 27 March 2003 a deputy prosecutor of the Sovetskiy District in  dismissed the complaint, noting that the investigator had carried out a full inquiry and that his conclusions had been based on “the objective analysis of sufficient and corroborating evidence”.
On 28 April 2003 the Sovetskiy District Court of Voronezh quashed the decision of 27 March 2003 on the ground that the investigator’s inquiry had been incomplete. It noted that the investigator had not questioned the applicant’s fellow officers and thus his conclusion that the applicant’s injuries had been caused by them had not been based on any evidence.
A deputy prosecutor of the Sovetskiy District annulled the decision of 8 August 2002 and sent the case for an additional inquiry.
On 17 November 2003 the prosecutor’s office once again dismissed the applicant’s complaint, having found no prima facie case of ill-treatment. That decision was quashed on 4 February 2004 and the case was sent for an additional inquiry.
On 6 February 2004 the senior investigator of the Sovetskiy District Prosecutor’s office refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers. The decision was based on the same evidence as the decision of 8 August 2002 and on a statement by the applicant’s fellow officer, Mr L., who had admitted hitting the applicant on the ear. The senior investigator also noted that “the applicant was serving his sentence and was attempting to call into question the trial court’s findings.”
Having found that the previous inquiry into the applicant’s ill-treatment complaints was incomplete, on 24 August 2007 the Voronezh Regional Prosecutor’s Office reopened an investigation into the events of 16 July 2001. The new round of inquiry was closed on 3 September 2007 in the absence of any evidence of criminal conduct on the part of the police officers. However, the decision of 3 September 2007 was quashed by a higher-ranking prosecutor and a new round of investigation commenced. That round resulted in the decision of 17 October 2007, by which the complaints of ill-treatment were found to be unsubstantiated.
On 13 December 2007 the acting deputy head of the Investigating Department of the Sovetskiy District Prosecutor’s office quashed the decision of 17 October 2007. The deputy head noted that that decision was unlawful and the inquiry was incomplete. The new round of investigation was, among other things, to lead to identification and questioning of military officers who had allegedly prevented the applicant’s attempted suicide on 15 July 2001. It appears that the investigation is now pending.
The Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (in force since 1 July 2002, “the CCrP”) establishes that a criminal investigation can be initiated by an investigator or a prosecutor on a complaint by an individual or on the investigative authorities’ own initiative, where there are reasons to believe that a crime was committed (Articles 146 and 147). A prosecutor is responsible for overall supervision of the investigation (Article 37). He/she can order specific investigative actions, transfer the case from one investigator to another or order an additional investigation. If there are no grounds to initiate a criminal investigation, the prosecutor or investigator issues a reasoned decision to that effect, which has to be notified to the interested party. The decision is amenable to appeal to a higher-ranking prosecutor or to a court of general jurisdiction within a procedure established by Article 125 of the CCrP (Article 148). Article 125 of the CCrP provides for judicial review of decisions by investigators and prosecutors that might infringe the constitutional rights of participants in proceedings or prevent access to a court.
Russian law sets out detailed guidelines for detention of individuals in police department temporary detention centres. These guidelines are found in the Decree of the Ministry of Internal Affairs no. 950 on Internal Regulations of Police Temporary Detention Centres (“the Decree”), enacted on 22 November 2005, and the joint Decree of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Health no. 1115/475 on Instruction on Medical and Sanitary Assistance to Individuals Detained in Police Temporary Detention Centres (“the Instruction”), enacted on 31 December 1999. In particular, Section II of the Decree sets out the procedure for initial steps to be taken by the staff of a detention centre on admission of a detainee. If, on a detainee’s arrival in a temporary detention centre an accepting officer discovers injuries on his body, the officer should draw up a detailed record of the injuries. The record should be signed by the accepting officer, the official who brought the detainee into the centre and the detainee himself. The latter should be served with a copy of that record.
Section XIV of the Decree and Section III of the Instruction establish that all detainees should be subjected to preliminary medical examination within twenty-four hours of their admission to a temporary detention centre. The examination should be performed by medical personnel and the results of the examination should be recorded in a medical log. The Decree states that the primary purpose of the medical examination is, inter alia, identification of individuals with physical injuries. If physical injuries are discovered, the detainee should immediately be subjected to a more thorough medical examination by the detention centre’s medical staff, or, if the ward does not employ medical staff, by civilian hospital doctors. The results of the medical examination should be properly recorded.
An inquiry should be carried out into the circumstances in which the detainee sustained injuries. As a result of the inquiry a decision on institution or refusal to institute criminal proceedings should be issued in compliance with the requirements of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure (paragraph 129 of Section XIV of the Decree).