The case originated in an application (no. 10926/09) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Michael Rinau (“the first applicant”) and a Lithuanian and German national, Ms Luisa Rinau (“the second applicant”), on 24 February 2009.
The applicants were represented by Ms N. Bümlein, a lawyer practising in Berlin. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė.
The applicants alleged mainly that the Lithuanian authorities’ failure to act in a timely fashion and in application of Council Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 and the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction constituted a violation of their right for respect for their family life and a breach of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. The applicants also complained that the decision-making in their case had been politicised and that this was in breach of Article 6 § 1 of the latter Convention.
On 9 June 2016 the application was communicated to the Government. At the same time, the German Government were invited to intervene as a third party (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court), but they did not express their intention to do so.
The first applicant was born in 1969. The second applicant is his daughter; she was born in 2005 (also see paragraph 8 below). They live in Bergfelde, Germany.
In July 2003 the first applicant married a Lithuanian citizen, I.R. They lived in Bergfelde, Germany, where their marriage was registered. The spouses also chose German law to be applicable to their marriage.
From a previous marriage I.R. had an older son, E.M., who was born in 1992.
On 11 January 2005 a daughter, Luisa (the second applicant), was born to the couple in Germany. Parental responsibility was exercised jointly by both parents. In the course of March 2005 the spouses began living separately. The child remained with her mother but maintained frequent contact with her father. At a later stage, divorce proceedings were initiated by the first applicant before the Oranienburg District Court (Amtsgericht Oranienburg) in Germany.
In May 2005 the second applicant was issued with a German passport.
On 21 July 2006, the first applicant agreed that his wife should take their daughter to Lithuania for two weeks’ holiday, on condition that she return to Germany by 6 August 2006.
When the child and mother did not return to Germany, the first applicant started court proceedings in Germany. An arrest warrant in respect of I.R. was issued by the German authorities.
On 14 August 2006 the Oranienburg District Court terminated the mother’s joint custody of their daughter and awarded provisional custody to the applicant until divorce proceedings were completed. The German court also granted the first applicant the exclusive right to decide questions relating to his daughter’s passport.
That decision was upheld by the Brandenburg Regional Court (Oberlandesgericht) on 11 October 2006, which dismissed an appeal by I.R.
On 30 October 2006 the first applicant asked the Klaipėda Regional Court in Lithuania for a permit allowing him to take his daughter back to Germany. He relied on the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (see paragraph 145 below), and also on Council Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 (also known as “the Brussels II bis Regulation”, hereafter “Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003”; for the text see paragraph 150 below).
On 15 November 2006 the State Child Rights and Adoption Service under the Ministry of Social Security and Labour (Valstybės vaiko teisių apsaugos ir įvaikinimo tarnyba prie Socialinės apsaugos ir darbo ministerijos; hereafter “the State Child Rights and Adoption Service”), which is also the “Central Authority” within the meaning of Article 53 of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 (see paragraphs 134 and 150 below), announced its conclusion regarding the second applicant’s return. The child care authority noted that the girl had lived in Germany until being taken to Lithuania and that I.R. had kept the child in Lithuania unlawfully. The child care specialists had talked to I.R., but could not persuade her to return the child to Germany and had concluded that the child had not yet reached an age at which it would be reasonable to hear her opinion. The child care specialists noted, on the one hand, that the child had been examined, on I.R.’s initiative, by child development specialists at Vilnius University Hospital, and those specialists had considered that separation of the child from her mother and brother at that moment would negatively affect the girl’s emotional health and potentially cause problems for her development. On the other hand, there was no proof that the first applicant would not be capable of taking care of his daughter or that any other kind of harm might be caused to her upon her return to Germany. The child care specialists also pointed out that, pursuant to Article 11 § 4 of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003, “a court cannot refuse to return a child on the basis of Article 13 (b) of the 1980 Hague Convention if it is established that adequate arrangements have been made to secure the protection of the child after his or her return” (see paragraph 150 below). Accordingly, even if the court were to establish that there was a substantial risk that the girl would sustain psychological harm if returned to Germany, it should in addition verify whether German institutions would take appropriate measures to protect the girl’s interests after her return. It also transpires from the documents in the case that the representatives of the State Child Rights and Adoption Service reiterated that view during the court hearing.
I.R., who was represented by a lawyer, V.Š., admitted before the Klaipėda Regional Court that it was definitely not her intention to return to Germany. Neither did she agree that the second applicant should be returned there but argued that her daughter should stay with her in Lithuania because a mother’s care was very important for a child. The first applicant was also present at that hearing, together with a lawyer.
By a ruling of 22 December 2006, the Klaipėda Regional Court refused the first applicant’s request. It held that because of the girl’s bond with her mother I.R. and brother E.M., her return to Germany ‒ where her mother might be arrested, even if only temporarily ‒ could cause the child serious psychological harm. As to E.M., he had a psychological ailment and refused to return to Germany, and I.R. could not leave him alone in Lithuania. For the first-instance court, this constituted grounds not to return the second applicant under Article 13 (b) of the Hague Convention. The Klaipėda Regional Court considered that the second applicant’s habitual place of residence, and thus her familiar and safe environment ‒ which was Lithuania ‒ could be changed only if there was a court decision regarding her custody.
It transpires from the documents before the court that in January 2007 the second applicant was issued with a permit granting her permanent residence in Lithuania. That same month I.R. declared her daughter’s place of residence to be Klaipėda, Lithuania.
On 15 March 2007 the Court of Appeal granted an appeal lodged by the first applicant and quashed the Klaipėda Regional Court’s decision. The Court of Appeal noted that although I.R., who at that stage was represented by a lawyer K.L., had taken her daughter to Lithuania lawfully − because she had the father’s agreement − her choice not to return the child to Germany and instead to keep her in Lithuania was unlawful both under Article 3 of the Hague Convention and under Article 2 § 11 of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003. Such unlawful retention of the child in a place which was not her habitual place of residence breached the custody rights of the first applicant, who had taken care of the second applicant before she was taken to Lithuania and who intended to continue taking care of her in future. The first applicant noted that on 2 January 2007 the criminal proceedings against I.R. had been discontinued in Germany and that, since those proceedings had been brought on the basis of a private prosecution, they could not be repeatedly reopened.
The Court of Appeal pointed out that since the criminal proceedings instituted against I.R. for unlawful retention of the child had been discontinued in Germany, there was no reason to believe that, if returned to Germany, the child would be separated from her mother. The Court of Appeal also noted that the proceedings in the Lithuanian courts were concerned only with the return of the child, who was being retained unlawfully in Lithuania, and not with questions relating to the child’s custody, such as the possibility of her living with her brother or her mother. This was a principle that likewise had its origins in Article 19 of the Hague Convention (see paragraph 145 below). In fact, as noted in the preamble to the Hague Convention, its aim was to protect children internationally from the harmful effects of their wrongful removal or retention (ibid.).
Moreover, there was no reason to doubt that a competent court in Germany would be capable of properly evaluating factual circumstances relating to matters of custody. The Court of Appeal observed that a consequence of unlawful removal was that the person with custody rights lost the possibility of exercising those rights in the child’s place of residence. The child, for her part, was deprived of that person’s care in a place that used to be her habitual place of residence. Accordingly, harm was caused to both the person with custody rights and the child and would continue until a lawful state of affairs was restored.
The Court of Appeal also noted that the burden of proof in demonstrating a grave risk that the child’s return would expose her to harm lay with the person who was objecting to the return. In the instant case, although − as noted in the report of the Klaipėda University Pedagogical Faculty social science (psychology) specialists − the return of the second applicant might cause her psychological hardship (psichologiniai sunkumai), there was no reason to believe that such hardship would amount to an intolerable situation or exceed the normal distress which the return of a small child to his or her country of origin would cause. Accordingly, there was no reason to apply Article 13 (b) of the Hague Convention.
The Court of Appeal ordered I.R. to return her daughter to Germany by 15 April 2007. In the event of her failure to do that, it would be for a Lithuanian bailiff to transfer the girl to her father in Klaipėda and in the presence of the Klaipėda child care authority.
Under Article 2 § 6 of the Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003 (see paragraph 134 below, which also contains the full title of this law), the decision of the Court of Appeal was final, that is to say, not amenable to an appeal on points of law. Under Article 339 of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter “the CCP”), it also became enforceable from the day of its adoption (see paragraph 136 below).
On 23 April 2007 the Klaipėda Regional Court, accepting a plea by I.R. that she and her son E.M. needed more time to prepare themselves psychologically for the girl’s return to her father, issued an order suspending enforcement of the Court of Appeal decision. The Klaipėda Regional Court disregarded the first applicant’s pleading that as early as 22 March 2007 he had contacted the child care authorities in Klaipėda and the State Child Rights and Adoption Service with an offer in good faith to help I.R. to execute the Court of Appeal ruling of 15 March 2007, including helping her financially to travel to and stay in Germany during the transfer of the child, but I.R. had rejected those proposals, seeking to delay the execution proceedings and abusing her procedural rights.
By a ruling of 4 June 2007 the Court of Appeal quashed the Klaipėda Regional Court’s decision of 23 April 2007. The appellate court noted, on the one hand, that the situation referred to by I.R. – that the second applicant’s return would be harmful for I.R. and for her son
According to the documents submitted by the Government, on 18 May 2007 I.R. signed an agreement with the law office of K.Č. and R.B., whereby I.R. agreed to pay 300 Lithuanian litai (LTL) (approximately 87 euros (EUR)) per hour for representation in the case concerning the second applicant’s return to Germany. The lawyers in question took on the obligation to represent I.R. in the Lithuanian courts up to the level of the Supreme Court.
Given that I.R. had not returned the second applicant within the prescribed time-limit, on 13 June 2007 at the first applicant’s request the Klaipėda Regional Court issued a writ of execution (vykdomasis raštas) which stated that “I.R. [was] obliged to return the second applicant to Germany before 15 April 2007 [see paragraph 21 above]. Should the court order for the transfer not be executed before that date, it is for the bailiff to take measures, in accordance with the rules set out in the Code of Civil Procedure, by taking the second applicant from I.R. and transferring the girl in Klaipėda city on a date agreed with the first applicant, and in the presence of the Klaipėda city child care authorities”.
In addition, on 9 July 2007 the first applicant presented the bailiff with a letter in which he stated that, in order to protect his daughter’s interests and to protect her from any harm during the transfer process − and also wishing to help I.R. to voluntarily execute the court decision for the girl’s return − he proposed to cover all costs for I.R. and the child related to their travel to Germany. He also proposed that he would provide I.R. with financial support and somewhere to live in Germany until she could find herself a place to live, and would also help her with other organisational matters. The first applicant also presented the bailiff with a document from a private company in Germany which agreed to employ I.R.
On 9 July 2007 the bailiff drew up an order (patvarkymas), asking I.R. to explain how she envisaged that the court decision could be executed in a friendly way.
The first applicant then wrote to the bailiff stating that he would arrive in Lithuania for the transfer, and asked the bailiff to make arrangements for that transfer to take place on 30 July 2007. On that date the bailiff issued the decision that the transfer would take place on 3 August 2007, with the participation of the Klaipėda city child care authorities. However, the bailiff could not subsequently serve that decision on I.R. because she could not be found at either her home address in Klaipėda or her place of work at Klaipėda University nor could she be reached on her telephone. On 3 August 2007 the bailiff announced that a search would be launched for I.R. and the second applicant, and informed the police of this fact. I.R. contacted the bailiff on 5 September 2007, stating that in August she had been on holiday and claiming that she had not been avoiding the bailiff. The bailiff therefore called off the search. On 5 September 2007 he again ordered I.R. to bring the second applicant to Klaipėda city child care authorities’ premises on 12 September for her transfer to the first applicant.
As confirmed by the bailiff and also by the signatures of the first applicant, of I.R., and of the representative of the Klaipėda child care authority, I.R. arrived at the meeting on 12 September 2007, but refused to execute the court decision for the second applicant’s transfer, or to disclose her daughter’s whereabouts. The bailiff also noted that the first applicant had asked I.R. to give him the opportunity to communicate with their daughter, but I.R. had refused that request. On the same day, the bailiff announced a police search for the second applicant, and asked the Klaipėda City District Court to decide whether I.R. should be issued with a fine for having ignored the court decision.
The court decisions on file also show that on 11 September 2007 the bailiff refused I.R’s request to suspend the execution proceedings, despite I.R.’s submission that separation would be traumatic because of the second applicant’s close family ties to her and to her brother.
The Klaipėda Regional Court on 4 December 2007 upheld the Klaipėda City District Court’s decision of 23 October 2007, and underlined that the merits of the question of the second applicant’s return had already been decided by the Court of Appeal ruling of 15 March 2007 (see paragraphs 19-21 above). After the latter decision, I.R.’s attempts to have the merits of the question reexamined − at the stage when the bailiff was executing the court decision − by invoking Article 13 § 1 (b) of the Hague Convention, had no basis in law. The Klaipėda Regional Court also pointed out that on 4 June 2007 the Court of Appeal had already examined the question of whether execution of the decision to return the second applicant could be suspended on the grounds of I.R.’s son’s state of health and his separation from the second applicant, but had dismissed the request as unfounded (see paragraph 24 above). Accordingly, such arguments could not be examined again.
I.R. appealed against the bailiff’s decision, but her complaint was dismissed by the Klaipėda City District Court on 23 October 2007. I.R. then lodged a further appeal, to which the first applicant responded that by such actions I.R. was abusing her procedural rights and being dishonest.
Afterwards, having received the 22 October 2007 ruling of the Supreme Court’s President ordering suspension of the execution of the Court of Appeal ruling of 15 March 2007 (see paragraph 73 below), on 29 October 2007 the bailiff issued a decision (patvarkymas) suspending execution of the second applicant’s return to the first applicant and also halting the search for the second applicant.
The applicants submitted numerous pieces of evidence showing the public interest in their case and the Lithuanian State authorities’ and politicians’ involvement in it, including statements of various officials, official documents of Lithuanian and European Union institutions, and publications in various Lithuanian Government Internet sites and the media. The facts constituting the evidence submitted by the applicants were not challenged by the Government and are also corroborated by the information available from the public sources (see also paragraph 210 below).
As noted by the applicants, as early as 6 December 2006 and in a television documentary entitled “SOS Pagalba” (translated as “SOS Help”), G.A., who was the director of the Klaipėda child care authority, made the following comments regarding the applicants’ situation (regarding her subsequent position see also paragraph 60 below):
“How can a mother be accused of kidnapping her own child? Father and mother must both take care of the child. And if there is a conflict situation in the family, then that can only be resolved in court.”
“As a mother I say that this is not a good step to take. I believe that the child has to grow up with his or her mother and stay in contact with the father. This is my opinion.”
“This mother is right – it is her child, and we should all make an effort to help her.”
“I am asking myself – what abduction? The mother has taken her child along with her. I would do the same, no one could take my child away from me.”
According to information published on 5 April 2007 on the Internet site of the Seimas (the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania), A.L., who was the Chairman of the Seimas Committee on Human Rights, commented that “Lithuania was not ready to defend the rights of Lithuanian citizens who had married foreigners or the rights of their children”. After the investigation which the Committee conducted on the basis of I.R.’s request, the Chairman considered that in the applicants’ case the child care specialists had acted only formally, having failed to evaluate the impact which the return to Germany could have on the second applicant. He also “rhetorically asked”: “the Hague Convention of 1980 and the Council Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 formally oblige to return [the second applicant] to her country of origin in order to avoid consequences negative for the child. However, if one would disregard the formal law, what harm could being with a loving mother cause to a two year old child?” According to the information on the Seimas Internet site, the Committee also discussed such questions as the “problem of Lithuania’s international engagements”, the European Union law which led to the situation where “the mothers from eastern Europe countries, after marriage in the West and having given birth there, lose the right to a child, when a man from western Europe turns them out of the family”. The Chairman also considered that there was no institution in Lithuania that would be effective in defending a child’s interests on an international scale.
On 7 September 2007 the press also quoted a public statement by V.A.A., a member of the Seimas who belonged to the Homeland Union (Tėvynės Sąjunga) political party and who, according to her CV on the Seimas website, had an educational background in music and whose interests included “family politics, children’s rights and human rights (angažuojasi šeimos politikos, vaiko teisių ir žmogaus teisių srityse)”. She was also a member of the Seimas Committee on Legal Affairs (Teisės ir teisetvarkos komitetas) and the Seimas Committee on European Affairs (Europos reikalų komitetas). V.A.A. claimed to be “very much concerned” with the conclusions that had been provided by the State Child Rights and Adoption Service as well as its position during the court proceedings regarding the second applicant’s return to Germany (see paragraph 15 above). V.A.A. pointed out that the State Child Rights and Adoption Service was the “Central Authority” under the Hague Convention and under Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 and that, pursuant to Article 2 § 3 of the Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003, its role was to provide a conclusion for submission to the court hearing the case for a child’s return (see paragraph 134 below). However, her impression was that the State Child Rights and Adoption Service had only formally defended the rights and interests of the second applicant and had essentially supported the arguments of the first applicant, who had asked the courts to order that his daughter be returned to Germany. V.A.A. underlined that the conclusions provided by the State Child Rights and Adoption Service “had influence on (įtakoja)” court decisions. It was therefore of paramount importance that those conclusions should be “just (teisingos)”: the State Child Rights and Adoption Service should not only formally rely on the norms of international conventions. In V.A.A.’s view, analysing the factual situation, one could not comprehend how the State Child Rights and Adoption Service could have agreed to the second applicant’s return to Germany, given that before leaving for Lithuania she had lived most of her life with her mother, and had now lived most of her life in Lithuania.
The parliamentarian also opined that, since the second applicant had been only one and a half years old when she left Germany, her connection with the environment there had been minimal. In Lithuania, however, she had already established close connections with other members of her (Lithuanian) family and had become used to that environment. The member of the Seimas considered that the second applicant’s return to Germany would thus put the child in an intolerable situation, and would possibly cause irreparable damage to her mental and other development. V.A.A. stated that she had read the conclusion of the State Child Rights and Adoption Service which it had submitted to the court but considered that the Service had not taken the relevant circumstances properly into account and therefore “had not performed its main function and task”, and “in this particular case” had failed “to protect the rights and lawful interests” of the second applicant. V.A.A. thus urged the State Child Rights and Adoption Service to properly carry out its functions when protecting the second applicant’s interests, also pointing out that that institution was overseen by the Ministry of Social Security and Labour.
By means of a written request dated 7 September 2007, six members of the Seimas elected in the constituencies of the Klaipėda region or those who stood for parliamentary elections in those constituencies and/or lived there (V.Č., V.G., V.S., A.S., I.Š. and I.Ro.) submitted a written request to the bailiff in charge of executing the Lithuanian court’s order for the transfer of the girl into her father’s custody, asking him to refrain from carrying out that duty. The parliamentarians stated that they intended to petition the President of the Republic and the Minister of Justice, requesting that the girl not be returned to her father.
On 9 September 2007 the President of the Republic wrote to the first applicant, stating that he was very much aware of the case, which had attracted wide media attention. However, the President highlighted that he could not exert any influence over the courts or provide any kind of recommendation as to how cases should be decided, for to do so would be unconstitutional. The President also pointed out that, whilst understanding how important a court decision was in the first applicant’s case, he had never expressed his view publicly in order not to breach the principle of the independence of the courts. The President expected that the case would be examined objectively, taking into account the interests and needs of the second applicant.
On 21 September 2007, a group of forty-one members of the Seimas, on the initiative of the Seimas Committee on Human Rights, asked the Constitutional Court to examine the question of whether Article 2 § 6 of the Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003 ‒ pursuant to which no appeal on points of law was possible in cases concerning a child’s return effected under that Regulation (see paragraph 134 below) ‒ contradicted the constitutional principle of the rule of law.
In that context, the press also quoted another member of the Seimas Committee on Human Rights, A.Sa., who also signed a petition seeking referral of the question to the Constitutional Court and stated that he did “not understand how such a situation was possible. Maybe the German courts adopt (priima) reasonable decisions, but this is a precedent which the Constitutional Court should examine. Lithuania is a member of the European Union, and there are plenty of such marriages. Does that mean that we shall always give in and our children will always be taken away to foreign countries?”
The Constitutional Court initially accepted the request for examination but, two years later, in December 2009, it discontinued the proceedings because on 13 November 2008 the Seimas had adopted a new Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003, and the former law ceased to be applicable (see paragraph 134 in fine below).
According to the Lithuanian news agency ELTA, in September 2007 members of the Liberals’ Movement (Liberalų Sąjūdis) political faction in the Seimas asked the President of the Republic to examine the possibility of granting Luisa Rinau Lithuanian citizenship urgently and by way of exception (see paragraph 132 below).
According to the report of the Seimas Committee on Human Rights activity for the period 10 September 2007 to 1 February 2008 − approved at the Committee’s meeting of 13 March 2008 − on 10 October 2007, exercising parliamentary oversight as regards the protection of children’s rights in the context of Lithuania’s international agreements, the Committee discussed, inter alia, the question “Regarding the quality of the actions of the child care authorities’ employees and the possibility of providing legal aid for Lithuanian citizens in the German courts”. The Committee considered that the conclusions which the State Child Rights and Adoption Service had presented to the Lithuanian courts regarding the second applicant’s return to her place of origin – Germany – had not reflected accurately the social situation of the second applicant, had not evaluated her connection with her mother and brother, and various other aspects. The Committee considered that such “an inappropriate conclusion” had done “irreparable harm to the interests of the child, and could also influence court decisions in Germany”. The Committee, having taken into account the harm which had been caused by the child care authorities’ formal attitude (formalus požiūris) towards the interests of the child, demanded that the Minister of Social Security and Labour (who supervised that child care authority), declare that those employees had not performed their duties correctly and also order the child care authority to submit another conclusion which would fully reflect the social situation of the second applicant, and also evaluate the expert conclusions regarding possible damage to the girl’s mental state should she be returned to Germany.
In that context, on 20 September 2007 members of the Liberals’ Movement in the Seimas had met the employees of the State Child Rights and Adoption Service “who had personally taken part in deciding Luisa’s fate”. According to the press article on the internet portal AINA (Aukštaitijos naujienų ir žinių portalas) on the same day under the heading “Luisa’s story – an example of Lithuanian institutions’ failure to act (Luisos istorija – Lietuvos institucijų neveiklumo pavyzdys)”, the members of the Liberals’ Movement political faction had been inquiring what steps the responsible authorities would take so that the second applicant’s story would have a happy ending, and “what they would do to truly help the children of Lithuania in protecting their interests (ką darys kad realiai padėti Lietuvos vaikams)”.
The article quoted G.Š., a member of the Seimas Committee on Human Rights who belonged to the Liberals’ Movement, as having greeted the State Child Rights and Adoption Service employees at that meeting with the statement “My dears, you are wishing to wash off your tainted tunic (Mielosios, jūs norite nusiplauti savo suteptą mundurą)” and having accused them of lacking patriotism. He was quoted as having said that “the ambivalence, lack of action and lack of simple humanity (abejingumas, neveiklumas ir paprasčiausio žmogiškumo stygius) of the State child care and adoption institution makes one angry – whereas that institution should be defending the rights and interests of the child, defending a Lithuanian citizen. We must ascertain whether such employees are fit for their job”.
The same article quoted another member of the Liberals’ Movement, D.T., who urged the State Child Rights and Adoption Service employees to put all their efforts into protecting the interests of the girl and asked “how come we are so stubborn as to not comprehend that the link between the mother and the child, responsibility for the well-being of the child, the child’s safety, link to the family and the homeland – as a great virtue – has not changed and never will change?...”. The article also stated that “the Liberals’ Movement faction has asked the President of the Republic to consider whether he could grant Lithuanian citizenship to the daughter of Lithuanian citizen I.R., who was born in Germany, by way of exception and as a matter of particular urgency (išimties ir ypatingos skubos tvarka)” (also see paragraph 44 above).
The Seimas Committee on Human Rights also asked the Ministry of Justice to provide quality legal help to I.R. and to request that the case be moved for examination from the German courts to the Lithuanian courts, “protecting the mother’s right to raise her daughter in Lithuania”.
The Committee’s initiative was reported in the media. On 10 October 2007 Internet news portal (www.delfi.lt) quoted the Chairman of the Seimas Committee on Human Rights A.L., who elaborated that “I think the employees of the [Ministry of Social Security and Labour and Ministry of Justice] will obey the ministers’ proposals (šių ministerijų darbuotojai paklus ministrų siūlymams), and that the courts will also have the decency (teismai turės garbingumo) to reopen this case if the Prosecutor General’s Office asks for the case to be reopened on the grounds that new circumstances have appeared”. The Chairman was also reported as having stated that since March 2007 the Seimas Committee on Human Rights had tried to exert influence that every institution would perform its job properly. He also stated that if within a year the bailiff had not executed the court decision ordering the girl’s transfer, the German courts should transfer the case to the Lithuanian courts to be examined in Lithuania.
The same article of 10 October 2007 also quoted the Ombudsman for Children’s Rights, R.Š., who stated: “From the very beginning the position of the Ombudsman’s Office was that the child should be with the mother. Everywhere we talk about a family – three persons, that the mother cannot choose one child. In this situation the children would be separated. Even our laws on child adoption state that if we have brothers or sisters, one should search for adoptive parents so that siblings would not be separated. And here we have a situation when we ourselves in some way are assisting to separate the children. The children should live together – we should search for ways and possibilities for allowing them to remain in Lithuania”. The Ombudsman also pointed out that if I.R. had gone to Germany to be present at the court hearings where the question of custody was being decided [which I.R. had not done], the process would perhaps not be so “painful” now.
In both instances – in spring and autumn 2007 (see paragraphs 37, 45, 47 and 48 above) − the Seimas Committee on Human Rights was presided over by A.L., who belonged to the Liberals’ and Centre Union (Liberalų ir Centro Sąjunga). In August 2008 I.R. became candidate no. 30 on the list of the Liberals’ and Centre Union in the Seimas election which was to take place in October 2008.
On 13 September 2007 V.M., the Chairman of one of political factions in the Seimas, sent a letter to P.B., the Minister of Justice, asking him to pay attention to “the court decisions that had shaken the whole of Lithuania (sukrėtė visą Lietuvą) and that had been widely reported in the press”, pursuant to which a minor child was to be taken away from I.R. and against her mother’s will to be sent to a father who lived in Germany. V.M. wrote to the Minister of Justice asking him “to properly ascertain (visapusiškai išsiaiškinti) whether the court decisions have been just and lawful, even though it was plain that they contradicted elementary logic and were not humane. If the laws of our country treat such actions [namely court decisions ordering transfer of the second applicant to the first applicant] as lawful, I would ask you to initiate legislative amendments so that similar situations can be avoided in future”. V.M. also stated that “although laws were written by people, and those laws had to serve people, the State could not remain a bystander when because of dramatic circumstances human fates were being broken (laužomi žmonių likimai), and children have been suffering”.
According to the press statement on 21 September 2007 released by the Ministry of Justice, the Minister of Justice P.B. had asked the State Guaranteed Legal Aid Service in Klaipėda to provide I.R. with free legal aid in so far as this was possible (pagal galimybes).
The applicants’ story was widely reported in the media, including newspapers printing readers’ opinions. For example, on 21 September 2007, Lietuvos rytas, one of the biggest daily newspapers in Lithuania, published an article “The story of a Klaipėda resident [I.R.] – warning to other Lithuanian women”. Under that headline the daily printed letters containing statements such as “A mother had a moral right to defend herself by any means, even to murder the bailiff, should he attempt to take the child by force. Moral right is above legal right”, “It is unbelievable that Lithuania cannot defend its citizen. What kind of laws, what kind of lawyers? What is the Ministry of Justice doing?”, “A heart-breaking story. Isn’t there anyone who could defend the woman and the child? Lithuanians, wake up, do not remain unmoved, do not be blind followers of the law”.
On 26 September 2007 the first applicant wrote to the Ombudsman for Children’s Rights, R.Š. He stated that he wished to settle the question of the second applicant’s return peacefully, and that he did not wish to bring the details of his case into the public domain, in order to protect both the second applicant and her brother, who was ill, and whom the first applicant had taken care of in Germany. The first applicant was therefore particularly disturbed by what had been happening in Lithuanian politics and society regarding his case. He noted, in particular, that members of the Seimas had been exerting pressure on the Lithuanian bailiff not to execute the court decision (see paragraph 39 above). The first applicant wondered whether the Seimas had assumed the powers of the courts, since its politicians − who had not seen the evidentiary material in his case file − had been ignoring court decisions which, all the more so, complied with international law. The first applicant also stated that the politicians had been supporting the exertion of psychological pressure on him and that the Lithuanian newspapers had been printing readers’ letters where he had been demonised and called “a German pig”, “Nazi”, “fascist” and “a criminal”; there had also been public calls for violent action (susidoroti) towards him, the court bailiff and the first applicant’s lawyer. He was asking, rhetorically, which of the politicians would take responsibility should something happen?
In that letter the first applicant also noted that he had not been able to see his daughter in Lithuania since December 2006, because I.R. had been hiding her. He had still been able to talk to his daughter via the Internet in January and February 2007, but afterwards I.R. had banned that contact as well. He also pointed out that the Lithuanian media had failed to depict his case objectively, since they had not mentioned the international courts’ practice regarding the Hague Convention, which applied equally to fathers and mothers. The first applicant also submitted that most of the expert reports on which I.R. had relied had been prepared by experts from Klaipėda University, where I.R. had worked for a long time (also see paragraph 29 above). He expressed sadness at what had become of the Lithuanian legal system: that international treaties had been signed but not adhered to because to follow them was “inconvenient”; that a father had very few rights in Lithuania; that the politicians had been publicly supporting smear campaigns or being ambivalent towards him. He noted that, if Lithuania had not signed the Hague Convention, his only option would have been to observe helplessly as his daughter became distant from him, but that now he had a right to fight for his daughter. The first applicant expressed hope that the decisions of the Court of Appeal would be respected and executed and that Lithuania would fulfil its obligations under international law.
On 15 October 2007 I.R. met P.B., the Minister of Justice of Lithuania. The Minister promised her free legal aid in the proceedings concerning her daughter’s return to Germany. I.R. also stated to the press that “there is a legal possibility that court proceedings regarding the second applicant’s custody might be transferred from Germany to Lithuania. I asked the Minister of Justice to act as intermediary in this matter (prašiau tarpininkavimo), but the Minister stated that he could not help. He implied that I myself should do that with the help of a lawyer (esą tai galiu padaryti aš pati su advokato pagalba).”
By October 2007, almost 35,000 Lithuanian citizens had signed a petition entitled “For Luisa” demanding that the girl not be returned to her father in Germany. The petition referred both to Lithuanian legislation and to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and argued that it was in the girl’s best interests for her to stay with her mother in a familiar environment in Lithuania. The petition was addressed to the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the Speaker of Parliament, the Ombudsman for Children’s Rights and Germany’s ambassador to Lithuania.
In that context, in October 2007 I.R. professed in the Lithuanian press that “[I]n our country mother and child are sacred and inseparable. It is unfortunate that this principle is not being followed by the courts (mūsų šalyje mama ir vaikas yra šventa, nedaloma. Gaila, kad šia nuostata nesivadovauja teismai)”.
In October 2007 the press also reported that I.R. had visited the prosecutor’s office in Klaipėda that month, where she had been invited for a conversation. The prosecutor D.P. noted that lawyer G.B. (see paragraph 101 below) had been defending I.R.’s interests at that time. The prosecutor also noted that the prosecutors’ office’s support for I.R. so far “had only been of a moral nature (kol kas tiktai moralinė)”, but that the complicated matter could possibly be resolved if the laws on dual citizenship were amended. The prosecutor stated that “if the second applicant were to become a Lithuanian citizen, maybe it would be possible to help her somehow. We must explore all possibilities.”
In October 2007 the press also quoted G.A., the director of the Klaipėda child care authority, as saying that she had attempted to persuade the first applicant to renounce custody rights in respect of the second applicant but had been unsuccessful. The director stated that the first applicant had been categorical, but that it also appeared that he “genuinely loved his daughter”.
On 19 September 2007 the press reported that I.R. would have to hide her daughter not only from her father, but also from Lithuanian police, since the bailiff had undertaken to announce a police search for her (see paragraph 29 above). The press also wrote that “from unofficial sources it is known that in these days I.R. intends to travel to Vilnius, to approach the highest civil servants and politicians, and in this manner fight for the right to bring up her daughter herself”.
On 3 June 2008 the Minister of Justice P.B. met I.R. According to the Ministry of Justice press release, that week “the Lithuanian Government approved Lithuania’s position with regard to examining the case under the urgent preliminary ruling procedure of the European Court of Justice” (see paragraph 95 below). The Minister of Justice also stated that it was important to support the doubt raised by the Supreme Court of Lithuania, namely whether Germany in fact had jurisdiction in such a child return case. It was therefore indispensable to clearly establish the intention behind the European Union’s legal norms.
On 2 September 2008 − that is to say already after the ruling of the European Court of Justice (hereafter “ECJ”) and the follow-up ruling by the Supreme Court (see, respectively, paragraphs 98-103 and 106 below) − A.L., who was the chairman of the Seimas Committee on Human Rights, replied to the first applicant in writing that the Committee had examined the child care specialists’ conclusions about the relationship between I.R. and her children. According to the Chairman, I.R. was “a mother beyond reproach (nepriekaištinga motina)”, and the first applicant’s fear about her negative influence on the children had no basis. The Chairman stated that, in the Committee’s view (mūsų žiniomis), I.R. could not move to Germany because of her son’s ailment. The Chairman thus suggested that the first applicant should “seriously consider the possibility of moving to Lithuania”, so that the second applicant would not be separated from her mother and brother.
On 17 May 2007 the Prosecutor General’s Office in Lithuania received I.R.’s written plea requesting ‒ on the basis of Article 366 § 1 (9) of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 136 below; hereafter “CCP”) ‒ that the court proceedings concerning the second applicant’s return be reopened.
On 4 June 2007 and 13 June 2007, respectively, I.R. and the Prosecutor General of Lithuania, who sought to defend the public interest, attempted to have the Lithuanian court proceedings for the child’s return reopened. They relied on Article 366 § 1 (2 and 9) of the CCP and argued that in the ruling on 15 March 2007 (see paragraphs 19-21 above) the Court of Appeal had failed to take into account the fact that there would be a grave risk to the girl’s well-being if she were to return to Germany. By that time she had lived in Lithuania for a considerable period and was integrated into the Lithuanian environment. If she were removed from Lithuania, she would lose her solid connection with her mother and be placed in an unfamiliar linguistic environment. I.R. also referred to the state of health of her son, E.M., claiming that he was afraid of losing his mother should she decide to go to Germany with the second applicant.
On 19 June 2007, the Klaipėda Regional Court refused to accept both applications for examination. The court also reiterated that all questions relating to the parents’ divorce and the custody of their daughter fell within the jurisdiction of the Oranienburg District Court.
Both I.R and the Prosecutor General appealed against the Klaipėda Regional Court’s decision. The first applicant, in turn, asked that their appeals be dismissed. He submitted, among other things, that the Prosecutor General had ignored the aims of the Hague Convention and of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 and had also disregarded Article 8 of the Convention.
The Court of Appeal upheld the Klaipėda Regional Court’s decision on 27 August 2007. The Court of Appeal also underlined that the 15 March 2007 ruling of the Court of Appeal (see paragraphs 18-20 above) was not amenable to reopening under Article 365 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The Prosecutor General and I.R. lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court against the rulings of the Klaipėda Regional Court and the Court of Appeal of 19 June 2007 and 27 August 2007, respectively, regarding the reopening of civil proceedings.
The first applicant responded by arguing that the reopening of civil proceedings for the child’s return would contradict the very essence of the goal set by Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003, namely that such cases should be decided without undue delay and within six weeks of the lodging of the application for the child’s return. The first applicant pointed out that on 27 August 2007 the Court of Appeal had correctly stated that the 15 March 2007 Court of Appeal ruling could not be amenable to reopening as the principles of concentration of civil proceedings and fairness would otherwise be contradicted and the child’s return would be delayed indefinitely. The first applicant also submitted that, in the light of the aim of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 and of the Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003, neither cassation nor reopening of proceedings would be permissible procedural measures. He relied on the Hague Convention and on Article 8 of the Convention, maintaining that an unjustified application for the reopening of civil proceedings would breach his right to respect for family life.
On 16 October 2007, the Supreme Court’s chamber for the selection of cases to be examined in appeals on points of law (teisėjų atrankos kolegija) accepted for examination the appeal on points of law for reopening of proceedings lodged by the Prosecutor General, who was acting to protect the public interest.
In that context, on 19 October 2007 the Supreme Court’s chamber also accepted for examination the appeal on points of law lodged by I.R., who had also asked the Supreme Court to suspend execution of the 15 March 2007 Court of Appeal ruling for the second applicant’s return (see paragraphs 19-21 above). The Supreme Court’s chamber pointed out, however, that pursuant to Article 2 § 6 of the Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003, no appeal on points of law was possible in proceedings involving the return of a child which have been instituted under Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003. It followed that there was no legal basis on which to grant I.R.’s request for suspension of the execution of the Court of Appeal ruling of 15 March 2007 ordering her daughter’s return to Germany. The chamber also indicated that its ruling was “final and not amenable to appeal”.
On 22 October 2007 the Prosecutor General submitted to the Supreme Court a fresh request for suspension of execution of the Court of Appeal’s ruling of 15 March 2007, pointing out that at that time execution of that court decision had already begun, the police and the bailiff having taken measures to establish the child’s whereabouts and to return her to Germany. The Prosecutor General pleaded that there was a theoretical possibility that the proceedings in the civil case which had been concluded by the final decision of the Court of Appeal of 15 March 2007 might be reopened. Afterwards, the courts could theoretically decide not to return the child to Germany, on the basis of the exceptions provided for in the Hague Convention. If that was the situation, this new court decision would remain impossible to execute, because by that time the child would be in Germany.
It was also the Prosecutor General’s view that in order to give priority to the best interests of the child, especially to a young child’s need to live in a familiar and stable environment, it was necessary to suspend the execution of the Court of Appeal ruling of 15 March 2007 “so that the child’s status quo would be maintained whilst the court proceedings were ongoing, and that possible damage to the child’s mental state and development could be avoided”. The Prosecutor General thus asked that temporary protective measures be applied.
The same day, 22 October 2007, the President of the Supreme Court, V.G., unilaterally adopted a ruling suspending the execution of the Court of Appeal judgment of 15 March 2007 until the Prosecutor General’s appeal on points of law regarding the possibility of reopening the court proceedings in Lithuania had been examined. The President of the Supreme Court considered that the criterion determining when an appeal on points of law was not possible (namely the child’s return under Article 2 § 6 of the Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003) did not automatically preclude an appeal on points of law in respect of the reopening of proceedings. Moreover, in his view, Article 372 of the Code of Civil Procedure allowed the suspension of execution of a court’s decision at any stage of the court proceedings (that is to say, also at the stage of an appeal on points of law) (see paragraph 136 below).
The President of the Supreme Court noted that the subject matter of the Prosecutor General’s appeal on points of law in that case was not the return of the child, but the question of reopening the court proceedings (“kasacinio nagrinėjimo dalykas šioje byloje yra proceso atnaujinimo klausimai, o ne vaiko grąžinimo klausimas – prašoma priimti procesinį sprendimą būtent dėl proceso atnaujinimo ir sustabdyti sprendimo vykdymą ryšium su galimu proceso atnaujinimu konkrečioje byloje”). The President of the Supreme Court also held that in the instant case relating to the reopening of the civil case concerning the child’s return, it was necessary to suspend execution of the Court of Appeal’s decision because “the child is a minor, she does not speak German, she is attached to her mother and her brother, and she has spent the majority of her life in Lithuania”. The President of the Supreme Court considered that, if the child were to return to Germany before the question of reopening was decided, it would cause her great psychological harm.
On 26 October 2007 the first applicant attempted to appeal against the Supreme Court President’s ruling. He pleaded, in writing, that when suspending execution of the 15 March 2007 Court of Appeal decision, the President had acted outside the law and had exceeded the powers assigned to him under the Code of Civil Procedure. The first applicant also argued that by suspending execution of the Court of Appeal ruling on the second applicant’s return, the child would be prevented from seeing her father. Given the second applicant’s young age, that would be detrimental to their connection with each other and would place the child in an intolerable situation.
The first applicant also pointed out that the President of the Supreme Court had exceeded the boundaries of the Prosecutor General’s request, because when suspending the execution of the return decision the President had relied on circumstances such as the second applicant’s attachment to her mother and brother, the fact that she was at a young age, and that for most of her life she had lived in Lithuania, which had not been relied on by the Prosecutor General in his request. Moreover, no proof supporting psychological harm to the second applicant had been provided to the President of the Supreme Court. Lastly, the first applicant relied on Article 8 of the Convention and the Court’s case-law on the issue (he referred to Sylvester v. Austria, nos. 36812/97 and 40104/98, § 60, 24 April 2003; Maire v. Portugal, no. 48206/99, § 74, ECHR 2003VII; and Iosub Caras v. Romania, no. 7198/04, § 38, 27 July 2006), pointing out that, under the Hague Convention, undue delay in returning a child to the State in which he or she was habitually resident was in breach of Article 8 of the Convention. He also pointed out that under Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 the authorities had six weeks to decide the issue of return, but this had not been the case in his situation.
On 30 October 2007 the President replied that the ruling adopted by him was “final and not amenable to appeal”. The first applicant then made a further attempt to appeal against the Supreme Court President’s ruling. He argued that the President had acted outside the law and in breach of the rules of the Code of Civil Procedure, the Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003, the Hague Convention, and Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 itself. By a ruling of 29 November 2007 the Supreme Court’s Chamber dismissed the appeal, noting that it did not have the competence to review a ruling by the President.
By a ruling of 7 January 2008 the Supreme Court held that both the Klaipėda Regional Court and the Court of Appeal had erred in applying civil procedure rules concerning the reopening of proceedings (see paragraphs 66 and 68 above). The Supreme Court remitted to the Klaipėda Regional Court the case concerning the reopening of the civil proceedings concerning the girl’s return.
On 21 March 2008 the Klaipėda Regional Court again rejected as unfounded the request for reopening of proceedings, and the Court of Appeal did likewise on 30 April 2008. On the basis of information received from Germany – a letter from the Prosecutor General of the German Supreme Court of 20 November 2006 and the German courts’ decisions regarding the second applicant’s custody and return – the Court of Appeal considered that measures had been taken in Germany to protect the second applicant’s interests upon her return. That being the case, a Lithuanian court could not refuse to return the child on the basis of Article 13 (b) of the Hague Convention, because to do otherwise would be in contradiction to Article 11 § 4 of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003. The Court of Appeal also relied on the findings of the Brandenburg Regional Court of 20 February 2008 (see paragraph 92 below) to the effect that any psychological problems which the second applicant might face because of her separation from the mother upon her return to Germany were less harmful than being taken care of by a mother “whose manner of raising [the second applicant] had obvious flaws (ženklūs auklėjimo trūkumai)”.
In the meantime, between 5 February and 20 March 2008, at the first applicant’s request, the bailiff reopened the execution file since after the Supreme Court’s ruling of 7 January 2008 (see paragraph 76 above), the Supreme Court’s President’s decision to suspend the execution of transfer (see paragraph 73 above) had become invalid. The bailiff ordered I.R. to provide information about the second applicant’s whereabouts and to present herself at the Klaipėda child care authority to discuss the details of the girl’s transfer. As noted by the bailiff, I.R. did not cooperate.
Instead, on 20 February 2008 she asked the Supreme Court to suspend execution of the 15 March 2007 Court of Appeal decision for the child’s return. This request for suspension was submitted to the Supreme Court by I.R. when she challenged the Klaipėda Regional Court’s decision of 4 December 2007 (see paragraph 32 above) to uphold the bailiff’s actions of September 2007 to continue with the execution of the court decision for the girls’ return.
On 15 March 2008 the Supreme Court again decided to suspend the execution proceedings until there had been a ruling on I.R.’s appeal on points of law concerning the Klaipėda Regional Court’s decision of 4 December 2007 upholding the bailiff’s actions.
On 13 October 2007 the first applicant wrote to F.F., who at that time was the European Commissioner for Justice, Freedom and Security and the Vice President of the European Commission. The first applicant stated that he had been prevented from seeing his daughter since 14 December 2006, despite the fact that he had been awarded temporary sole custody by the German courts, and likewise notwithstanding the Lithuanian Court of Appeal decision of 15 March 2007 (see paragraphs 19-21 above). He highlighted that I.R. had been hiding his daughter from him, that the bailiff had been threatened with murder, and that the first applicant had been publicly called names such as “German pig”, “Nazi” and “fascist” (see paragraph 53 above). This behaviour had been widely supported and encouraged by Lithuanian politicians, including members of the Seimas and the Chairman of its Committee on Human Rights, by the prosecutor in Klaipėda and the Minister of Justice, as well as by the mass media and the child care authorities. The applicant referred to certain of the facts as described above in this judgment in particular.
On 30 June 2008 the Lithuanian Government received an inquiry from the European Commission in connection with the Rinau case regarding the fact that, even though more than fourteen months had elapsed since the Court of Appeal decision of 15 March 2007 (see paragraphs 19-21 above), the second applicant had still not been returned to Germany. The European Commission pointed out that the first applicant had attempted to ensure that the aforementioned court ruling was executed, but that all his efforts had been in vain. The Commission stated that it was seeking to evaluate whether the actions of the Lithuanian State institutions had been in accordance with European Union law, including Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003.
The Lithuanian authorities were therefore asked to explain the reasons for the non-return of the second applicant. The European Commission also wished to know what was the length of time that it usually took in Lithuania to execute court decisions for a child’s return from one parent to another who had exclusive custody rights. The European Commission also asked to be provided with information about the special circumstances of the applicants’ case, if there were any. Lastly, the European Commission pointed to the fact that the Supreme Court had suspended execution of the 15 March 2007 Court of Appeal ruling on the grounds that questions of European Union law had been referred to the ECJ for interpretation (see paragraph 94 below). The European Commission asked the Lithuanian authorities to provide an explanation as to the basis (“kuo remdamasis”) on which the Supreme Court had taken such a decision to suspend the Court of Appeal ruling.
In July 2008 the news agency Baltic News Service quoted the Lithuanian Ambassador to the European Commission as saying that “the European Commission was interested in the Lithuanian institutions’ attitude towards the Rinau case”. For their part, the Lithuanian officials believed that there was no danger that the European Commission would start infringement proceedings, which could lead to Lithuania being obliged to pay a fine. They noted that the proceedings before the European Court of Justice were already pending at that time (see paragraphs 98-103 below).
On 18 July 2008 the Ministry of Justice sent its reply to the European Commission. The Ministry firstly noted that, under Articles 109 and 114 of the Constitution, in Lithuania justice was administered solely by the courts and that “the Ministry had not taken part in the processes concerning the [second applicant’s] return to Germany”. Responding to the Commission’s question why fourteen months after the Lithuanian Court of Appeal ruling (see paragraph 19 above) the first applicant’s child had still not been returned to Germany, the Ministry recounted the chronology of the respective court proceedings that had taken place in Lithuania. The Ministry pointed out that, in order to guarantee the swiftest possible proceedings so as to hear the cases for a child’s return quickly, and also to protect the interests of a child so that one who had been taken away or had not been returned would be returned as quickly as possible, the Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003 (see paragraph 134 below) did not allow appeals on points of law (neleidžia kasacijos) in child return cases. However, if there was a reopening of civil proceedings (taikant proceso atnaujinimo institutą), under the Code of Civil Procedure both appeals and appeals on points of law were possible (galima ir apeliacija, ir kasacija).
The Ministry of Justice considered that, in theory, the reopening of civil proceedings was an exceptional way to monitor the lawfulness and reasonableness of court decisions which were already in force. Reopening of proceedings provided an opportunity to rectify mistakes of law in court decisions that were already final, thus protecting not only private but also public interests. The grounds for reopening civil proceedings were laid down in Article 366 of the Code of Civil Procedure – namely circumstances that could not have been verified when the case was examined (for example, circumstances that came to light later). The Ministry of Justice suggested that this was the reason (“tai lemia”) why court proceedings in Lithuania were still on-going after the 15 March 2007 Court of Appeal ruling which had ordered the child’s return to Germany.
As to the Commission’s question about the time usually taken to execute a court decision by which one of the parents is obliged to return the child to another parent who has sole custody rights, the Ministry of Justice wrote that the information of this kind was not entered into record (tokie duomenys nėra renkami) and that the time depended upon the factual circumstances of each particular case.
Lastly, the Ministry of Justice wrote that on 26 May 2008 the Supreme Court had suspended execution of the Court of Appeal ruling of 15 March 2007 on the basis of Article 363 of the CCP (see paragraph 136 below). The Ministry pointed out that the letter of the aforementioned provision of the Code of the Civil Procedure allowed execution of a court decision or a ruling which had been subject to cassation appeal to be suspended. However, relying on the Commentary to the CCP (Lietuvos Respublikos civilinio proceso kodekso komentaras. II dalis. Vilnius: Justitia, 2005, p. 450), the Ministry also stated that in exceptional cases it was possible to suspend execution of a court decision which was not the subject of cassation proceedings. It was within the Supreme Court’s discretion to evaluate the factual circumstances of the case and their possible impact on human rights or lawful interests and to suspend execution of a particular court decision or ruling.
In May 2008 I.R. asked the Migration Department in Vilnius to recognise (pripažinti) the second applicant’s Lithuanian citizenship. The Migration Department replied, however, that pursuant to Article 23 § 1 of the Law on Citizenship (see paragraph 132 below), I.R. should have provided documents showing that both parents had agreed in writing to the child taking up the Lithuanian citizenship, as well as a document confirming that she had renounced any other (namely German) citizenship.
On 24 July 2008, that is to say, two days after the amendments to the Law on Citizenship had come into force (also see paragraphs 91 and 133 below), I.R. asked the Lithuanian authorities to recognise her daughter’s Lithuanian citizenship. The migration authorities in Klaipėda granted I.R.’s request on 11 August 2008, and issued the second applicant with a Lithuanian passport. The authorities cited Article 9 § 1 and Article 22 of the Law on Citizenship as in force at that time as the legal basis for such a decision (see paragraphs 132 and 133 below).
The first applicant appealed, arguing that the Lithuanian passport had been issued in breach of the law. He alleged I.R. should not have submitted such a request because on 20 June 2007 the Oranienburg court had ruled that questions of the second applicant’s citizenship were to be decided by the first applicant (see paragraph 92 below). He conceded that his daughter had the right to Lithuanian citizenship, but that right should have been properly exercised.
By a decision of 6 January 2009 the Migration Department rejected the first applicant’s request to rescind his daughter’s Lithuanian citizenship. It noted that the Government Commission for Questions of Citizenship had examined the first applicant’s complaint and the girl’s situation and on 11 December 2008 had ruled that the second applicant had been lawfully recognised as a Lithuanian citizen on the basis of Article 9 § 1 of the Law on Citizenship, which stated that a child with parents of different citizenships, but one of whom was a Lithuanian citizen, could be a Lithuanian citizen irrespective of where he or she was born (see paragraph 133 below). Citizenship had been recognised on the basis of a request by I.R., who, according to the Migration Department, was her daughter’s lawful legal representative because the Lithuanian migration authorities had no knowledge that I.R. had been recognised as not having legal capacity (pripažinta neveiksnia), as noted in Article 3.157 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 142 below). The Migration Department also stated that an appeal against its decision could be lodged before the Commission for Administrative Disputes or an administrative court.
It appears that after the second applicant’s return to Germany (see paragraph 112 below) the first applicant did not pursue these proceedings any further.
According to a press release issued by the Chairman of the Seimas Committee on Human Rights, A.L., “the doubts as to whether [the second applicant] has been recognised as a Lithuanian citizen ‒ and whose mother I.R. is using all possible means (visomis priemonėmis siekia) to ensure that the girl remains in Lithuania ‒ are speculative and not well-founded”. A.L., who presided over the working group which prepared the amendments to Article 9 § 1 of the Law on Citizenship, “considered that [the amendments] which came into force in July 2008 created the possibility (suteikė galimybę) for [the second applicant] to be not only a citizen of Germany but also a Lithuanian citizen.” According to the press release, A.L. was “confident that attempts to question the lawfulness of [the second applicant’s] [Lithuanian] citizenship represented merely the wish of malefactors (piktavaliai) to harm the little girl, who spoke only Lithuanian, because in Germany she would be forced to communicate with people who did not know her language. This was against the interests of the child and was also in breach of the Hague Convention, which declares that the child’s interest must prevail when taking decisions relating to him or her”.
By a judgment of 20 June 2007 the Oranienburg District Court granted a divorce to the first applicant and his spouse. It awarded permanent custody of their daughter to her father. The court also ordered that questions regarding the second applicant’s citizenship should be decided by the first applicant. The German court examined the Klaipėda Regional Court’s decision of 22 December 2006 refusing the return of the child (see paragraph 17 above), but ordered I.R. to return the child to Germany and to leave her in the custody of her father. I.R. was not present at that court hearing, but was represented and made submissions. On the same day, the Oranienburg District Court annexed to its decision a certificate issued pursuant to Article 42 § 1 of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 (see paragraph 150 below).
On 20 February 2008, the Brandenburg Regional Court dismissed an appeal lodged by I.R. and held that she was bound to return the child to Germany. I.R. was present at the hearing and made submissions.
It appears from the German court’s judgments in the case file that I.R. was represented and able to submit observations, even though not physically present, in the proceedings giving rise to the Oranienburg court’s judgments of 14 August 2006 and 20 June 2007. That information was confirmed at the hearing before the Court of Justice, when she was again present (see paragraph 101 below).
On 14 May 2008 the Oranienburg District Court issued the certificate ordering the second applicant’s return to the first applicant, on the basis of that court’s decision of 20 June 2007 and pursuant to Articles 28 and 42 of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003.
Meanwhile, I.R. asked the Lithuanian Court of Appeal not to recognise the Oranienburg District Court’s decision of 20 June 2007 regarding the child’s custody and return and to apply temporary protective measures, namely to suspend execution of its earlier decision of 15 March 2007 for the second applicant’s transfer to Germany (see paragraphs 19-21 above).
On 14 September 2007 the Court of Appeal refused to accept I.R.’s request for examination. It pointed out that, pursuant to its earlier decision of 15 March 2007, I.R. had been obliged to return the child to Germany on the basis of Article 13 of the Hague Convention. The Court of Appeal also noted that the certificate issued by the Oranienburg District Court pursuant to Article 42 of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 stated that all the conditions necessary for the issue of such a certificate, as set out in Article 42(2), had been satisfied. The Court of Appeal noted that the German court’s judgment, in so far as it ordered the return of the child to Germany, ought to have been directly enforced pursuant to the provisions of [Article 42 of] Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003, without the need for special exequatur proceedings for the recognition and enforcement of judicial decisions (see paragraph 150 below). Lastly, in the light of the foregoing, the Court of Appeal also rejected I.R.’s request for the application of temporary protective measures.
In response to an appeal by I.R. against the Court of Appeal decision of 14 September 2007 (see paragraph 93 above), on 30 April 2008 the Supreme Court decided to suspend civil proceedings and to put to the ECJ six questions regarding the interpretation of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003, including that of Article 42 thereof.
The questions were:
“(1) ‘Can an interested party within the meaning of Article 21 of Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 apply for non-recognition of a judicial decision if no application has been submitted for recognition of that decision?’
(2) ‘If the answer to Question 1 is in the affirmative: how is a national court, when examining an application for non-recognition of a decision brought by a person against whom that decision is to be enforced, to apply Article 31(1) of Regulation No 2201/2003, which states that ‘... Neither the person against whom enforcement is sought, nor the child shall, at this stage of the proceedings, be entitled to make any submissions on the application’?’
(3) ‘Is the national court which has received an application by the holder of parental responsibility for non-recognition of that part of the decision of the court of the Member State of origin requiring that that holder return to the State of origin the child staying with that holder, and in respect of which the certificate provided for in Article 42 of Regulation No 2201/2003 has been issued, required to examine that application on the basis of the provisions contained in Sections 1 and 2 of Chapter III of Regulation No 2201/2003, as provided for in Article 40(2) of that regulation?’
(4) ‘What meaning is to be attached to the condition laid down in Article 21(3) of Regulation No 2201/2003 (‘Without prejudice to Section 4 of this Chapter’)?’
(5) ‘Do the adoption of a decision that the child be returned and the issue of a certificate under Article 42 of Regulation No 2201/2003 in the court of the Member State of origin, after a court of the Member State in which the child is being unlawfully kept has taken a decision that the child be returned to his or her State of origin, comply with the objectives of and procedures under Regulation No 2201/2003?’
(6) ‘Does the prohibition in Article 24 of Regulation No 2201/2003 of review of the jurisdiction of the court of the Member State of origin mean that, if it has received an application for recognition or non-recognition of a decision of a foreign court and is unable to establish the jurisdiction of the court of the Member State of origin and unable to identify any other grounds set out in Article 23 of Regulation No 2201/2003 as a basis for non-recognition of decisions, the national court is obliged to recognise the decision of the court of the Member State of origin ordering the child’s return in the case where the court of the Member State of origin failed to observe the procedures laid down in the regulation when deciding on the issue of the child’s return?’”
Pending the ECJ’s examination of the questions referred to it, in a ruling of 26 May 2008 the Supreme Court also suspended execution of the Court of Appeal decision of 15 March 2007 requiring the return of the girl to Germany.
On 21 May 2008 the Supreme Court also requested that the referral to the ECJ for a preliminary ruling be dealt with under the urgent procedure provided for in Article 104b of the ECJ Rules of Procedure. To substantiate this request the Supreme Court this time referred to the necessity to act urgently on the grounds that any delay would have a very unfavourable impact on the relationship between the child and the parent with whom she was not living.
In June 2008 the Lithuanian press quoted I.R. as saying that the European Court of Justice was her last hope in having the case regarding the second applicant’s custody decided by the Lithuanian courts. She stated that she did not dare to think about how she would manage to execute the German courts’ decisions should the European Court of Justice findings be unfavourable to her.
On 22 October 2008 the Lithuanian Government passed resolution no. 1062 “On the allocation of means (Dėl lėšų skyrimo)”, by which it allocated a sum of LTL 5,300 (approximately EUR 1,530) “to the citizen of the Republic of Lithuania I.R. so that she could cover the fees of the lawyer G.K. who had represented her on 26 and 27 June 2008 at the European Court of Justice” (also see paragraph 101 below).
On 1 July 2008 the Advocate General (AG) observed in her View that since one factor characteristic of the situations under consideration consisted in the fact that the abductor claimed that his or her actions had been rendered lawful by the competent authorities of the State of refuge [in this case – Lithuania], one effective way of deterring him or her would be to deprive his or her actions of any practical or juridical consequences. In order to bring this about, the Hague Convention placed at the head of its objectives the restoration of the status quo, by means of “the prompt return of children wrongfully removed to or retained in any Contracting State” (paragraph 15 of the View). A principle which underpinned Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 as a whole was that of cooperation and mutual confidence between the courts and authorities of the Member States, which implied that decisions of the courts of the Member State of the child’s habitual residence should in principle be recognised and enforced automatically (paragraph 18 of the View). The Advocate General also noted that “the fundamental significance of this principle was brought into focus at the hearing when counsel for [I.R.] suggested that the Lithuanian courts might consider that the objectivity of the German courts was not guaranteed in a dispute between a German father and a Lithuanian mother”. For the Advocate General, “it was clear that to allow recognition to be refused on the basis of such doubts (whether they were or were not in fact felt by the Lithuanian courts) would negate the whole system which the Regulation seeks to establish” (paragraph 19 of the View).
Whilst reiterating that the superior interests of the child must be paramount in all circumstances, the Advocate General observed the following:
“22.  However, I should like to qualify that statement in the context of the child’s return to the Member State of habitual residence. It is clear that the Convention and the Regulation are based on the principle that, in the event of a child’s wrongful removal or retention, his or her superior interests do indeed always require that return, except only in certain clearly-defined situations set out in Articles 13 and 20 of the Convention (read, in so far as Article 13(b) is concerned, in conjunction with Article 11(4) of the Regulation). That, it seems to me, is perfectly coherent, and even necessary. A child can have no interest in being dragged from one Member State to another by a parent in quest of the court which he or she supposes will be the most sympathetic to his or her cause. I would add that a return to the Member State of habitual residence does not necessarily imply the child’s return to the home of the parent left behind, or separation from the abducting parent. Those are separate questions, to be decided by the competent court, which must take account of all the emotional, psychological and material aspects of the situation and which must, in deciding, accord paramount importance to the child’s superior interests.”
As to the applicants’ case, the Advocate General considered that “one cannot but observe that, in the present case, the fundamental aim of depriving the actions of the abducting parent of any practical or juridical consequences by ensuring the child’s prompt return is far from having been achieved” (paragraph 24 of the View). It was neither denied nor deniable that the German courts had jurisdiction to hear the divorce proceedings under Article 3(1)(a) of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003, as all the residence requirements listed there had been fulfilled at the time when the proceedings were initiated. Next, it appeared to be common ground that the child had indeed been wrongfully retained for the purposes of the Hague Convention (Article 3) and Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 (Article 2(11)). At the time when the mother had announced her intention not to return to Germany with the child, custody rights had actually been exercised by both parents jointly, by virtue of German law, and the father had consented only to a two-week trip to Lithuania (paragraphs 27 and 28 of the View). In the Advocate General’s view, once seised, the Lithuanian court had in principle been required to order the child’s return. It should also have issued its judgment no later than six weeks after the application was lodged. The only grounds on which it could have refused to order the child’s return were those set out in Article 13 of the Hague Convention (paragraph 33 of the View). The Advocate General thus stated:
“39.  However, as a result of the mother’s application for the proceedings to be reopened and the procedural vagaries that have followed upon it, the decision was not enforced, nor has it been enforced to this day. On the contrary, enforcement of the Court of Appeal’s decision has been suspended on several occasions, even by the Supreme Court itself – despite the fact that the same Supreme Court held, in its judgment allowing the reopening, that such suspension was not possible.
Even if enforcement of a judgment of a court of a Member State within its own territory is a matter for domestic law, it can only be concluded, at this point, that the outcome of these successive suspensions – the fact that, nearly two years after she was first supposed to return and more than 15 months after the decision ordering her return was issued, the child has still not been brought back to Germany – is totally incompatible with the fundamental aims of the Convention and the Regulation.”
The European Court of Justice held hearings on 26 and 27 June 2008. I.R. was represented by two lawyers, G.B. (see paragraph 59 above) and G.K., who submitted observations on her behalf. The lawyer G.K. told the Lithuanian press that “it is obvious that the German court’s certificate for the return of the child was invalid ... However, only [the European Court of Justice] may decide whether law can be born out of unlawfulness”.
The Lithuanian Government were represented by two lawyers from the European Law Department under the Ministry of Justice.
The first applicant also had a lawyer – the one who had represented him in the court proceedings in Lithuania.
On 11 July 2008 the European Court of Justice delivered its preliminary ruling (ECLI:EU:C:2008:406) on interpretation of the Regulation, having examined the referral for a preliminary ruling under an urgent procedure pursuant to Article 104b of its Rules of Procedure. The ECJ noted that the Regulation complements the provisions of the 1980 Hague Convention, which nevertheless remains applicable (paragraph 53 of the ECJ’s judgment). It then held, inter alia, that procedural steps which had been taken in the Member State of enforcement after a non-return decision had been given were not decisive and could be regarded as irrelevant for the purposes of implementing the Community regulation in question (paragraph 80 of the ECJ’s judgment). If the position were otherwise, there would be a risk that the Regulation would be deprived of its useful effect, since the objective of the child’s immediate return would remain subject to the condition that the redress procedures allowed under the domestic law of the Member State in which the child was being wrongfully retained had been exhausted. That risk should be particularly balanced because, where young children were concerned, biological time could not be measured according to general criteria, given the intellectual and psychological structure of such children and the speed with which that structure develops (paragraph 81 of the ECJ’s judgment). Since no doubt had been expressed as regards the authenticity of the certificate issued by the German court and since it had been drawn up in accordance with the provisions of the Regulation, opposition to the recognition of the decision ordering return was not permitted and it was for the Lithuanian court merely to declare the enforceability of the certified decision and to allow the immediate return of the child (paragraphs 89 and 109 of the ECJ’s judgment).
The European Court of Justice also held:
“87.  First, the sequence of the decisions taken by the Lithuanian courts, as regards both the application for return and that for non‑recognition of the decision certified pursuant to Article 42 of the Regulation, does not appear to have observed the autonomy of the procedure provided for in that provision. Second, the number of decisions and their diverse nature (to set aside, overturn, reopen, suspend) are evidence that, even if the most expeditious domestic procedures may have been adopted, the periods of time elapsed were already, on the date on which the certificate was issued, in manifest contradiction to the requirements of the Regulation.”
In a ruling of 9 July 2008, that is to say, after the ECJ had delivered its preliminary ruling, the Supreme Court asked the State Child Rights and Adoption Service for a fresh conclusion regarding the possibility of returning the second applicant to Germany. The Supreme Court reasoned that such a conclusion had to be produced under Article 2 § 3 of the Law on EU Regulation implementation (see paragraph 134 below) and that it was necessary given that “a certain time had passed since the case had been examined”.
On 24 July 2008 the first applicant wrote to the Supreme Court that under Article 2 § 6 of the Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003, an appeal on points of law was not possible in cases concerning a child’s return. The first applicant also underlined that the conclusion which the Supreme Court had ordered the State Child Rights and Adoption Service to produce was related to the factual circumstances of the case and their evaluation. The first applicant pointed out that, under Article 353 §1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the Supreme Court was bound by the facts as they had been established by the first-instance and appellate courts (see paragraph 136 below). Accordingly, it was not the Supreme Court’s function to examine the factual circumstances of the case even if they were mentioned in an appeal on points of law or a response to it. Above all, it was not the Supreme Court’s function to gather evidence ex proprio motu. To interpret the Code of Civil Procedure in any other way would negate the entire purpose and meaning of proceedings on points of law, the main aim of which was to ensure the uniform interpretation and application of law, as set out in Article 346 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 136 below). The first applicant also emphasised that none of the parties to the civil proceedings (namely himself, the Prosecutor General, and I.R.) had asked the Supreme Court to order such a fresh conclusion by the State Child Rights and Adoption Service. Lastly, he pointed out that the proceedings regarding the merits of the request to return the girl to Germany had already been terminated by the final and enforceable Court of Appeal decision of 15 March 2007 (see paragraphs 19-21 above). In those proceedings such a conclusion had already been produced on 22 November 2006 (see paragraph 15 above). These proceedings, however, had been initiated to look into the legal question of the possibility of a reopening (see paragraph 73 above).
By final ruling no. 3K-3-403/2008 of 25 August 2008, the Supreme Court rejected the Prosecutor General’s and I.R.’s requests for a reopening of the civil proceedings for the second applicant’s return, leaving the Court of Appeal’s decision of 30 April 2008 unchanged (see paragraph 77 above). The State Child Rights and Adoption Service was party concerned in those proceedings. Relying on the ECJ’s preliminary ruling, the Supreme Court pointed out that once a court of the child’s country of origin had taken a decision for that child’s return and issued a certificate as set out in Article 42 of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003, a court in the State in which execution of that decision had been requested could only pronounce (tik paskelbti) that other court’s decision and grant the request to return the child without delay. In the light of the ECJ’s preliminary ruling, the Supreme Court also held that the Lithuanian courts did not have jurisdiction to review the German courts’ decisions on the basis of which a certificate for the child’s return had been issued. Moreover, as explained by the ECJ, once a certificate under Article 42 of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 had been issued in the child’s state of origin [Germany], [any] court decisions taken in the State where the child was residing [Lithuania], would have no effect on its validity or its enforcement. The Supreme Court thus concluded that “any measure aimed at the reopening or further continuation of the court proceedings was prohibited (tai užkerta kelią proceso atnaujinimui ar jo tolimesniam vyksmui)”.
Although I.R. had relied on a report (raštas) of 31 October 2007 from the Ministry of Social Security and Labour stating that the State Child Rights and Adoption Service had not executed its duties properly when providing a conclusion in the instant case and that the director of that Service had been issued with a disciplinary sanction in that regard, the Supreme Court considered that this had not been of any relevance as regards the lawfulness of the decision of 15 March 2007 by the Court of Appeal concerning the second applicant’s return. In that context the Supreme Court also pointed out that in their request to reopen the civil proceedings in the case which had been terminated by the 15 March 2007 Court of Appeal ruling, I.R. and the Prosecutor General had relied on Article 366 § 1 (2 and 9) of the Code of Civil Procedure, that is, that new circumstances had come to light which could not have been known when the case was heard initially and that there had been a clear error when applying the law. Regarding the first ground, the Supreme Court held that the fact that the child would be in unfamiliar linguistic environment if she were to be returned to Germany did not correspond to any of the cases mentioned in Article 13 (b) of the Hague Convention. Because of her young age she would have the capacity to learn another language, and mere immersion in another linguistic environment could not be seen as causing the child physical or mental harm within the meaning of Article 13 (b) of the Hague Convention. As to I.R.’s argument that her son’s health would deteriorate upon the second applicant’s return to Germany, that contention was not related to any potential harm to the child who was to be returned – the second applicant. Moreover, the circumstances regarding I.R.’s son’s ailment had been known from the very beginning of the court proceedings for the second applicant’s return. That circumstance could therefore not be considered as new. Lastly, the Supreme Court pointed out that the rule that siblings should not be separated applied in relation to their adoption [which was not the situation in the case at hand] (Article 3.209 § 6 of the Civil Code).
The Supreme Court then turned to the Prosecutor General’s submission that when sanctioning the child’s return, the Court of Appeal had committed a clear mistake of law in interpreting Article 13 (b) of the Hague Convention and Article 3 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and that this would, in turn, constitute a basis for reopening the civil court proceedings under Article 366 § 1 (9) of the CCP. The Supreme Court however pointed out that the Klaipėda Regional Court and the Court of Appeal − both during the proceedings for the second applicant’s return (see paragraphs 17 and 19-21 above), and when adopting decisions refusing the reopening of court proceedings in the already terminated case (see paragraphs 66, 68 and 77 above) − had not established any exceptions which would permit the non-return of the child on the basis of those two international Conventions. For the Supreme Court, this showed that both the Klaipėda Regional Court and the Court of Appeal had acted within their competence. It followed that no clear mistake of law had been committed.
On the same day, 25 August 2008, the Supreme Court adopted another ruling, no. 3K-3-126/2008, dismissing I.R.’s appeal on points of law against the Court of Appeal decision of 14 September 2007 by which that court had rejected I.R.’s request for the application of temporary protective measures (see paragraph 93 above). The Supreme Court also relied on the ECJ’s preliminary ruling.
Also on the same day, 25 August 2008, I.R. gave an interview to an Internet news portal 15min.lt. The article reported that, after two years of dramatic activity surrounding I.R.’s family, which had been marked by a marathon of court hearings and demonstrations of support (paramos piketai), and had attracted attention not only in Lithuania but all over Europe, the Supreme Court had adopted two rulings which were unfavourable to I.R. She stated regarding those decisions: “Clearly, these are unjust decisions, in particular the one refusing to reopen court proceedings. One must conclude that our State does not protect its citizens. As if it is kow-towing (nuolaidžiaujama) to a stronger country. This is inhuman, but I cannot lay down my weapons. The execution proceedings remain. I will use all legal avenues to allow my daughter to stay with me and her brother.” I.R. also expressed her happiness that during the two years that she had been fighting for her child she had been supported by her family, and also by Lithuanian society and the State institutions: “My family has been behind me from the very first unfavourable German court decisions. Afterwards Lithuanian institutions joined in. As the saying
In reply to an inquiry from the first applicant’s relatives, the President of the Republic later wrote, on 22 September 2008, that he was aware of the case, in which over the previous two years Lithuanian and German courts had adopted more than thirty decisions “which had often been contradictory and invalidated one another”. The President also referred to the ECJ’s preliminary ruling and to the Supreme Court’s subsequent ruling, pursuant to which I.R. had been obliged to return the second applicant to the first applicant. Lastly, the President referred to the principle of the separation of powers, under Article 109 of the Constitution, and stated that, in a democratic State, refusal to execute a court decision was a breach of the principle of the rule of law. The President expressed his confidence (esame įsitikinę) that the Lithuanian authorities would ensure that the court decision was executed.
On 20 October 2008 the first applicant, I.R. and their daughter attended a meeting at the premises of the Klaipėda child care authority. The first applicant had earlier asked a Lithuanian bailiff for the meeting so that their daughter could be transferred into his custody on the basis of the writ of execution (vykdomasis raštas) issued by the Klaipėda Regional Court on 13 June 2007 (see paragraph 26 above). During the meeting ‒ before the bailiff reached the premises and whilst I.R. was in another room talking to a psychologist ‒ the first applicant took their daughter out of the building and drove her away (išsivežė).
The applicants travelled together to Riga, where they attempted to board a plane to Berlin. According to the Latvian authorities, on the night of 20 October 2008 the two applicants were arrested at Riga airport by the Latvian authorities (also see paragraph 115 below).
The following day the two applicants were released by the Latvian authorities, who had established that the first applicant had sole custody rights over the child, as confirmed by the court decision. On the same day, I.R. arrived at Riga airport, accompanied by Lithuanian police officers but returned to Lithuania without the child because the two applicants had boarded a plane to Berlin earlier that day. The Lithuanian press quoted the first applicant as blaming the Lithuanian authorities for their failure to act, and said that he would have had to wait ten years to be reunited with his daughter if he had not acted as he did, taking her away with him. The press also quoted the Ombudsman for Children’s Rights as suggesting that the first applicant’s actions in taking his daughter away with him raised doubts as to whether he could “be good for the child” (gali būti geras vaikui) and “properly guarantee the child’s safety” (tinkamai užtikrinti vaiko saugumą).
On 20 October 2008 a Lithuanian prosecutor opened criminal proceedings against the first applicant on charges of child abduction and wilful conduct (savavaldžiavimas) (Article 156 § 2 and Article 294 § 1 of the Criminal Code, see paragraph 143 below). The criminal charges were initiated by a complaint from the Klaipėda child care authority. I.R. was granted victim status in that criminal case.
That same day, in response to a request from the prosecutor, the Klaipėda City District Court ordered the first applicant’s detention on remand, holding that he might have violated the rights and interests of I.R. The Lithuanian prosecutors subsequently issued a European Arrest Warrant in respect of the first applicant but cancelled that warrant on 20 November 2008.
On 18 November 2008 the Klaipėda Regional Court quashed the order for the detention of the first applicant. The court noted that the German courts’ decisions of 14 August 2006 and 20 June 2007 (see paragraphs 12 and 92 above) had never been invalidated, and should therefore have been executed. The fact that the second applicant should have been transferred into the first applicant’s custody followed both from the ECJ’s preliminary ruling and from the Supreme Court’s rulings of 25 August 2008. There was no basis on which it could be held that the first applicant’s actions had breached the rights of I.R., who had in any case been deprived of her custody rights in respect of her daughter by court decisions that were still valid.
The Lithuanian prosecutors however pursued the criminal investigation against the first applicant. On 3 February 2009 he was officially informed that he was a suspect in a criminal case under Articles 156 § 2 and 294 § 2 of the Criminal Code, on the grounds that on 20 October 2008 he had seized the second applicant and driven her away. The prosecutor considered that by such actions the first applicant had caused serious damage to the second applicant’s interests.
Subsequently, the prosecutor questioned all the relevant persons in the case: the first applicant, I.R., the representatives of the child care authorities, the bailiff, and others who had taken part in the proceedings concerning the second applicant’s transfer to the first applicant and had witnessed the events of 20 October 2008. The prosecutors also obtained documents from Germany regarding the second applicant’s psychological state after she had been returned to the first applicant.
In particular, the director of the Klaipėda Pedagogical Psychological Service (Klaipėdos pedagoginė psychologinė tarnyba) testified as a witness that the first applicant’s lawyer had contacted that service between 15 and 20 September 2008, asking that a psychologist be involved when the child was transferred to the first applicant. The Service had agreed to be involved in the transfer proceedings. At the beginning of October 2008 the first applicant had called the Service asking for a consultation. When the director had met the first applicant, they had discussed how to communicate with the child so that the closest possible contact could be established with her so that she would be traumatised as little as possible. She had given him much advice. The first applicant had also complained to the Service that I.R. had not allowed him to communicate with his daughter.
The director also testified that the first applicant had asked her to attend a meeting at 2.15 p.m. on 20 October 2008 so that she could see how he communicated with the child and whether everything was in order. The director also testified that when she had arrived at that meeting she had tried to talk to I.R., but it had been obvious that I.R. did not wish to reach any compromise; she was ready only “to fight (kovoti)” and “to go until the end (eiti iki galo)”. No constructive solution could be reached, even though psychological assistance was offered to I.R. The director also stated that she had heard comments that I.R. was about “to harm herself and [the second applicant] (pakenkti sau ir vaikui)”, and had therefore suggested to the child care authorities that they talk to I.R. about those intentions. The director stated that the bailiff had arrived at the child care authority premises at 2.15 p.m., as scheduled.
When questioned by the prosecutor as a suspect, the first applicant testified that he had arrived in Lithuania on 24 September 2008. Initially he had been able to see his daughter on a daily basis, but after ten days I.R. had forbidden him to see her, and for two weeks he had had no contact with his daughter. Afterwards, with the help of the child care authority and at its premises, the first applicant had succeeded in seeing his daughter for two hours a day for three days, but I.R. had always been present in the room during those meetings. He pointed out that he was the person who had sole custody rights over their daughter, but that he was unable to reach a friendly agreement with I.R., who submitted complaints against the bailiff. The first applicant also stated that he had taken seriously I.R.’s threat that she could do something to herself or the second applicant and that he therefore felt he had to act.
The first applicant also stated that he had liaised with the bailiff over how the second applicant’s transfer should take place on 20 October 2008. However, after seeing I.R., he had thought that things might escalate out of control. He had therefore decided to leave the child care authorities’ premises with his daughter when the opportunity arose, and without waiting for the bailiff. He had thus taken her to his car, where he had clothes for her. The applicant stated that his goal had been to leave Lithuania and to return to his home in Germany, which he reached on 21 October 2008. According to him, throughout that time the second applicant had felt all right (sekėsi gerai). Lastly, he stated that after their return to Germany I.R. had asked the German prosecutors and the child care authorities to arrest the first applicant and to return their daughter to her, but in April 2009 the Oranienburg firstinstance court had held that the first applicant had sole custody rights and that it would not be in the best interests of the second applicant if she were to return to her mother.
When questioned as a witness, I.R. testified that when the first applicant was seeing their daughter during the arranged meetings in autumn 2008, she had not told the girl that she would have to go to Germany to live with her father. She also admitted that she had not visited the psychologists so that she could prepare the child for life with her father. I.R. also stated that she had been shocked by the developments on 20 October 2008 when the first applicant had taken their daughter away. She had suffered a lot due to the fact that the girl had been torn away from her. I.R. acknowledged that the child had not been prepared for the transfer to her father. It would have been easier for her if she had known that the girl had been psychologically prepared.
The representative of the Klaipėda child care authority testified that she had taken part in the meeting of 20 October 2008. Both parents and the girl had been in one room. She had witnessed how the girl communicated with her father, noting that they “communicated nicely, chatted and somehow understood each other (vaikas su tėvu gražiai bendravo, čiauskėjo, kažkaip suprato vienas kitą)”. At some point the representative of the child care authority asked I.R. to leave the room where the two applicants were and to come into her office, because the psychologist had arrived. She and the psychologist had then tried to find out from I.R. what she had in mind when she said that she would “go until the end”. I.R. replied that she wanted to do everything by lawful means, and that her lawyers were “preparing new papers” (ruošia naujus raštus). The representative and the psychologist understood that I.R. had some kind of unused means at her disposal. I.R. had talked very briefly and had been tense. The representative also noted that the psychologist had not observed the child during the meeting of 20 October 2008, because there had been no time for that. Everything had happened very fast. The representative considered that the action of taking away a child and putting her into a car, with the mother then running after her, was tantamount to kidnapping.
By a decision of 24 November 2009 the Klaipėda City District Prosecutor discontinued the criminal proceedings against the first applicant. The prosecutor firstly noted the Oranienburg District Court’s decisions of 14 August 2006 and 20 June 2007 granting the first applicant custody of the second applicant and ordering I.R. to return the girl, and secondly the Lithuanian Court of Appeal ruling of 15 March 2007 (see paragraph 19-21 above) ordering I.R. to return the second applicant to her father. It followed that the second applicant had been living at her mother’s home unlawfully. Lastly, the prosecutor also noted the Supreme Court’s ruling of 25 August 2008, rejecting the Prosecutor General’s and I.R.’s requests to reopen civil proceedings (see paragraphs 106 and 107 above).
The prosecutor also relied on the psychological expert report (psichologinė ekspertizė) of unspecified date which she had received from Germany, which she then recited in the decision:
“The sudden separation of the second applicant from her mother as well as the sudden change of her place of residence had led to a reaction of sadness (liūdesio reakcija), which was normal for her age as she had been separated from persons close to her. However, Luisa had survived the move and the changes well; she had also received assistance. Therefore there was no long-term or traumatic impact resulting from that separation. Luisa had also borne the changes in her move to her father well. Her acclimatisation had been further eased by her capacity to learn and the presence of persons whom she had known from childhood, especially her father and her nanny, as well as her regular contact with her mother. She had learned the German language quickly and fully. Although she had been stressed during her trip to Germany, an interpreter and her father, who had always been next to her, had helped her. There were no residual consequences of that stressful event. Luisa’s physical and mental state was very good. She was a self-confident, happy and smart girl with the capabilities, knowledge and interests which were characteristic for her age. There were no indications that she had any emotional or behavioural issues or other psychological problems. Luisa’s social development, including her behaviour when interacting with others, in all areas corresponded to that of other children of her age. Luisa had fully integrated into her living environment.”
The prosecutor also found that the first applicant’s actions of 20 October 2008 had not constituted a crime under Articles 156 § 2 or 294 § 2 of the Criminal Code. On the basis of the case file materials, including video recordings by journalists which showed how the first applicant had taken the girl from the premises of the Klaipėda child care authority and put her into the car, and also witness testimony, the prosecutor found that the first applicant had carried the girl in his arms. However, there was no proof that physical coercion had been used against her. In fact, given that the first applicant had custody rights over the girl, he in fact had the right to take her in his arms and carry her. The prosecutor pointed out that the first applicant had communicated with the child previously and had therefore not been a stranger or an unfamiliar person to her. When being carried out of the building in the first applicant’s arms, the girl had not cried or screamed or otherwise indicated that she was being taken by force. One of the witnesses testified that she had started screaming when she saw her mother running after her and the first applicant, but that had been a normal response to her mother’s reaction. The other witnesses testified, and the video recordings also showed, that the first applicant had calmed the child down after putting her in the car.
In setting out the reasons for discontinuing the criminal proceedings against the first applicant, the prosecutor also noted that, according to the bailiff, it had been planned to execute the court decision ordering the girl’s transfer on 20 October 2008 at 2.15 p.m. Moreover, it was apparent from both the bailiff’s and the first applicant’s testimonies, as well as from the execution file that from the outset the first applicant had sought to have the court decisions executed lawfully and peacefully. In order to avoid forcible execution of the court decision, he had made the offer to I.R. that he would voluntarily execute the court decision and alleviate all issues ensuing from that execution.
The first applicant had also offered, on his own initiative, to cover I.R.’s travel costs to Germany, and to provide her with a place to live and financial support; she had also been provided with a job offer in Germany. However, I.R. had not accepted the first applicant’s offer. Furthermore, the first applicant had also sought to communicate with the child, so that the connection between the father and child would be restored, but I.R. had put obstructions in the way. As confirmed by the child care employees, I.R. had disregarded the agreement that had been signed at the bailiff’s office on 25 September 2008 obliging her to allow the first applicant to communicate with his daughter for four hours per day.
According to the testimony of a psychologist from the Klaipėda Pedagogical Psychological Service, the first applicant had consulted her about how best to communicate with the child and how to establish closer contact with her, so that she would be traumatised as little as possible. Such actions on the part of the first applicant showed that he had sought goodwill and lawful execution of the court decision, so that as little harm as possible would be caused to the child. Moreover, the case file also showed that the first applicant had made preparations for the lawful transfer of the child, ensuring that everyone who had to take part in the transfer would be present at the child care authority premises, where the court decision should have been executed. All this showed that he did not have a premeditated intention to execute the court decision as he saw fit.
Lastly, turning to the behaviour of I.R., the prosecutor pointed out that during the proceedings concerning the execution of the court decision she had concealed her place of residence, which she shared with the child, and had also appealed against all the actions of the bailiff. According to I.R.’s own testimony, she had not been preparing the child for her return to Germany, nor had she visited psychologists so that the girl could be prepared for going to live with her father. The prosecutor also noted I.R.’s statement to journalists when asked what she planned to do when the time came for her daughter to go to Germany, namely “There are various ways. We will be together with Luisa. I will fight until the end”. For the prosecutor, this showed that I.R. had no intention of executing the court decision and returning the child to her lawful custodian. That being so, it had to be concluded that the first applicant had not caused major damage to I.R., who had no custody rights.
In the light of the above the prosecutor concluded that the first applicant had good reason to consider I.R.’s actions as unlawful. Even so, he had not undertaken any extreme or violent measures against her. In fact, it had been the actions of I.R. that had been obstructive and provocative, since she had prevented the first applicant from properly taking care of his child. The prosecutor also concluded that the first applicant’s actions on 20 October 2008 were to be considered as spontaneous, taken so as to avoid calamity and physical violence which would only have harmed the child’s interests or prevented the execution of the court decision. Even if the child had been taken away suddenly and might have been stressed during the journey, the psychological report ruled out any negative and lasting consequences of the action, and currently her situation was deemed very good. From that it followed that the first applicant had not caused harm to the second applicant either.
As to the right to respect for family life, the Lithuanian Constitution reads:
“The family shall be the basis of society and the State.
Family, motherhood, fatherhood, and childhood shall be under the protection and care of the State.
...
In the family, the rights of spouses shall be equal...”
As regards Lithuanian citizenship, the Lithuanian Constitution reads:
“Citizenship of the Republic of Lithuania shall be acquired by birth or on other grounds established by law.
With the exception of individual cases provided for by law, no one may be a citizen of both the Republic of Lithuania and another state at the same time.
The procedure for the acquisition and loss of citizenship shall be established by law.”
“The State of Lithuania shall protect its citizens abroad.
It shall be prohibited to extradite a citizen of the Republic of Lithuania to another state unless an international treaty of the Republic of Lithuania establishes otherwise.”
The Law on Citizenship, at the material time (Article 9 until 22 July 2008; see paragraph 133 below), read:
“1.  A child whose parents have different citizenships, but one of whom was a citizen of the Republic of Lithuania at the time of the child’s birth, will be a citizen of the Republic of Lithuania if he or she was born in the territory of the Republic of Lithuania ...”
“1.  The President of the Republic may, in compliance with this Law, grant citizenship of the Republic of Lithuania by way of exception to citizens of other States or stateless persons of outstanding merit to the Republic of Lithuania who have integrated into Lithuanian society, without applying the [usual] conditions for granting citizenship of the Republic of Lithuania ... Under this Law, outstanding merit to the Republic of Lithuania shall include any action by a foreign citizen or a stateless person, which significantly contributes to the consolidation of the statehood of the Republic of Lithuania, as well as to the strengthening of its power and authority in the international community ...”
“1. If both parents acquire citizenship of the Republic of Lithuania or they both lose it, the citizenship of their children under fourteen years of age changes accordingly ...”
“1.  If one parent has the citizenship of the Republic of Lithuania and the other parent remains a citizen of another country, their child may obtain the citizenship of the Republic of Lithuania if both parents so ask in writing. If the parents are divorced, the child may obtain the citizenship of the Republic of Lithuania on the basis of a written request of one of the parents who has obtained the citizenship of the Republic of Lithuania, and with whom the child has been left to live by a court decision or with whom the child habitually lives de facto ...”
On 15 July 2008 the Law on Citizenship was amended to provide (wording in force as of 22 July 2008):
“1.  A child whose parents have different citizenships, but of whom one was a citizen of the Republic of Lithuania at the time of the child’s birth, will be a citizen of the Republic of Lithuania irrespective of whether he or she was born within or outside the territory of the Republic of Lithuania ...”
The Law on the Implementation of EC Regulation No. 2201/2003 was passed by the Seimas on 21 April 2005 (Įstatymas dėl 2003 m. lapkričio 27 d. Tarybos reglamento (EB) Nr. 2201/2003 dėl jurisdikcijos ir teismo sprendimų, susijusių su santuoka ir tėvų pareigomis, pripažinimo bei vykdymo, panaikinančio reglamentą (EB) Nr. 1347/2000, įgyvendinimo). A request for return of a child who had been brought to Lithuania or held there unlawfully had to be examined within the timelimits set out in Article 11 of Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 [that is, within six weeks] (Article 2 § 5 of the aforementioned Law). When examining such a request, a regional court with jurisdiction for the child’s last known place of residence was to act as the court of first instance (Article 2 § 2). An appeal (atskirasis skundas) could then be lodged with the Court of Appeal, whose decision whether or not the child should be returned was final. The Law explicitly stated that “in cases concerning a child’s return, an appeal on points of law is not possible” (Article 2 § 6). In matters concerning the return of a child, the Central Authority for the performance of the functions designated in the Regulation was the State Child Rights and Adoption Service under the Ministry of Social Security and Labour. Its function was to provide a conclusion (išvada) regarding the child’s return when such a dispute was heard by a court (Article 2 § 3). The Law also read that certificates issued in accordance with Articles 41 and 42 of the Regulation in a Member State were considered as valid enforcement orders (Article 3 § 1).
That Law was replaced by a new Law on the Implementation of the European Union and International Law Acts within Civil Proceedings (Civilinį procesą reglamentuojančių Europos Sąjungos ir tarptautinės teisės aktų įgyvendinimo įstatymas), passed by the Seimas on 13 November 2008. Article 7 §§ 5 and 6 of the new Law contained provisions identical to the provisions of Article 2 §§ 5 and 6 of the earlier Law.
Under the Law on the Constitutional Court, annulment of the legal act that has been challenged before the Constitutional Court is a ground to discontinue the proceedings before that court (Article 69).
According to the Law on Courts, as in force at the material time, the Supreme Court is the court which examines appeals on the points of law in cases, where decisions have become final (Article 23 § 1).
The Code of Civil Procedure at the material time read as follows:
“A ruling regarding a separate complaint (atskirasis skundas) adopted by the appellate court shall come into force with effect from the date of its adoption.”
“1.  Cassation proceedings are possible only if the grounds enumerated in this article exist.
The grounds for reviewing a case in cassation proceedings are:
1)  breach of substantive or material legal norms which has an essential impact on the uniform interpretation and application of the law, if that breach could have meant that an unlawful court decision (ruling) was adopted;
2)  if the court in the decision (ruling) departed from the Supreme Court’s practice as to how a certain legal rule should be interpreted and applied;
3)  if the Supreme Court’s practice as regards a certain legal question is not uniform.”
“1.  The court of cassation, without exceeding the boundaries of the appeal on points of law, shall verify the court decisions and (or) rulings that have been appealed against inasmuch as the questions of law are concerned. The court of cassation shall be bound by the circumstances as established by the first-instance and appellate courts.
The court [of cassation] may overstep the boundaries of the appeal on the points of law if the public interest so requires ...”
“1.  The President of the Supreme Court, the chairman of the civil cases division, the chamber for selection of the cases for the examination (teisėjų atrankos kolegija), a chamber of judges or plenary session of the civil cases division shall have the right to suspend the execution of a court decision or ruling until an appeal on points of law has been examined in the Supreme Court.”
“1.  Court proceedings which have been terminated by a court decision (ruling) which has entered into force with final effect may be reopened on the grounds and according to the rules which are set out in this Chapter. A request for reopening may be submitted by the parties to the civil proceedings and by third parties, and also persons not involved in the case but whose rights or interests protected by law are breached by the court decision or ruling which had entered into force.
Requests for a reopening of court proceedings in order to protect the public interest and according to the rules set out in this Chapter may be submitted by the Prosecutor General.”
“1.  Proceedings may be reopened if:
...
2)  essential new circumstances come to light which had not been known and could not have been known to the applicant (nebuvo ir negalėjo būti žinomos pareiškėjui) when the case was heard initially;
9)  the first-instance court made a clear mistake when applying the law and its decision (or ruling) has not been reviewed on appeal. The Prosecutor General also has the right to lodge a request for the proceedings to be reopened also regarding court decisions (rulings) which have been reviewed on appeal.”
“1.  A request to reopen proceedings shall not stop execution of a court decision or ruling.
A court which examines a request for reopening shall have the right to suspend the execution of a court decision or ruling until the case for reopening of the proceedings has been examined. A ruling for suspension of the court decision or ruling is not amenable to appeal.”
According to the Commentary on the Code of Civil Procedure (Lietuvos Respublikos civilinio proceso kodekso komentaras, II tomas, Justitia, Vilnius 2005, p. 417), the norm set out in Article 353 § 1 means that the cassation court is bound by the circumstances of the case as established by the first-instance and appellate courts. The cassation court may not establish new facts or evaluate existing or new evidence afresh. When issuing a decision, the cassation court may not hold that a particular circumstance as established by a lower instance court exists or does not exist or, conversely, that a circumstance which a lower court had previously not established as existing does now exist. Furthermore, under Article 353 § 1, the court of cassation is not bound to always rely on the circumstances as established by the appellate instance court if they differ from those established by the first-instance court. The court of cassation may choose which court’s findings – those of the first instance or the appellate instance – to rely on.
By a ruling of 18 July 2017 in civil case no. 3P-1249/2017 the Supreme Court confirmed the settled case-law that questions regarding the establishment of facts could not be the object of cassation proceedings, because the court of cassation was bound by the circumstances that have been established by the first-instance and appellate courts. The cassation court reviewing such an appeal is bound by the facts established by lower courts and may decide only questions of law (Article 353 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure).
The Law on Courts at the material time provided that cases are heard at the Supreme Court in three or seven judges’ chambers or in plenary session (Article 36 § 5). Under the Statute of the Supreme Court, its President, as a judge, hears cases when he or she is in the composition of the Supreme Court’s chamber (Article 11).
Under the Lithuanian Constitution, justice shall be administered only by courts. When administering justice, judges and courts shall be independent. When considering cases, judges shall obey only the law (Article 109).
The Law on Bailiffs at the relevant time provided that when exercising their functions bailiffs were independent and were to act on the basis of the Constitution, international treaties signed by Lithuania, and the laws and other legal instruments adopted in Lithuania. Bailiffs are appointed and dismissed by the Minister of Justice. In carrying out their functions, bailiffs must adhere to the principle of lawfulness as well as to the principles of civil proceedings. A bailiff must carry out his professional duties in good faith. In enforcing writs of execution, the bailiff must use all lawful remedies to protect adequately the interests of the plaintiff, without violating the rights and lawful interests of other parties to the enforcement procedure (Article 3 § 2). At the material time, Article 594 of the Code of Civil Procedure provided that the procedural actions of a bailiff were supervised by the judge of the region in which the bailiff is active.
As regards parents representing children, the Civil Code reads:
“1.  Children who are legally incapable shall be represented by their parents under the law, except where the parents have been declared legally incapable by a court judgment.
Parents shall represent their children on presentation of the child’s birth certificate.”
The Lithuanian Criminal Code provides that a father, mother or a close relative who abducts their own or a relative’s young child from a children’s establishment or from a person with whom the child lawfully resides is punishable by community service or by a fine or by restriction of liberty or by arrest or by imprisonment for a term of up to two years (Article 156 § 2).
A person who, by disregarding the procedure established by law, wilfully exercises an existing or alleged right of his own or of another person which is disputed or recognised but not yet exercised, and causes major damage to that person’s rights or legitimate interests is punishable by a fine or by arrest or by imprisonment for a term of up to three years (Article 294 § 1).
The Law on International Treaties at the material time read that the treaties that had entered into force must be executed (Article 11). The principle of pacta sunt servanda has been confirmed by the Constitutional Court as early as in its ruling of 17 October 1995. According to the Constitutional Court’s ruling of 14 March 2006, that principle is also a constitutional principle in Lithuania.
The relevant provisions of the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction of 25 October 1980 (“the Hague Convention”), which came into force in respect of Lithuania on 1 September 2002, read as follows:
“The States signatory to the present Convention,
Firmly convinced that the interests of children are of paramount importance in matters relating to their custody,
Desiring to protect children internationally from the harmful effects of their wrongful removal or retention and to establish procedures to ensure their prompt return to the State of their habitual residence, as well as to secure protection for rights of access,
Have resolved to conclude a Convention to this effect, and have agreed upon the following provisions –
...
The objects of the present Convention are –
a)  to secure the prompt return of children wrongfully removed to or retained in any Contracting State; and
b)  to ensure that rights of custody and of access under the law of one Contracting State are effectively respected in the other Contracting States.
...
The removal or the retention of a child is to be considered wrongful where –
a)  it is in breach of rights of custody attributed to a person, an institution or any other body, either jointly or alone, under the law of the State in which the child was habitually resident immediately before the removal or retention; and
b)  at the time of removal or retention those rights were actually exercised, either jointly or alone, or would have been so exercised but for the removal or retention.
The rights of custody mentioned in sub-paragraph a) above, may arise in particular by operation of law or by reason of a judicial or administrative decision, or by reason of an agreement having legal effect under the law of that State.
The Convention shall apply to any child who was habitually resident in a  immediately before any breach of custody or access rights. The Convention shall cease to apply when the child attains the age of 16 years.
For the purposes of this Convention –
a)  ’rights of custody’ shall include rights relating to the care of the person of the child and, in particular, the right to determine the child’s place of residence;
b)  ’rights of access’ shall include the right to take a child for a limited period of time to a place other than the child’s habitual residence.
...
The judicial or administrative authorities of Contracting States shall act expeditiously in proceedings for the return of children.
If the judicial or administrative authority concerned has not reached a decision within six weeks from the date of commencement of the proceedings, the applicant or the Central Authority of the requested State, on its own initiative or if asked by the Central Authority of the requesting State, shall have the right to request a statement of the reasons for the delay. ...
Where a child has been wrongfully removed or retained in terms of Article 3 and, at the date of the commencement of the proceedings before the judicial or administrative authority of the Contracting State where the child is, a period of less than one year has elapsed from the date of the wrongful removal or retention, the authority concerned shall order the return of the child forthwith.
The judicial or administrative authority, even where the proceedings have been commenced after the expiration of the period of one year referred to in the preceding paragraph, shall also order the return of the child, unless it is demonstrated that the child is now settled in its new environment.
Where the judicial or administrative authority in the requested State has reason to believe that the child has been taken to another State, it may stay the proceedings or dismiss the application for the return of the child.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding Article, the judicial or administrative authority of the requested State is not bound to order the return of the child if the person, institution or other body which opposes its return establishes that –
a)  the person, institution or other body having the care of the person of the child was not actually exercising the custody rights at the time of removal or retention, or had consented to or subsequently acquiesced in the removal or retention; or
b)  there is a grave risk that his or her return would expose the child to physical or psychological harm or otherwise place the child in an intolerable situation.
The judicial or administrative authority may also refuse to order the return of the child if it finds that the child objects to being returned and has attained an age and degree of maturity at which it is appropriate to take account of its views.
In considering the circumstances referred to in this Article, the judicial and administrative authorities shall take into account the information relating to the social background of the child provided by the Central Authority or other competent authority of the child’s habitual residence.
In ascertaining whether there has been a wrongful removal or retention within the meaning of Article 3, the judicial or administrative authorities of the requested State may take notice directly of the law of, and of judicial or administrative decisions, formally recognised or not in the State of the habitual residence of the child, without recourse to the specific procedures for the proof of that law or for the recognition of foreign decisions which would otherwise be applicable.
...
After receiving notice of a wrongful removal or retention of a child in the sense of Article 3, the judicial or administrative authorities of the Contracting State to which the child has been removed or in which it has been retained shall not decide on the merits of rights of custody until it has been determined that the child is not to be returned under this Convention or unless an application under this Convention is not lodged within a reasonable time following receipt of the notice.
The sole fact that a decision relating to custody has been given in or is entitled to recognition in the requested State shall not be a ground for refusing to return a child under this Convention, but the judicial or administrative authorities of the requested State may take account of the reasons for that decision in applying this Convention.
...
A decision under this Convention concerning the return of the child shall not be taken to be a determination on the merits of any custody issue.
The return of the child under the provisions of Article 12 may be refused if this would not be permitted by the fundamental principles of the requested State relating to the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
...”
As noted by the Court in X v. Latvia ([GC], no. 27853/09, § 35, ECHR 2013), the Explanatory Report on the 1980 Hague Child Abduction Convention ‒ prepared by Elisa Pérez-Vera and published by The Hague Conference on Private International Law (HCCH) in 1982
The Pérez-Vera Report, insofar as relevant, reads:
With regard to the definition of the Convention’s subject-matter, we need only remind ourselves very briefly that the situations envisaged are those which derive from the use of force to establish artificial jurisdictional links on an international level, with a view to obtaining custody of a child. The variety of different circumstances which can combine in a particular case makes it impossible to arrive at a more precise definition in legal terms. However, two elements are invariably present in all cases which have been examined and confirm the approximate nature of the foregoing characterisation.
Firstly, we are confronted in each case with the removal from its natural environment of a child whose custody had been entrusted to and lawfully exercised by a natural or legal person. Naturally, a refusal to restore a child to its own environment after a stay abroad to which the person exercising the right of custody had consented must be put in the same category. In both cases, the outcome is in fact the same: the child is taken out of the family and social environment in which its life has developed. What is more, in this context the type of the legal title which underlies the exercise of custody rights over the child matters little, since whether or not a decision on custody exists in no way alters the sociological realities of the problem.
Secondly, the person who removes the child (or who is responsible for its removal, where the act of removal is undertaken by a third party) hopes to obtain a right of custody from the authorities of the country to which the child has been taken. The problem therefore concerns a person who, broadly speaking, belongs to the family circle of the child; indeed, in the majority of cases, the person concerned is the father or mother.
It frequently happens that the person retaining the child tries to obtain a judicial or administrative decision in the State of refuge, which would legalize the factual situation which he just brought about. However, if he is uncertain about the way in which the decision will go, he is just as likely to opt for inaction, leaving it up to the dispossessed party to take the initiative. Now, even if the latter acts quickly, that is to say manages to avoid the consolidation through lapse of time of the situation brought about by the removal of the child, the abductor will hold the advantage, since it is he who had chosen the forum in which the case is to be decided, a forum which, in principle, he regards as more favourable to his own claims.
To conclude, it can firmly be stated that the problem with which the Convention deals – together with all the drama implicit in the fact that it is concerned with the protection of children in international relations – derives all of its legal importance from the possibility of individuals establishing legal and jurisdictional links which are more or less artificial. In fact, resorting to this expedient, an individual can change the applicable law and obtain a judicial decision favourable to him. Admittedly, such a decision, especially coexisting with others to the opposite effect issued by another forum, will enjoy only limited geographical validity, but in any event it bears a legal title sufficient to ‘legalise’ a factual situation which none of the legal systems involved wished to see brought about.”
“104.  The importance throughout the Convention of the time factor appears again in this article. Whereas article 2 of the Convention imposes upon Contracting States the duty to use expeditious procedures, the first paragraph of this article restates the obligation, this time with regard to the authorities of the State to which the child has been taken and which are to decide upon its return. There is double aspect to this duty: firstly, the use of the most speedy procedures known to their legal system; secondly, that applications are, so far as possible, to be granted priority treatment.
The second paragraph, so as to prompt internal authorities to accord maximum priority to dealing with the problems arising out of the international removal of children, lays down a non-obligatory time-limit of six weeks, after which the applicant or Central Authority of the requested State may request a statement of reasons for the delay. Moreover, after the Central Authority of the requested State receives the reply, it is once more under a duty to inform, a duty owed either to the Central Authority of the requesting State or to the applicant who has applied to it directly. In short, the provision’s importance cannot be measured in terms of the requirements of the obligations imposed by it, but by the very fact that it draws the attention of the competent authorities to the decisive nature of the time factor in such situations and that it determines the maximum period of time within which a decision on this matter should be taken.”
In 2003 the HCCH published Part II of the Guide to Good Practice under the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction. Although primarily intended for the new Contracting States and without binding effect ‒ especially in respect of the judicial authorities ‒ this document seeks to facilitate the Convention’s implementation by proposing numerous recommendations and clarifications. The Guide repeatedly emphasises the importance of the Explanatory Report to the 1980 Convention (the Pérez-Vera Report), in helping to interpret coherently and understand the 1980 Convention (see, for example, points 3.3.2 “Implications of the transformation approach” and 8.1 “Explanatory Report on the Convention: the Pérez-Vera Report”). In particular, it emphasises that the judicial and administrative authorities are under an obligation, inter alia, to process return applications expeditiously, including on appeal (point 1.5 “Expeditious procedures”). Expeditious procedures should be viewed as procedures which are both fast and efficient: prompt decision-making under the Convention serves the best interests of children (point 6.4 “Case management”). The Guide to Good Practice specifies that delays in the enforcement of return orders, or their non-enforcement, in certain Contracting States are matters of serious concern, and recommends that States Parties ensure that there are simple and effective mechanisms to enforce orders for the return of children within their domestic systems, noting that the return must actually be effected and not just ordered (point 6.7 “Enforcement”) (see X v. Latvia [GC], cited above, § 36).
The Guide to Good Practice (Part I - Central Authority Practice, 2003) under the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction specifically reads:
“Speed is of the essence in Hague abduction matters. Expeditious procedure is a key operating principle for any person or body involved in the implementation of the Convention. This is clear from the objects of the Convention as set out in Article 1, to secure the prompt return of children. It is also clear from the general direction in Article 2 to use the most expeditious procedures possible, and in Article 11 to act expeditiously in proceedings for the return of children.
To encourage expeditious procedures, Article 23 of the Convention removes any requirement for legalisation of documents or similar formalities.”
“The most contentious issue surrounding implementation of the Convention concerns delay, in processing applications, resolving matters in court, or enforcing return orders.
The need for speed at all stages of the process cannot be over-emphasised.
...
Many Contracting States have expressed concerns about delays and excessively complex procedures used by Central Authorities in processing cases, in responding to communications, and in referring cases to court. An essential step that minimises these obstacles, and achieves speedy or prompt action, is to develop clear and effective administrative and legal procedures for handling Convention applications. This should be done at an early stage of implementation.”
“The Preamble to the Convention states that the interests of children are paramount, and that the Convention’s purpose is to protect them from the harmful effects of abduction. Experience has shown that speedy, prompt or expeditious action under the Hague Convention is a critical factor in protecting children’s interests.
An expedited process will:
minimise disruption or dislocation to the child taken from its familiar environment;
minimise harm to the child caused by separation from the other parent;
reduce the further disruption for the child which may result where a return order is made after a settled period abroad;
prevent or limit any advantage to the abductor gained by the passage of time.
Without derogating from the importance of speed as a key operating principle, a Central Authority or its intermediary needs to exercise some discretion in resolving any conflict between taking action promptly or speedily, and allowing time to negotiate an amicable resolution of the matter or a voluntary return...”
“If personnel are committed to achieving the goals of the Convention, they will:
be professional and objective in dealing with applications;
not be influenced by issues of nationalism, gender bias, class or racial prejudice;
...”
“The real success of the Convention as a remedy for child abduction can be measured, not by the number of return orders made, but by the number of return orders enforced.
Unfortunately there is some discrepancy between the two.
The enforcement of return orders will be improved if the following matters are addressed in each Contracting State:
effective mechanisms for enforcement are included in implementing measures, including implementing legislation;
co-operation between the judicial authority and the enforcement agency;
clear directions in the return order about how the return arrangements are to be effected;
any necessary precautionary measures to reduce the risk of flight by the abductor with the child after the return order is made.
In most jurisdictions, the Central Authority is not directly involved in enforcement of return orders, but it will work co-operatively with other agencies and personnel to assist the enforcement process.
Legislative enforcement provisions already in effect include:
measures for the immediate execution of final orders;
directions for specific return arrangements to be made;
measures to prevent the child’s re-abduction pending return;
punitive measures to discourage avoidance of a return order;
authority for coercive detention or use of force;
issue of a warrant for the apprehension or detention of the child.”
Council Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 of 27 November 2003 concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and matters of parental responsibility (“the Brussels II bis Regulation”) reads as follows:
“...
(12)  The grounds of jurisdiction in matters of parental responsibility established in the present Regulation are shaped in the light of the best interests of the child, in particular on the criterion of proximity. This means that jurisdiction should lie in the first place with the Member State of the child’s habitual residence, except for certain cases of a change in the child’s residence or pursuant to an agreement between the holders of parental responsibility.
(13)  In the interest of the child, this Regulation allows, by way of exception and under certain conditions, that the court having jurisdiction may transfer a case to a court of another Member State if this court is better placed to hear the case. However, in this case the second court should not be allowed to transfer the case to a third court.
...
(17)  In cases of wrongful removal or retention of a child, the return of the child should be obtained without delay, and to this end the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 would continue to apply as complemented by the provisions of this Regulation, in particular Article 11. The courts of the Member State to or in which the child has been wrongfully removed or retained should be able to oppose his or her return in specific, duly justified cases. However, such a decision could be replaced by a subsequent decision by the court of the Member State of habitual residence of the child prior to the wrongful removal or retention. Should that judgment entail the return of the child, the return should take place without any special procedure being required for recognition and enforcement of that judgment in the Member State to or in which the child has been removed or retained.
...
(21) The recognition and enforcement of judgments given in a Member State should be based on the principle of mutual trust and the grounds for non-recognition should be kept to the minimum required.
...”
“Jurisdiction in cases of child abduction
In case of wrongful removal or retention of the child, the courts of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention shall retain their jurisdiction until the child has acquired a habitual residence in another Member State and:
(a)  each person, institution or other body having rights of custody has acquiesced in the removal or retention;
or
(b)  the child has resided in that other Member State for a period of at least one year after the person, institution or other body having rights of custody has had or should have had knowledge of the whereabouts of the child and the child is settled in his or her new environment and at least one of the following conditions is met:
(i)  within one year after the holder of rights of custody has had or should have had knowledge of the whereabouts of the child, no request for return has been lodged before the competent authorities of the Member State where the child has been removed or is being retained;
(ii)  a request for return lodged by the holder of rights of custody has been withdrawn and no new request has been lodged within the time limit set in paragraph (i);
(iii)  a case before the court in the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention has been closed pursuant to Article 11(7);
(iv)  a judgment on custody that does not entail the return of the child has been issued by the courts of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention.”
“Return of the child
Where a person, institution or other body having rights of custody applies to the competent authorities in a Member State to deliver a judgment on the basis of the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (hereinafter “the 1980 Hague Convention”), in order to obtain the return of a child that has been wrongfully removed or retained in a Member State other than the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention, paragraphs 2 to 8 shall apply.
...
A court to which an application for return of a child is made as mentioned in paragraph 1 shall act expeditiously in proceedings on the application, using the most expeditious procedures available in national law.
Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, the court shall, except where exceptional circumstances make this impossible, issue its judgment no later than six weeks after the application is lodged.
A court cannot refuse to return a child on the basis of Article 13b of the 1980 Hague Convention if it is established that adequate arrangements have been made to secure the protection of the child after his or her return.
...
Notwithstanding a judgment of non-return pursuant to Article 13 of the 1980 Hague Convention, any subsequent judgment which requires the return of the child issued by a court having jurisdiction under this Regulation shall be enforceable in accordance with ... [Article 42] below in order to secure the return of the child ...”
“Enforceable judgments
A judgment on the exercise of parental responsibility in respect of a child given in a Member State which is enforceable in that Member State and has been served shall be enforced in another Member State when, on the application of any interested party, it has been declared enforceable there.
...”
“Rights of access
The rights of access ... granted in an enforceable judgment given in a Member State shall be recognised and enforceable in another Member State without the need for a declaration of enforceability and without any possibility of opposing its recognition if the judgment has been certified in the Member State of origin...”
“Return of the child
The return of a child referred to in Article 40(1)(b) entailed by an enforceable judgment given in a Member State shall be recognised and enforceable in another Member State without the need for a declaration of enforceability and without any possibility of opposing its recognition if the judgment has been certified in the Member State of origin in accordance with paragraph 2.
Even if national law does not provide for enforceability by operation of law, notwithstanding any appeal, of a judgment requiring the return of the child mentioned in Article 11(b)(8), the court of origin may declare the judgment enforceable.
The judge of origin who delivered the judgment referred to in Article 40(1)(b) shall issue the certificate referred to in paragraph 1 only if:
(a)  the child was given an opportunity to be heard, unless a hearing was considered inappropriate having regard to his or her age or degree of maturity;
(b)  the parties were given an opportunity to be heard; and
(c)  the court has taken into account in issuing its judgment the reasons for and evidence underlying the order issued pursuant to Article 13 of the 1980 Hague Convention.
In the event that the court or any other authority takes measures to ensure the protection of the child after its return to the State of habitual residence, the certificate shall contain details of such measures.
The judge of origin shall of his or her own motion issue that certificate using the standard form in Annex IV (certificate concerning return of the child(ren)).
The certificate shall be completed in the language of the judgment.”
“Enforcement procedure
The enforcement procedure is governed by the law of the Member State of enforcement.
Any judgment delivered by a court of another Member State and ... certified in accordance with Article 41(1) or Article 42(1) shall be enforced in the Member State of enforcement in the same conditions as if it had been delivered in that Member State...”
“Legal aid
An applicant who, in the Member State of origin, has benefited from complete or partial legal aid or exemption from costs or expenses shall be entitled, in the procedures provided for in Articles 21, 28, 41, 42 and 48 to benefit from the most favourable legal aid or the most extensive exemption from costs and expenses provided for by the law of the Member State of enforcement.”
“Relations with certain multilateral conventions
In relations between Member States, this Regulation shall take precedence over the following Conventions in so far as they concern matters governed by this Regulation:
...
(e) the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.”