The case originated in an application (no. 41168/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Russian nationals, Mr Vladimir Vitalyevich Sidorin (‘the first applicant”), Mr Sergey Valeryevich Klimov (“the second applicant”) and Mr Yuriy Mikhaylovich Chervochkin (“the third applicant”), on 11 September 2007.
The third applicant died on 10 December 2007. His mother, Ms Nadezhda Gennadyevna Chervochkina, expressed the wish to pursue the proceedings before the Court.
The applicants were represented by Ms O. Mikhaylova and Mr V. Prokhorov, lawyers practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 8 June 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1985, 1988 and 1984 respectively. The first and second applicants live in Moscow. The third applicant lived in the Moscow region and died there on 10 December 2007.
On 11 March 2007 elections to the Moscow City Duma were held. The applicants came to a polling station at about 10.30 a.m. They started to loudly criticise the elections and were immediately (at about 10.35 a.m.) arrested and brought to the Odintsovo police station.
At 3.30 p.m. on the same day the local prosecutor’s office opened criminal proceedings against the applicants. It follows from its decision that at 10.30 a.m. on 11 March 2011 at polling station no. 1763 the applicants had unrolled banners, turned on smoke jets and distributed leaflets in an attempt to disturb the work of the polling station. Their unlawful actions had been interrupted by the police.
At 6.30 p.m. on the same day the police started to draw up arrest records in respect of the applicants. According to those records the applicants were arrested at the Odintsovo police station. The first applicant was arrested at 6.30 p.m., the third applicant at 7.00 p.m. and the second applicant at 7.30 p.m.
On 13 March 2007 the investigator asked the Odintsovo Town Court to remand the applicants in custody.
During the hearings on the same day - which lasted from 11.30 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. for the first applicant, from 9.40 a.m. to 10.25 a.m. for the second applicant and from 10.30 a.m. to 11.25 a.m. for the third applicant – the judge heard the prosecutor, the applicants and their counsel. She also read the prosecutor’s applications for remand. No other documents were examined at the hearings.
On the same day, 13 March 2007, the  ordered that the applicants be remanded in custody. The court found that the prosecutor’s applications had been supported by evidence showing the necessity of placing the applicants in custody in view of the risks of absconding, reoffending or interfering with the investigation.
On the same day the applicants prepared their preliminary appeal submissions against the detention orders and asked the detention facility administration to dispatch them. It follows from a document issued by the detention facility administration that the first applicant’s submissions were dispatched on 14 March 2007. However, the submissions by the second and third applicants were not dispatched until 23 March 2007.
On 20 March 2007 counsel for the applicants lodged additional appeal submissions. They complained that they had not still received copies of the detention orders of 13 March 2007. They further argued that the Town Court had disregarded the fact that the offence imputed to the applicants was not a serious one, that they had permanent places of residence, had positive references and studied at a university. On the same day counsel asked for permission to study the case-file. Their request was however rejected because the case file had been taken by the judge who was currently on leave.
On 27 March 2007 counsel for the applicants complained before the Odintsovo Town Court that the investigators had denied them access to the case file and had refused to give them copies of, in particular, the prosecutor’s applications for remand and of the detention orders.
On 29 March 2007 the second applicant received a copy of his detention order. The first and third applicants received copies of their respective detention orders on 30 March 2007. The delay in serving the detention orders on the applicants was due to the fact that the judge had sent the documents to the Mozhaysk detention facility, although the applicants were held at the Odintsovo detention facility.
On 3 April 2007 the Odintsovo Town Court found that the investigators had unlawfully restricted counsel’s access to the case file and had thereby violated the applicants’ defence rights. However, it was not until 6 April 2007 that counsel were ultimately granted access to the case file.
On 9 April 2007 counsel lodged additional appeal submissions in which they complained about the belated access to the case file. They further complained that the detention order had been based on insufficient reasons and that no time-limit for detention had been fixed. The evidence showing the existence of the risks of absconding, reoffending or interfering with the investigation to which the Town Court had referred in its detention orders had not been examined during the hearings and the applicants had not been given an opportunity to challenge it. They also complained that the investigator who had lodged the application for remand had acted outside his competence and that the detention orders had been issued more than forty-eight hours after the arrest. Moreover, the applicants’ arrest had been unlawful because the arrest records had been drawn with several hours’ delay. Finally, the applicants asked to be brought to the courtroom for the appeal hearing.
On 11 April 2007 the  held an appeal hearing. The applicants were not brought to the courtroom. On the same day the  quashed the detention orders of 13 March 2007. It found that the detention orders had been based on insufficient reasons. The  had disregarded the facts that the charges were not serious, that the applicants had no criminal record, had a permanent place of residence and studied at a university. There was no evidence that they had threatened witnesses or had attempted to destroy evidence. The Town Court’s finding that the applicants might abscond, interfere with the investigation or reoffend had not been therefore supported by relevant facts. The  ordered the applicants’ immediate release.
Counsel for the applicants asked the court to give them copies of the appeal decisions so that they could bring it to the detention facility and have the applicants immediately released. Their request was refused.
On 12 April 2007 counsel asked for a second time for copies of the appeal decisions. By letter dated 18 April 2007 the President of the Moscow Regional Court informed them that under the domestic law copies were to be sent by post to the detention facility, which had been done on 12 April 2007. Copies of the detention orders could not be given to counsel.
On the same day, 12 April 2007, counsel asked the director of the detention facility to release the applicants, referring to the Regional Court’s order to release them. However, the director refused to release the applicants because the appeal decisions had not yet been received by the detention facility.
The appeal decisions were received by the detention facility on 13 April 2007. On the same day the applicants were released.
Article 92 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (“the CCrP”, in force since 1 July 2002) provides that after a suspect is brought to the police station the record of his or her arrest shall be drawn up within three hours.
No one may be deprived of their liberty without legal grounds. If a judge does not order a suspect to be remanded in custody as a preventive measure within forty-eight hours of arrest, the suspect should be immediately released (Articles 10 and 94 § 2 of the CCrP).
A preventive measure, such as, among others, a remand in custody, may be applied only if there are sufficient grounds to believe that a suspect or an accused might (i) abscond, (ii) reoffend or (iii) obstruct the proceedings (Article 97 of the CCrP). Other circumstances, such as the gravity of a charge, an accused’s personality, his age, state of health, family status and occupation, must also be taken into account when deciding on the preventive measure (Article 99 of the CCrP).
In its ruling no. 245-O-O of 20 March 2008, the Russian Constitutional Court noted that it had reiterated on several occasions (rulings nos. 14-P, 4-P, 417-O and 330-O of 13 June 1996, 22 March 2005, 4 December 2003 and 12 July 2005 respectively) that a court, when taking a decision on the placement of an individual into detention or on the extension of a period of an individual’s detention, was under obligation, inter alia, to calculate and specify a time-limit for such detention.
An appellate court’s decision to quash a detention order must be enforced immediately (Article 108 § 11 of the CCrP).