The case originated in an application (no. 57101/10) against the Republic of Slovenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian national, Mr Aranđel Ribać, on 29 September 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Krivic, who was granted leave to represent the applicant under Rule 36 § 4 (a) of the Rules of Court. The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Morela, State Attorney.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the refusal to grant him an old-age pension between November 1998 and April 2003 because he had not had Slovenian citizenship constituted discrimination on the grounds of nationality, contrary to Article 14 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
On 14 June 2016 the above complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1942 and lives in Maribor.
The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (“the SFRY”) was a federal State composed of six republics: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia, Slovenia, Montenegro and Macedonia. Nationals of the SFRY had “dual citizenship” for internal purposes, that is to say they were citizens of both the SFRY and one of the six republics. They had freedom of movement within the federal State and could register as permanent residents wherever they settled on its territory.
The SFRY had two pension systems – military and civil. The pension rights of military personnel were regulated by and secured through the federal authorities. In particular, members of the Yugoslav People’s Army (hereinafter “the YPA”), the armed forces of the SFRY, paid their contributions to and received their pensions from a special military pension fund based in Belgrade (Zavod za socialno osiguranje vojnih osiguranika, hereinafter “the YPA Fund”). The YPA Fund paid pensions to military pensioners irrespective of where they undertook military service or lived once retired. This was the only pension fund existing at federal level. In parallel, each republic had in place its own pension legislation and public pension fund set up for the payment of civil pensions.
Between 1991 and 1992 the SFRY broke up. On 25 June 1991 Slovenia declared its independence.
In 1992 the Slovenian Government issued the Ordinance on the payment of advances on military pensions (see paragraph 28 below, hereinafter “the Ordinance”) which regulated, on a temporary basis, the payment of military pensions to former YPA military personnel residing in the Republic of Slovenia who had applied for or fulfilled the conditions for retirement under the rules governing the pension and disability insurance of military personnel (hereinafter “the SFRY military rules”) by 18 October 1991, the date of withdrawal of the YPA from Slovenia (see P.P. v. Slovenia, no. 39923/98, Commission decision of 1 July 1998, Decisions and Reports (DR) 3, p. 25). This was followed in 1998 by a new Act on the Rights Stemming from the Pension and Disability Insurance of Former Military Personnel (see paragraph 29 below, hereinafter “the 1998 Act”) which put in place a comprehensive regulatory framework for the pension rights of former YPA military personnel, in most cases allowing for pensions to be paid only to Slovenian nationals.
In 1994 the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (succeeded in 2006 by Serbia) transformed the YPA Fund (see paragraph 7 above) into the Social Insurance Fund of Military Personnel of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on the basis of the Yugoslav Army Act. The (transformed) YPA Fund continued paying YPA pensions to the citizens of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. However, it remains uncertain to what extent, if at all, the YPA Fund continued paying YPA pensions to the citizens of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia residing in the other former SFRY republics (see also, mutatis mutandis, Kudumija v. Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, and Remenović and Mašović v. Bosnia and Herzegovina, (dec.), nos. 28233/08 and 2 others, § 11, 4 June 2013).
At the inter-State level, however, the question of responsibility for the payment of pensions to military personnel who had acquired or applied for pensions with the YPA Fund under the rules governing the pension and disability insurance of military personnel (hereinafter “the SFRY military rules”) remained unresolved until the Agreement on Succession Issues entered into force in 2004 (see paragraph 30 below).
The applicant was a citizen of the Republic of Serbia in the SFRY. Following its dissolution, he retained citizenship of the then Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. He has been residing in Slovenia since 1964 and has had permanent resident status since 1981. In 1969 he married a Slovenian woman, with whom he had two children. He was a non-commissioned officer in active military service in the YPA until 30 September 1991, when he retired.
On 16 July 1991 he applied for retirement to the Maribor military district headquarters, and was then “available” (na razpolago) until his retirement. On 13 November 1991 the YPA Fund found him to be entitled to an old-age pension under the SFRY military rules as from 1 October 1991 with more than forty-one pensionable years with bonus (benificirana doba) in the YPA. The applicant maintained that he had only received his pension from the YPA Fund twice (in November 1991 and January 1992), when he had personally gone to Belgrade to collect it.
On 23 October 1991 the applicant applied for Slovenian citizenship under section 40 of the Citizenship Act (see paragraph 26 below). By a decision of 11 July 1992 the Ministry of Interior dismissed his application. It based its decision on section 40(3) and section 10(1)(8) of the Citizenship Act, which stipulated that the Ministry was allowed to refuse an application where there was reason to believe that the person posed a threat to public order, security or national defence. After the Constitutional Court quashed the decision and the case was remitted to the Ministry of Interior for fresh consideration, the latter on 2 September 1997 again dismissed his application on the same grounds. The applicant instituted court proceedings, which were unsuccessful. On 13 October 2005 the Constitutional Court rejected a constitutional complaint by him on the grounds that it was no longer relevant because he had acquired Slovenian citizenship in 2003 (see paragraph 19 below).
On 27 February 1992 the applicant applied for an advance on his military pension under the Ordinance (see paragraph 28 below). On 29 April 1993 he requested the YPA Fund to discontinue the payment of his pension. By a decision of 17 May 1993 his payments were stopped with effect from 31 January 1992. The applicant lodged this request after realising that the Pension and Disability Insurance Institute of Slovenia (hereinafter “the Institute”) only granted advances under the Ordinance provided that the YPA Fund stopped paying the pension. By a decision of 5 May 1993 the Institute found that the applicant had been entitled to such an advance starting from 1 November 1991. It held that he had been a permanent resident of Slovenia since 1 April 1981 and had fulfilled the conditions for pension entitlement under the SFRY military rules by 18 October 1991.
On 13 October 1998 the Institute, on the basis of section 25 of the 1998 Act (see paragraph 29 below), issued of its own motion a decision not to convert the applicant’s advance on his military pension into an old-age pension under the 1998 Act. His advance was suspended as of 31 October 1998. The Institute decided that since the applicant had been in active military service in the YPA from 25 June to 18 July 1991 and from 18 July 1991 had been on leave, he did not fulfil the statutory conditions for converting the advance on his military old-age pension into an old-age pension under section 2(1)(4) of the 1998 Act.
The applicant appealed, complaining that at the relevant time he had not been on leave, but had been available until his retirement. On 30 September 2002 the Institute dismissed his appeal, holding that he could not be considered a beneficiary under section 2(1) of the 1998 Act as he did not have Slovenian citizenship and did not comply with the requirements applicable to foreign beneficiaries. It added that he could re-apply for an old-age pension under the 1998 Act once he acquired Slovenian citizenship.
The applicant subsequently applied for judicial review of the Institute’s decision before the Ljubljana Labour and Social Court, maintaining that, as a resident of Slovenia, he should have been treated in the same way as Slovenian citizens.
On 1 April 2003 the applicant acquired citizenship by naturalisation under section 19 of the amended Citizenship Act read in conjunction with section 10(1) of the Citizenship Act (see paragraph 27 below).
On 4 June 2003, after lodging a new request with the Institute, the applicant was granted an old-age pension as from 1 April 2003.
On 13 January 2006 the Ljubljana Labour and Social Court dismissed the application for judicial review (see paragraph 18 above). It pointed out that the applicant’s situation had to be assessed with regard to the different categories of beneficiaries listed in section 2(1) of the 1998 Act. It concluded that the applicant had not fulfilled the conditions for an old-age pension set out in section 2(1)(2) of the 1998 Act. Likewise, as a foreigner he had not met the conditions set out in section 2(1)(4) of the 1998 Act. He had therefore been eligible for an old-age pension under section 2 of the 1998 Act only from 1 April 2003 onwards, the date on which he had acquired Slovenian citizenship.
The applicant lodged an appeal with the Higher Labour and Social Court. On 21 March 2007 the appeal was dismissed, essentially on the grounds that in the legally relevant period the applicant had been a foreigner who had not had rights to a pension or other benefits under the SFRY military rules by 25 June 1991 as required by section 2(1)(2) of the 1998 Act. The court held that the other provisions of section 2 of the 1998 Act were applicable only to Slovenian citizens and, thus, the applicant, who had not fulfilled the condition of nationality, should not have relied upon them.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, claiming he should have been treated the same as Slovenian citizens. On 23 March 2009 it was dismissed by the Supreme Court, which followed the lower courts’ reasoning. It held that in the period at issue the applicant had not met the requirements of any of the categories of beneficiaries under section 2 of the 1998 Act, having applied for the pension under the SFRY military rules on 16 July 1991 and having only acquired Slovenian citizenship on 1 April 2003.
On 24 March 2010 the Constitutional Court decided not to accept a constitutional complaint by the applicant for consideration, finding that it did not concern an important constitutional issue or entail a violation of human rights which had serious consequences for him.
The following provision of the 1991 Constitutional Act is relevant to the present case:
“The Republic of Slovenia guarantees the protection of the rights of fighters ... and beneficiaries of military pensions permanently residing in the Republic of Slovenia and of ... within the scope and under the conditions defined by the SFRY regulations [as applicable] until the entry into force of this Act.”
Under section 40 of the Citizenship Act, which entered into force on 25 June 1991, a person could acquire Slovenian citizenship if he or she could demonstrate that there were exceptional circumstances. In particular, citizens of another republic of the former SFRY who on 23 December 1990, the day the plebiscite on independence was held, were registered as permanent residents in the Republic of Slovenia and resided there would acquire Slovenian citizenship if they submitted an application with the internal affairs authority of the municipality where they lived within six months of the Act entering into force.
Section 10(1) of the Citizenship Act regulates the acquisition of citizenship by naturalisation. On 14 November 2002 the Citizenship Act was amended (Official Gazette no. 96/02-I). Under section 19, adult who on 23 December 1990 was registered as permanent residents in the Republic of Slovenia and lived there uninterruptedly from that date, could apply for Slovenian citizenship within one year of the amended Citizenship Act entering into force if they met the specific requirements set forth in section 10(1) of that Act.
The Ordinance provided that the following former YPA military personnel with permanent residence in Slovenia by no later than 26 June 1991 were entitled to an advance on their military pension:
(i) those who had claimed pension or other benefits under the pension and disability insurance of military personnel by 18 July 1991 (section 2(1)(1));
(ii) those who after 18 July 1991 had still been available, suspended, on holiday, or on sick leave, and had submitted a request for retirement and had met the conditions for entitlement to a pension or other benefits under the SFRY military rules by 18 October 1991 (section 2(1)(2)); and
(iii) those who had joined the Territorial Defence of Slovenia and who had met the conditions for entitlement to a pension under the SFRY military rules by 1 February 1992 (section 2(1)(3)).
Pursuant to section 2(2), those who had participated in aggression against Slovenia as members of the YPA were not entitled to an advance.
The following provisions of the 1998 Act are relevant to the present case:
“This Act regulates the rights arising from pension and disability insurance that [Slovenian] citizens and other beneficiaries have acquired or fulfilled the conditions for entitlement under this Act based on the insurance under the former SFRY regulations on pension and disability insurance of military personnel (hereinafter ‘the military rules’) and the coordination and translation of these rights.”
“The beneficiaries under this Act are:
- [Slovenian] citizens residing in the Republic of Slovenia who claimed pension or other benefits under the military rules up to and including 25 June 1991;
- persons who have not applied for [Slovenian] citizenship or whose application for citizenship has been rejected (hereinafter ‘foreigners’) with permanent residence or residing in the Republic of Slovenia without interruption from and including 25 June 1991, provided that they claimed pension or other benefits under the military rules up to and including 25 June 1991 and cannot obtain them under the rules of the country of which they are citizens;
- active military personnel of the former YPA who joined the Territorial Defence of ... Slovenia and who fulfilled the conditions for entitlement to a pension under the military rules up to and including 1 February 1992;
- [Slovenian] citizens residing in the Republic of Slovenia who remained in active military service in the YPA after 25 June 1991 provided that their active service ... ceased before 18 July 1991, or from 18 July 1991 to the termination of the active service they were still suspended, in prison, on sick leave, or available, or by order of a competent authority their service was terminated due to retirement, or they remained in service in the YPA with the consent of the [Slovenian] authorities competent for defence matters, and they submitted a request for retirement and fulfilled the conditions for entitlement to an old-age, early or survivor’s pension under the military rules by 18 October 1991; and ...
Slovenian citizens who meet the conditions laid down in the preceding paragraph can also obtain rights under this Act if they have permanent residence in a foreign country in which they cannot claim or enjoy the rights under the pension and disability insurance for the period of their service in the former YPA.
Persons who actively participated in aggression against the Republic of Slovenia in the function of command or direct combat operation, or who participated in military intelligence or counterintelligence activities against the Republic of Slovenia shall not be considered beneficiaries under the preceding paragraphs.
Slovenian citizens who were on 18 October 1991 missing at most five years with respect to their age or five pensionable years in order to fulfil the conditions for entitlement to a pension under military rules and who on that date had permanent residence in the Republic of Slovenia or in a country which does not recognise rights based on military rules to Slovenian citizens, are entitled to a pension under the conditions and in the manner defined in the Pension and Disability Insurance Act (Official Gazette nos. 12/92, 5/94 and 7/96, hereinafter ‘the general rules’) as if they spent the majority of their insurance period insured with the Pension and Disability Insurance Institute of Slovenia (hereinafter ‘the Institute’).
...”
“Beneficiaries under section 2 of this Act have a right to an old-age, early, family or ... under the conditions and to the extent determined in the military rules, unless stipulated differently in this Act.”
...”
“Advances on military pensions and other benefits under the Ordinance on the payment of advances on military pensions convert [of the authorities’ own motion] to pensions and other benefits under this Act.”
On 29 June 2001 Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (succeeded in 2006 by Serbia), the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Slovenia signed the Agreement on Succession Issues, which entered into force on 2 June 2004. Pursuant to Article 2 of Annex E, each successor State assumes responsibility for and regularly pays pensions which are due to its citizens who were civil or military servants of the SFRY irrespective of their current residence, if those pensions were funded from the federal budget or other federal resources of the SFRY. If a person is a citizen of more than one State, the pension is paid by the State of residence.