The applicants complained under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention that the authorities had failed to conduct an effective investigation into an arson attack on their house.
The first and second applicants were born in 1952 and 1948, respectively, and live in the Panevėžys Region. The third applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Panevėžys. The first and second applicants are husband and wife, and the third applicant is their son. The applicants were represented by Mr D. Staškevičius, a lawyer practising in Panevėžys.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms L. Urbaitė.
In the early morning of 30 May 2013 the first and second applicants’ house caught fire. The firefighters who extinguished the fire established that it had been started intentionally.
On 30 May 2013 the Panevėžys district police office (hereinafter “the police”) opened a pre-trial investigation into the destruction of or infliction of damage to another person’s property in a dangerous manner, under Article 187 § 2 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 41 below). The decision to open the investigation stated:
“On 30 May 2013, around 3.15 a.m., ... while at home, [the first applicant] noticed a sudden outbreak of fire ... [H]e suspected an arson attack. The pecuniary damage sustained will be specified later.”
The first and second applicants explained that after the fire had broken out, they had escaped from the house through a window. They suspected that the house had been set on fire by their neighbour, P.K., with whom they had been having an ongoing conflict.
On the same day the police inspected the applicants’ house and took a sample of the fire debris. Some footprints were found in front of the house, but they did not contain any specific characteristics that would have made it possible to identify the person who had left them.
On the same day a police dog handler was called to the applicants’ house. With the help of a police dog, he began tracking (by scent) a trail leading away from footprints that had been found at the back of the house. The dog followed the scent to P.K.’s house, but stopped at the yard in front of the house; the circumstances under which it stopped were subsequently disputed (see paragraphs 21 and 28 below). The dog handler took the dog around to the back of P.K.’s house, but the dog did not react to any footprints that may have been left there.
On the same day P.K. was arrested, taken to the police station and served with an official notice that he was a suspect. The police took swab samples from his hands. P.K. denied his guilt and stated that he had been asleep when the fire had broken out. He submitted that he often walked by the applicants’ house in order to get to the pasture where he kept his cattle.
On the same day, approximately ten hours after the fire, the police carried out a search of P.K.’s house but did not find any flammable liquids, clothes bearing traces of such liquids, or any other objects that might have been related to the fire.
On 31 May 2013 the police asked P.K. to provide the clothes that he had worn on the day of the fire. P.K. provided a pair of trousers, a shirt and a pair of shoes.
On 5 June 2013 the police took soil samples near the applicants’ and P.K.’s houses and ordered that they be forensically examined by an expert. The expert report, delivered on 23 July 2013, found that the soil that had been found on P.K.’s shoes had not corresponded to the soil sample taken near the applicants’ house.
On 6 June 2013 the police ordered a forensic examination of the above-mentioned sample of fire debris, of the clothes and shoes that P.K. had provided to the police, and of his hand swabs (see paragraphs 5, 7 and 9 above). The expert report, delivered on 30 October 2013, stated that the sample of fire debris had been presented to the expert in special plastic packaging, but that P.K.’s clothes, shoes and hand swabs had been wrapped in paper and had not been hermetically sealed (rankų nuoplovų, kelnių, marškinių ir batų pakuotės yra nehermetiškos). The report found traces of machine oil on P.K.’s clothes and shoes but no traces of any flammable liquid on the fire debris or the hand swabs. It also stated that most flammable liquids were very volatile; therefore – depending on the type and amount of the liquid, the circumstances of the fire and whether the packaging of the samples had been hermetically sealed – the liquid could have burned completely away during the fire or been washed away in the course of the fire being extinguished, or traces of the liquid on the samples could have evaporated before they were examined.
On various dates in June and July 2013 the police inspected the record of telephone calls made and received by P.K. but did not obtain any useful information.
In August 2013 some of the applicants’ neighbours were questioned as witnesses, but they were unable to provide any information about the fire.
On various dates the police questioned the applicants, P.K. and the dog handler.
On various dates the applicants were granted the status of victims and civil claimants.
On 7 January 2014 the Panevėžys district prosecutor (hereinafter “the prosecutor”) discontinued the part of the pre-trial investigation relating to P.K. The prosecutor’s decision stated that all the necessary investigative measures had been carried out but there was no direct and indisputable evidence that P.K. might have set fire to the applicants’ house. There was no forensic evidence linking him to the crime and no direct witnesses, and P.K. had denied his guilt. The suspicion against him had been essentially based on the applicants’ statements, but in view of the ongoing conflict between them and P.K., those statements could not be considered credible.
On 8 January 2014 the prosecutor suspended the pre-trial investigation on the grounds that, after all the necessary investigative measures had been carried out, it had not been possible to identify the perpetrator.
The applicants were informed of the aforementioned decisions and of their right to appeal against them to a senior prosecutor. They did not appeal against either decision.
In March 2014 the applicants lodged a complaint with the prosecutor against the police. They submitted that the pre-trial investigation into the arson attack had been carried out incompetently and that certain investigative measures had been taken too late, as a result of which important evidence might have been lost. They stated that the fire had destroyed their property, causing damage to the value of 500,000 Lithuanian litai (LTL, approximately 144,810 euros (EUR)).
The prosecutor conducted a disciplinary inquiry and, by a decision dated 27 June 2014, found that some of the investigative measures had not been carried out properly, as presented below.
Firstly, the dog handler had not acted in accordance with the relevant regulations when following the trail from the applicants’ house (see paragraph 6 above). In particular, when he and the police dog had arrived at the yard of P.K.’s house, the dog had stopped and the dog handler had ceased following the trail because there had been some cattle loose in the yard. The prosecutor considered that the tracking had not been carried out properly, because the dog handler should have had the cattle removed from the yard and continued the tracking to the front of P.K.’s house.
Secondly, the search of P.K.’s house had been carried out approximately ten hours after the fire (see paragraph 8 above). Before starting the search, the police officers had not taken any measures to verify what clothes P.K. had been wearing on the day of the fire, and they had not seized the clothes that he had been wearing when he had been arrested (see paragraph 7 above). Moreover, during the search they had not seized any clothes or other items that might have been linked to the fire. Furthermore, during the search P.K. had not been in the house, as required by law, but he had been outside milking cows. The prosecutor therefore considered that the search had not been carried out properly and had not complied with the law.
Thirdly, according to the expert report (see paragraph 11 above), P.K.’s clothes, shoes and hand swabs had been wrapped in paper and had not been hermetically sealed. During the disciplinary inquiry the police officers had submitted that airtight plastic packaging might have caused the deterioration of non-volatile materials on the hand swabs, and that was why they had been wrapped in paper. Furthermore, the clothes and shoes had been dirty and damp and they would have become stale if packaged in plastic. However, the prosecutor held that the police officers had breached the relevant regulations, which required that objects that might include traces of flammable liquids be placed in special plastic, glass or metal containers and hermetically sealed.
At the same time, the prosecutor observed that the mistakes made by the police officers “had not necessarily affected” the outcome of the pre-trial investigation. He did not impose disciplinary penalties on any officers because such penalties could not be imposed more than one year after the commission of the disciplinary violation in question.
The applicants were informed of the prosecutor’s decision and of their right to appeal against it to a senior prosecutor. They did not appeal.
In March 2015 the applicants, represented by a lawyer, lodged a civil claim against the State (see paragraph 42 below). They submitted that the pre-trial investigation concerning the arson attack on their house had been carried out improperly and in violation of the relevant law. They argued that the mistakes made by the police officers (see paragraphs 20-23 above) had led to the loss of important evidence, and that as a result it was no longer possible to identify the perpetrator of the arson. Accordingly, the applicants submitted that the State had to compensate them for the damage that they had sustained. The first and second applicants claimed approximately EUR 31,400 jointly in respect of pecuniary damage, amounting to the value of their property, which had been destroyed or damaged during the fire; the third applicant claimed approximately EUR 2,600 under that head. They also claimed EUR 3,000 each in respect of non-pecuniary damage caused by the allegedly unprofessional actions of the police officers.
On 16 March 2016 the Panevėžys District Court dismissed the applicants’ claim.
The court firstly found that, according to the official report submitted by the dog handler (see paragraph 6 above), the police dog had followed the trail from the back of the applicants’ house to the yard of P.K.’s house, but that it had stopped in the yard because it had lost the trail. Since there had been cattle loose in the yard, the dog handler and the dog had walked around the house, but the dog had not picked up any fresh trail. According to the dog handler, if the dog had sensed the presence of the person who had left the footprints, it would have barked. However, it had not barked either in the yard or near P.K.’s house, which indicated that the person who had left the footprints had not been there. Furthermore, when the dog handler and the dog had returned to the applicants’ house, he had been informed that the suspect, P.K., had already been arrested; thus, he had not had any further reason to continue the tracking. In the court’s view, the dog handler had carried out his duties properly and there were no grounds to find that any important evidence had been lost because of his actions.
The court further noted that the expert who had examined the fire debris had not found any traces of flammable liquids on that debris (see paragraph 11 above); accordingly, it had not been possible to identify what flammable material had been used to start the fire. In such circumstances, the court considered that it was immaterial whether P.K.’s clothes, shoes and hand swabs had been properly packaged or not, because even if any flammable liquids had been found on them, that could not have proved that P.K. had had any link to the fire. Therefore, the court ruled that the officers who had taken P.K.’s clothes, shoes and hand swabs had not lost any important evidence.
It also stated that, according to the testimony given at the hearing by the police officers and P.K., on the day of the fire P.K. had been wearing the same clothes that he had been wearing when he had been arrested, and he had afterwards provided those clothes to the police (see paragraph 9 above). Furthermore, during the search P.K. had been present inside the house and not milking cows (see paragraphs 8 and 20 above). The officers had searched the house but had not detected the smell of any flammable liquids and had not found any relevant objects. The court considered that there was no reason to doubt the officers’ and P.K.’s testimony. It also noted that P.K. lived alone and that he had been arrested soon after the fire; therefore, even though the search of his house had not been carried out immediately after the fire, there was no indication that somebody could have entered the house and hidden or destroyed any relevant items.
The court lastly observed that many other investigative measures had been carried out promptly after the fire (see paragraphs 10 and 12-14 above), and the fact that it had not been possible to identify the perpetrator did not suffice for it to find that the police officers had failed to act with due diligence and in accordance with the law.
The applicants lodged an appeal against the aforementioned decision. They presented essentially the same arguments as in their initial claim (see paragraph 26 above), and submitted that the arson attack and the ensuing ineffective investigation had caused them great psychological and moral suffering.
On 7 September 2016 the Panevėžys Regional Court allowed the appeal in part. The court reached essentially the same conclusions as those reached by the prosecutor during the disciplinary inquiry (see paragraphs 20-23 above), and held that the officers had failed to fulfil their duties with the requisite degree of diligence. In the court’s view, it could not be denied that if the officers had acted properly, more of the circumstances surrounding the arson would have been determined.
The court awarded EUR 900 to each of the first and second applicants and EUR 200 to the third applicant in respect of non-pecuniary damage that they had suffered as a result of the ineffective investigation. However, it considered that there had been no direct causal link between the mistakes made by the police officers and the pecuniary damage sustained by the applicants because of the fire, and dismissed their claims under that head.
The State, represented by the Panevėžys district police office, lodged an appeal on points of law against the aforementioned decision. The applicants also lodged an appeal on points of law, submitting that their claims in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage (see paragraph 26 above) should have been allowed in full, in view of the fact that their only home had been severely damaged in the fire, and also taking into account their age, financial situation and other relevant circumstances.
On 6 April 2017 the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal lodged by the applicants and allowed that lodged by the State. It quashed the decision of the Panevėžys Regional Court (see paragraphs 33 and 34 above) and upheld that of the Panevėžys District Court (see paragraphs 27-31 above).
The Supreme Court referred to the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Blumberga v. Latvia (no. 70930/01, 14 October 2008) and emphasised that the State had a positive obligation to ensure that property rights were sufficiently protected by law and that adequate remedies were provided to the victim of an interference. However, the obligation to investigate was less exacting with regard to crimes involving property than with regard to more serious ones, such as violent crimes. In the former cases, the State would only fail to fulfil its positive obligation in the event that flagrant and serious deficiencies in the criminal investigation or prosecution could be identified.
The Supreme Court considered that the investigation at hand had not contained flagrant and serious deficiencies, and that any mistakes or shortcomings alleged by the applicants had not been significant or decisive (see paragraph 44 below).
Firstly, it held that the appellate court had not examined whether the dog handler had had any realistic possibility of removing the loose cattle from P.K.’s yard and continuing to follow the trail to the front of P.K.’s house (see paragraphs 21, 28 and 33 above). In the view of the Supreme Court, the dog handler – faced with an obstacle (the cattle) – had made a rational decision to take the dog to the back of P.K.’s house and to continue tracking there. It further observed that even if the footprints followed by the police dog had been identified as belonging to P.K., that would have only proved that P.K. had walked by the applicants’ house, but not that he had set their house on fire. The Supreme Court thus concluded that the dog handler’s actions had not led to the loss of any essential evidence.
The Supreme Court also noted that it had not been possible to identify the flammable liquid that had been used to start the fire (see paragraph 11 above). In such circumstances, even if the search of P.K.’s house had been carried out properly and if his clothes, shoes and hand swabs had been hermetically sealed (see paragraphs 22, 23, 29, 30 and 33 above), it would have nonetheless been impossible to establish a link between him and the fire. Thus, there had not been a causal link between the mistakes made during the investigation and the fact that the perpetrator of the arson had not been identified (see paragraph 43 below).
At the material time, Article 187 § 2 of the Criminal Code provided, inter alia, that the destruction of or infliction of damage to another person’s property in a dangerous manner that could have caused harm to people (jeigu dėl to galėjo nukentėti žmonės) was punishable by detention or imprisonment of up to five years.
Article 6.272 § 1 of the Civil Code allows a civil claim to be lodged against the State in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage caused by unlawful actions on the part of investigating authorities or courts, irrespective of whether any individual officers were at fault.
By a decision of 3 May 2010 in civil case no. 3K-3-200 the Supreme Court, referring to its established case-law, held that the civil liability of the State under Article 6.272 § 1 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 42 above) arose under three conditions: (1) State officers had acted unlawfully; (2) an individual or individuals had sustained damage; and (3) there had been a causal link between those unlawful actions or omissions and that damage. The Supreme Court emphasised that the State was under a general duty of care and thus had to ensure that its officers and institutions were properly qualified and acted lawfully. Furthermore, officers in criminal proceedings were also under an obligation to act responsibly and diligently, and the civil liability of the State could arise not only because of unlawful actions or omissions, but also because of officers’ failure to act with the requisite diligence.
In a decision of 3 October 2012 in civil case no. 3K-3-414/2012 and a decision of 25 September 2015 in civil case no. 3K-3-487-915/2015 the Supreme Court held that the civil liability of the State for unlawful actions undertaken by investigating officers arose only when it was established that those officers had committed mistakes that had been significant and decisive for the violation of the claimant’s rights in criminal proceedings.