The case concerns the applicant’s conviction for a minor offence of failing to declare a weapon, specifically a diving speargun, at border control even though diving spearguns were expressly excluded from the definition of a weapon under the relevant domestic law.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Zadar. He was represented by Ms S. Miličević, a lawyer practising in Zadar.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 14 September 2009 the applicant, who was on his way back to Croatia from Bosnia and Herzegovina, was stopped by the Croatian border police while crossing the border between the two States. The police searched the applicant’s car and found in the luggage compartment, together with beach equipment, a diving speargun. The police temporarily seized the speargun and on the same day instituted minor-offence proceedings (prekršajni postupak) by indicting the applicant before the Imotski Minor Offences Court (Prekršajni sud u Imotskom) for the minor offence of failing to declare a weapon when crossing the State border as defined in subparagraph 27 of section 92(1) in conjunction with section 4(1) of the Weapons Act (see paragraph 12 below).
Further to a request for legal assistance by the Imotski Minor Offences Court, on 2 February 2010 the applicant was heard before the Zadar Minor Offences Court (Prekršajni sud u Zadru). At the hearing the applicant stated as follows:
“It is true that ... at the border crossing ... in reply to the customs official’s question whether I had anything to declare, I forgot to mention, out of ignorance, that is, without any intention to mislead, that in the luggage compartment [of my car] I had a used speargun ... I had no intention of not declaring the speargun because I already had it with me when entering Bosnia and Herzegovina ...”
By a judgment of 30 April 2010, the Imotski Minor Offences Court found the applicant guilty of the minor offence in question, fined him 1,000 Croatian kunas (HRK) and ordered him to pay HRK 120 in respect of the costs of the proceedings. It also imposed a protective measure (zaštitna mjera), confiscating the applicant’s speargun. The relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“Based on the accused’s explicit confession, this court finds it proven beyond doubt that the accused committed the offence [mentioned] in the operative part of this judgment. He must therefore be found guilty and punished accordingly.”
The applicant appealed, arguing (a) that under section 4 of the Weapons Act, spearguns were expressly excluded from the notion of a weapon as defined in that Act (see paragraph 12 below), and (b) that the first-instance court had not assessed his guilt at all or provided any reasons as regards the constituent element of the offence. As regards the issue of guilt, the applicant submitted that the first-instance court had not taken into account at all the fact that the incident in question had occurred in late summer (in September), when he had regularly kept all his beach equipment, including the speargun, in the luggage compartment of his car, and he had not considered it necessary to remove the equipment when travelling to a short, two-hour long, business meeting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
By a judgment of 17 October 2012, the High Minor Offences Court (Visoki prekršajni sud Republike Hrvatske) dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the first-instance judgment. It held that spearguns were bowstring weapons and thus weapons within the meaning of the Weapons Act, and that the applicant had therefore been obliged to declare his speargun at the border. The relevant part of that judgment reads as follows:
“... the argument in the appeal that ... a speargun is not a weapon is ill-founded.
Section 5 of the Weapons Act [defines] certain terms used in the Act. In subparagraph 16 it provides that ‘bowstring weapons [such as] bows, crossbows and other devices which by force of a taut bowstring shoot an arrow or other projectile’ are also considered weapons.
Spearguns [fall into the category of] other devices which by force of a taut bowstring shoot an arrow or other projectile ... The mere fact that this speargun is intended exclusively for fishing does not mean that it is not a weapon ...”
The applicant then lodged a constitutional complaint, arguing, inter alia, that the minor-offences courts’ judgments had been in breach of his right to fair proceedings and of his right not to be convicted of an act which did not constitute an offence, as guaranteed by Article 29 § 1 and Article 31 § 1 of the Croatian Constitution respectively. He also relied on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. He reiterated the argument he had made before the appellate court that spearguns were not weapons and that he had therefore been convicted on account of an act which had not constituted an offence under domestic law (see paragraph 8 above). In addition, he criticised the position of the High Court for Minor Offences (see paragraph 9 above) that spearguns were bowstring weapons and thus weapons within the meaning of the Weapons Act. Specifically, he submitted that a mere visual examination of the speargun confiscated from him would have revealed that it was band-powered rather than bowstring-powered, and that it was exclusively intended for fishing.
In a decision of 9 May 2013, the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) examined the applicant’s case under Article 29 § 1 of the Constitution alone, that is, from the perspective of the right to fair proceedings, and dismissed his constitutional complaint as ill-founded. That decision was served on the applicant on 24 June 2013.
The relevant provisions of the Weapons Act (Zakon o oružju, Official Gazette no. 63/07 with further amendments), which was in force from 1 September 2007 until 31 October 2018, provide as follows:
Section 3(1)
“A weapon, within the meaning of this Act, is a device made or adapted so that it shoots, under the pressure of air, gunpowder gas or other gases or other propellant, a bullet, pellet, round shot or other projectile, or disperses gas or liquid, as well as other devices intended for self-defence, hunting or sports.”
Section 4
“For the purposes of this Act, the following shall not be considered a weapon: ... spearguns and other implements which, by force of a spring, taut rubber-bands or compressed gas [that is, spring, pneumatic or band-powered implements] shoot spears or harpoons which are exclusively intended for fishing (underwater weapons) ...”
Section 5(1)
“Certain notions used in this Act have the following meaning:
...
Bowstring weapons are bows, crossbows and other devices which by force of a taut bowstring shoot an arrow or other projectile.”
Section 54
“(1)  When crossing the State border, Croatian nationals and foreigners are obliged to declare weapons and ammunition to the border police and customs.
(2)  The border police shall temporarily confiscate weapons and ammunition from a Croatian citizen or foreigner who, when crossing the State border, did not declare weapons and ammunition at the border crossing, and [shall] store them until the conclusion of the [minor-offence] proceedings.”
Section 92
“(1)  Natural persons shall be fined between 3,000 and 15,000 kunas for a minor offence:
...
if they do not declare a weapon and ammunition to the border police and customs when crossing the State border (section 54(1));
...
(2)  For the minor offences referred to in paragraph (1) of this section, save for the offences referred to in subparagraphs 1, 9 and 10, the protective measure of confiscation of the weapon and the ammunition shall be imposed.”