The case originated in an application (no. 29979/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Ivan Grygorovych Rysovskyy (“the applicant”), on 7 August 2004.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev.
The applicant alleged that the authorities had unjustifiably failed to enforce a court judgment in his favour and interfered with his ability to enjoy possession of a plot of land and that there were no effective remedies for those complaints.
On 16 November 2009 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Zubry village, Pustomytivsky District, Lvivska Region.
On 11 May 1992 the Pustomytivsky District Council (hereafter “the District Council”) withheld from “L.”, an agricultural company, a plot of land to transfer it to individual farmers for permanent use (hereafter “the 1992 decision”). A four-hectare part of this plot in the administrative ownership of Zubry village was allocated to the applicant.
On 27 April 1993 the applicant was issued with a Land Use Act (Державний акт на право користування землею) in his name as a physical person registering his permanent right to use this plot for farming.
On an unspecified date the applicant complained to the  that the Zubry Village Council (hereafter “the Village Council”) had refused to allocate to his farm in kind the plot of land to which he had been entitled under the Land Use Act.
On 10 March 1994 the above court ordered the Village Council to allocate the plot to the applicant’s farm by 10 April 1994.
This judgment (hereafter “the 1994 court judgment”), which was rectified in 1996, became final and enforcement proceedings were instituted in its respect. On numerous occasions the bailiffs approached the Village Council seeking allocation of the plot. However, the latter refused, insisting that the community had no land for distribution and that all available plots were lawfully occupied by other parties.
On 4 October 2000 the Village Council took an official decision refusing to allocate the land to the applicant’s farm, stating that there were no available plots.
On 1 March 2001 the  revoked this decision as unlawful, finding that the previous judgment confirming the applicant’s farm’s right to a plot of land had never been challenged in accordance with applicable procedures and so had remained in force and subject to execution.
On an unspecified date the bailiffs destroyed the enforcement order and discontinued the enforcement proceedings.
On 6 March 2008 the applicant, acting on behalf of his farm, instituted proceedings against the bailiffs, complaining about their failure to ensure enforcement of the 1994 court judgment and seeking a renewal of the enforcement proceedings.
On 27 May 2008 the Lviv Regional Commercial (former Arbitration) Court allowed his claim in part. It noted that the 1994 court judgment had never been revoked and remained in force at the material time. It further found that the failure of the bailiffs to enforce the judgment at issue and destruction of the enforcement order issued by the court was not lawful.
On 9 March 2010 the Lviv Commercial Court of Appeal upheld this decision, having added to its operational part that the applicant’s demand for reopening of the enforcement proceedings should be rejected.
The parties did not inform the Court as to whether there had been any further appeals against this decision.
On 25 November 1998 the Pustomytivsky District Prosecutor lodged a protest against the 1992 decision allocating the land to the applicant.
On 4 December 1998 the District Council revoked the decision at issue following this intervention and requested the prosecutor to initiate proceedings for revocation of the applicant’s Land Use Act and registration as a farmer. The Council noted, in particular, that the land at issue should have been distributed among the employees of “L.”, which the applicant was not. It also noted that the plot had been allocated to the applicant without a proper preliminary land survey and before he had been duly registered as a farmer.
The applicant appealed against this decision before the .
On 4 February 1999 the court ruled for the applicant. It found that the District Council had no authority to interfere with the applicant’s use of the land, unless this use were found to be unlawful according to the procedure established by section 49 of the Property Act. It further noted that the reasons cited by the Council in justification of the revocation of the decision did not constitute a valid ground for divesting him of the possession of the plot. According to the case file materials this decision was not appealed against and became final.
On 14 June 1999 the President of the  reviewed the decision by way of supervisory review following the defendant’s request and found the previous decision lawful.
On 1 December 1999 the  revoked these decisions and remitted the case for fresh consideration.
On 20 April 2000 the  found that the defendant had acted contrary to section 59 of the Self-Governance Act in revoking its 1992 decision and found that revocation unlawful. It appears from the case file materials that this decision was not appealed against and became final.
On 12 July 2000 the Deputy President of the  reviewed the decision by way of supervisory review at the defendant’s request and upheld the previous decision.
On an unspecified date the above decisions were revoked and the proceedings reopened.
On 19 December 2002 the Lviv Regional Commercial (former Arbitration) Court rejected the applicant’s claim. It noted that on 28 January 1992 the Pustomytivsky District Council had decided that the land withheld from “L.” for distribution to individual farmers would be allocated to its (former) employees in accordance with Article 7 of the Farming Act and Article 5 of the Land Code in force at the material time. As the applicant had not been employed by “L.”, he had not been eligible to obtain a plot from the land at issue. The court further noted that the extra-judicial procedure by which the Council’s decision had been revoked was lawful, as the Prosecutors’ Office Act entitled prosecutors to lodge objections to unlawful decisions of various entities, obliging them to review them and remove their shortcomings where necessary. As regards the Council’s request for the prosecutor to initiate proceedings for revocation of the Land Use Act and the applicant’s registration as a farmer, these were recommendations only and did not as such have any bearing on the applicant’s rights. On 15 May 2003 the Lviv Regional Commercial Court of Appeal upheld this decision.
The applicant appealed in cassation, alleging that revocation of the decision of 11 May 1992 was contrary to the applicable provisions of substantive and procedural law. In particular, this revocation had resulted in the applicant’s being de facto deprived of a plot of land on grounds not foreseen in the applicable legislation and in violation of due process provisions, requiring judicial proceedings for a decision on that deprivation.
On 14 January 2004 the  upheld the previous judgments, noting that the applicant had never submitted a proper application for allocation of the land and that as he had never worked for “L.” there had been no grounds to add him to the list of persons entitled to obtain its former land in the first place. In the light of the above there was no reason to conclude either that the prosecutor had wrongfully objected to the 1992 decision or that the District Council had wrongfully revoked it in response to this objection.
On 15 April 2004 the Supreme Court of Ukraine refused the applicant leave to make a further appeal in cassation.
Subsequently the applicant attempted unsuccessfully to have the proceedings reopened and the judgment of 19 December 2002 reviewed.
It is not clear from the case file materials whether the validity of the applicant’s Land Use Act was ever reviewed by the domestic judicial authorities.
Article 144 of the Constitution of Ukraine reads as follows:
Article 144
“Bodies of local self-government, within the limits of authority determined by law, adopt decisions that are mandatory for execution throughout the respective territory.
Decisions of bodies of local self-government which do not conform with the Constitution or the laws of  are suspended by the procedure established by law with a simultaneous appeal to a court.”
Relevant provision of the Code read as follows:
Article 23. Documents certifying rights to a plot of land
“Right of ownership or right of permanent use of land shall be certified by State acts, which shall be issued and registered by village, town, city or district councils of people’s deputies ...”
Relevant provisions of the Act read as follows:
Section 48
“...
Protection of property rights shall be effected by a court, arbitration court or mediation court. ...
Provisions concerning protection of property right shall also pertain to a person, who, although not an owner, possesses a property as ... a permanent heritable possession or on other grounds, listed in a law or a contract. This person shall be entitled to protection of her right of possession from the owner as well.”
Section 49. Lawfulness of possession
“Possession shall be deemed lawful unless established otherwise by the court, the arbitration court or the mediation court.”
Section 51. Protection of land ownership
“1.  A citizen may not be deprived of ownership of a plot of land against his will otherwise than on the basis of a court decision on grounds established by legal acts of . ...”
According to section 2 of the Act, a ‘farm’ could consist of a single founder or of a family (including extended family) farming the land together. The State Land Ownership or Land Use Act was to be issued in the name of the head of the farm.
According to section 5 of the Act, plots of land for farming use were to be allocated to the citizens from reserve lands or lands withheld from agricultural companies and transferred to farmers for permanent heritable use, leased, or transferred as private property.
According to section 7, members of collective farms and other agricultural cooperatives and employees of agricultural companies wishing to become farmers were entitled to obtain plots equivalent to the size of their share in the collective farm (cooperative, company) upon a decision of the relevant local council. These lands were to be allocated from the lands withheld from the relevant farm (cooperative, company) or from reserve lands.
According to section 17, members of the farm managed its property by mutual consent.
Relevant provisions of the Act read as follows:
Section 59
“...
Acts of bodies and officials of local self-governance which are incompatible with the Constitution or laws of  shall be declared unlawful by means of judicial proceedings. ...”
According to Articles 20 § 2 and 21 of the Act, the prosecutors are authorised to object (lodge “protests”) to acts of local councils which in their opinion are unlawful. Introduction of a protest suspends the act at issue and obliges the council to examine it within ten days and report to the prosecutor. The council may refuse the protest, in which case the prosecutor may seek revocation of the act by way of judicial proceedings.
The relevant part of the Ruling reads as follows:
“... The Constitutional Court of Ukraine notes that the Constitution of Ukraine includes a principle pursuant to which human rights and freedoms and their guarantees shall determine the content and direction of activity of the State, which is answerable to humans for its actions (Article 3). Bodies of local self-governance shall be answerable for their actions to legal and physical persons (Article 74 of the [Local Self-Governance Act]). Consequently, bodies of local self-governance may not revoke their previous decisions or amend them if, according to the prescriptions of these decisions, legal relations have emerged which are connected with the realisation of certain subjective rights and lawful interests and where the subjects of those legal relations are against their modification or termination. This is a “guarantee of stability of social interaction” between bodies of local self-governance and citizens, fostering the citizens’ certainty that their situation will not be negatively affected by adoption of a later decision...
Non-normative legal acts of a body of local self-governance shall be acts of single use; they shall exhaust their force by the fact that they have once been enforced; they may therefore not be revoked or amended by the body of local self-governance upon their enforcement...”