The case originated in an application (no. 38427/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Artem Anatolyevich Samsonov (“the applicant”), on 30 March 2011.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 30 August 2017 the Government were given notice of the application.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Vladivostok.
On 10 November 2010 another person (probably, the applicant’s relative) created a topic in the forum section of an Internet site dedicated to various matters about cars. The topic was entitled “Four years’ imprisonment for instrumental music in South Korea”. It read as follows:
“The Supreme Court of South Korea upheld the conviction for which Song was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment for possession of fourteen MP3 files containing music such as North Korea’s hymns and marches.
The South Korean authorities closely control and punish any attempts to disseminate any North Korean material that glorifies it or attempts to have unlawful contact with the opponents in the Cold War. Those who violate the law risk long prison terms.
In August 2010 South Korea blocked its citizens’ access to the Uriminzok (“Our People”) Twitter account, which is controlled by the North Korean authorities ... [hyperlink to an online newspaper article]”
The post ended with the creator of the topic (“original poster”) asking:
“Friends, I am just shocked. How can we help her?”
On 10 and 11 November 2010 the original poster and various other people posted comments or conversations, either directly in reply to the above post or as replies to other comments. In the discussion relating to the question raised by the original poster, some participants suggested complaining to or seeking clarifications from the “Korean Cultural Centre”. One user (using smileys and apparently jokingly) wrote “Let’s take our pitchforks and torches to the Consulate!! To defend ‘our people’)))”.
The applicant participated in the discussion and wrote several posts.
(a) On 11 November 2010, in response to a post saying “So when do we gather in front of the Korean Consulate with banners?”, the applicant wrote “At 6 p.m. on 15 November, in front of the Korean Consulate, at 19 Pologaya Street”.
(b)  Another user wrote “I would like to go and ‘protest’ in favour of North Korea ...”. The applicant replied “Come on Monday”.
(c)  Another user wrote a post addressing the original poster: “... Look, maybe it would be a good idea for you to organise a picket in front of the Korean Consulate, for instance?”. The applicant replied “We are working on it. Come on Monday at 6 p.m.”.
On 12 November 2010 three people (other than the original poster and the applicant) notified the Vladivostok City Administration of their intention to hold a static demonstration on 15 November 2010 in front of the Consulate of South Korea in Vladivostok to protest against human-rights violations in the country. They were told that the notification had to be submitted to the regional administration instead, given the location of the event and that the event was planned to take place next to a government building, namely the Regional Office of the Federal Agency for State Property Management.
The demonstration was held as planned on 15 November 2010.
The applicant’s posts and conversations in the topic of the forum were spotted by an officer from the local anti-extremism unit.
The applicant was then prosecuted, it appears, in relation to his post on 11 November 2010 (see under (a) in paragraph 8 above).
By a judgment of 3 February 2011 a justice of the peace convicted the applicant under Article 20.2 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (CAO) and fined him 1,000 Russian roubles (some 30 euros at the time). The court considered that he had been the event organiser, and that as such he had not been permitted to lawfully engage in any pre-event campaigning prior to formally notifying the local authority of the planned event.
The applicant appealed, arguing that his posts amounted to a discussion of various political views and future plans. His posts did not amount to “campaigning” since they had not indicated or explained the aims of a specific public event or other information relating to the organisation or running of a specific public event. His posts were indistinguishable from an ordinary conversation that two or more people might have on the street. His prosecution therefore constituted an unjustified interference with his freedom of expression and violated Article 10 of the Convention.
On 16 March 2011 the Frunzenskiy District Court of Vladivostok upheld the judgment. The court specified that the applicant’s post on 11 November 2010 (see under (a) in paragraph 8 above) had indicated the specific date, time and venue of a public event and thus amounted to unlawful pre-event campaigning in the absence of any pending notification of the event (sections 4 and 10 of the Public Events Act). The notification of a static demonstration had not been lodged with the Vladivostok City Administration until 12 November 2010.
Section 4 of the Public Events Act defines “organisation” of a public event as, inter alia, providing information to potential participants, notifying the competent public authority and pre-event campaigning.
At the material time, section 10 of the Public Events Act provided that once notification of a public event had been given, the event organiser or other people could engage in pre-event campaigning, such as informing others of the venue(s), timing, objectives or other aspects pertaining to the preparation and running of the upcoming event, and calling on citizens to take part.
This section was amended in June 2012 to indicate that pre-event campaigning could be carried out once the competent public authority had approved the venue(s) and/or timing of the public event.