The case originated in an application (no. 41288/15) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Lithuanian nationals, Mr Pijus Beizaras (“the first applicant”) and Mr Mangirdas Levickas (“the second applicant”), on 13 August 2015.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr R.W. Wintemute (a lawyer practising in London) and Mr T.V. Raskevičius (a representative of a non-governmental organisation – the National Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) Rights Association (Nacionalinė LGBT teisių organizacija), hereinafter “the LGL Association”, see also paragraphs 7, 29 and 55 below). The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė-Širmenė.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been discriminated against on the grounds of sexual orientation, in breach of Article 14 of the Convention, taken in conjunction with Article 8, on account of the public authorities’ refusal to launch a pre-trial investigation into hateful comments left on the first applicant’s Facebook page.
They also argued that the authorities’ refusal to launch a pre-trial investigation had left them without the possibility of legal redress, in breach of Article 13 of the Convention.
On 16 June 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
In addition to written observations submitted by the applicants and the Government, third-party comments were received jointly from the AIRE Centre (Advice on Individual Rights in Europe), the European branch of the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (“ILGA-Europe”), the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) and the Human Rights Monitoring Institute (“the HRMI”), which had collectively been granted leave by the President of the Section to intervene as a third party (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2).
The first applicant was born in 1996 and lives in Kaunas. The second applicant was born in 1995 and lives in Panevėžys.
At the time that the application was lodged with the Court, the first applicant was a secondary-school student at the Kaunas School of Applied Arts. He graduated from that school in June 2017. He is an openly gay man in a same-sex relationship with the second applicant.
At the time of the lodging of the application with the Court, the second applicant was a theology student at the Vytautas Magnus University in Kaunas. In August 2015 he discontinued his theology studies and instead began studying psychology at the same university.
Both applicants are members of the LGL Association.
As can be seen from the material provided and relied on by the Government – namely, copies of public posts on the Facebook pages of the first and the second applicants – on 31 December 2013 the second applicant publicly posted on Facebook that on that day he had “met for the first time” the first applicant. On 26 March 2014 the first applicant publicly posted on his Facebook account, asking: “Do I have any homophobic ‘friends’ who are against LGBT people?” On 17 May 2014 the first applicant publicly posted a summary of the main arguments cited by homophobic commenters (such as the assertion that homosexuality was a disease and a perversion that was against the laws of nature). On 30 May 2014 the first applicant stated in a public post that he had excluded homophobic persons from his Facebook “friends”. On 4 July 2014 the first applicant announced in a public post that he was “in a relationship” with the second applicant.
On 8 December 2014 the first applicant posted a photograph on his Facebook page depicting a same-sex kiss between him and the second applicant. The picture was accessible not only to his Facebook “friends”, but also to the general public.
As stated by the applicants in their application to the Court, the intention of posting the picture publicly was to announce the beginning of the applicants’ relationship.
According to the applicants, “the picture went viral online and it received more than 2,400 ‘likes’ and more than 800 comments”. They also submitted that the majority of online comments had been aimed at inciting hatred and violence against LGBT people in general, while numerous comments had directly threatened the applicants personally. The posted comments, of which the Lithuanian law-enforcement authorities were notified afterwards, included the following (Lithuanian language has not been corrected):
“I’m going to throw up – they should be castrated or burnt; cure yourselves, jackasses – just saying” (Vimtelsiu, kastruot ar degint tokius, pasigydykit asilai, tik sakau)
“If you were born perverts and have this disorder, then go and hide in basements and do whatever you like there, faggots. But you will not ruin our beautiful society, which was brought up by my mum and dad, where men kiss women and do not prick their skewers together. I genuinely hope that while you are walking down the street, one of you will get your head smashed in and your brain shaken up” (Jei jau gimet isgamom ir turit liga, eikit pasislepe rusiuose ka norit ir darykit pyderastai. Bet musu grazios visuomenes, kuria uzaugino mama ir tetis ir vyrai buciuoja moteris, o ne badosi spagom tarpusavyje – nesugadinsit. As labai nuosirdziai tikiuosi kad kazkuriam is jusu einant gatve atitrenks galva kazkas ir atpurtys smegeneles)
“These faggots fucked up my lunch; if I was allowed to, I would shoot every single one of them” (Supisti pietai per siuos pyderastus, leistu visus iki vieno issaudyciau)
“Scum!!!!!! Into the gas chamber with the pair of them” (Urodai!!!!!! I duju kameras abu)
“Hey fags – I’ll buy you a free honeymoon trip to the crematorium.” (Ei pyderai medaus menesio kelione nupirksiu nasaram y krematoriuma)
“Fucking faggots – burn in hell, garbage” (Kurwa pydarai blt, dekit pragare siuksles)
“Into the bonfire with those faggots ...” (Pydarastus and lauzo ...)
“For fuck’s sake ... You fucking gays – you should be exterminated FU” (Eik tu nahui... Gėjai jūs supisti, jus naikint nx)
“Because you’re faggots, and children can see photos such as these, it’s not only the Jews that Hitler should have burned” (Tuom kad jus pydarasai esat ir vaikai mato tokias ft issigimeli, galėjo Hitleris netik žydus deginti)
“Burn the faggots, damn it” (Sudeginti piderastus ku*va)
“Fags! Into the bonfire those bitches!” (Gaidžiai! Ant laužo kurvas!)
“Fuck you – damn it, kill yourselves, faggots” (Eik to nahui krw nusizudykit piderai)
“Satan, please allow me to smash their heads into a wall” (Šetone prašau duok man leidimą daužys tokiem galvas į sienas)
“Oh for fuck’s sake – get the fuck out of Lithuania and don’t shame us, you fucking capon; we should put your head under a car and into the noose, you fucking faggot” (Oj kurwa pidaras pusk is lt nedares gedos wisgaidy tu krw jabanas galwa po masina pakist ir sniurais suka tu kwr jabanas)
“Kill ...” (Zudyt ...)
On 9 December 2014 the photograph was re-posted by LGBT-friendly Vilnius (an organisation upholding the rights of LGBT people) on its public Facebook page with the following comment:
“Two young men, who live in Kaunas – Pijus and Mangirdas – today caused a big commotion on Lithuanian Facebook pages, provoking a huge number of ‘likes’, ‘shares’; and hateful comments ... Why? The reason is simple: a kiss. Nothing more, nothing less.
We asked them what prompted their choice to make this nice photograph public.
Here is Pijus’ wise reply: ‘We hope that maybe some lonely person, who is being condemned by others, will see this photograph and will no longer feel lonely. Maybe, [standing] on the roof of some house, or on the edge of a window sill or balcony, he or she will move to a safer spot, where nothing will threaten him or her and his or her life will not be just a statistic.’
Thank you Pijus, and thank you, Mangirdas! Your courage inspires and gives hope.
Let’s express our support by sharing [the link to the post carrying the photograph] and expressing our opinion”.
On 10 December 2014 the LGL Association on its Facebook page shared the photograph and publicly posted the following:
“We are happy about the bravery of these young men. Now they need support – more than ever – here on Facebook, and also in their everyday life. So, is it just a kiss? What is the reaction of Lithuanians who avoid being labeled as homophobes? Please pay attention to their opinions expressed in the comments.”
Later on, on 12 December 2014, the LGL Association stated in a public post on its Facebook page:
“Homophobia seeps through not only anonymous comments on Internet portals but also on Facebook, where people post under their true names. We did as we said we would: the meanest comments and their authors have already been denounced to the law-enforcement institutions. Do express your opinion respectfully and responsibly ...
There are thousands of comments and thousands of people making them. You cannot catch them all, but this is not our purpose. It is more important to show society that [making such hateful comments] is against the law and that hatred cannot be tolerated.”
In that context, the Government also provided a screenshot of the first applicant’s Facebook page from December 2016, where he had written “Two years ago we were causing a commotion” and provided a link to the photograph in question.
In June 2016 LGBT-friendly Vilnius on its Facebook page shared both applicants’ impressions of the Baltic Pride event. The applicants expressed their satisfaction that the parade had gone well and had passed off without incidents such as the throwing of eggs or disruptions staged by “supporters of traditional values”. The two applicants had marched at the forefront of the parade, carrying the Lithuanian flag.
On 10 December 2014 both applicants lodged a written request with the LGL Association, of which they were both members (see paragraph 7 above), asking it to notify, in its own name, the Prosecutor General’s Office of the hateful comments left under the photograph posted on the first applicant’s Facebook page. They submitted that those comments were not only degrading, detrimental to their dignity and incited discrimination, but also “incited violence and physically violent treatment”. The comments were therefore frightening both to homosexual people in general and to the applicants in particular. The applicants considered that such actions were criminal and merited pre-trial investigation. They reasoned in their request that their wish for the LGL Association, as a non-governmental organisation that defended the public interest, to act on their behalf was based on the applicants’ view that the Lithuanian legal system did not provide any additional procedural guarantees for alleged victims of homophobic hate crimes. The applicants also wrote that they feared retaliation by the authors of the online comments should they personally lodge such a complaint with the prosecutor. They also believed that were they to lodge a personal complaint it would not be treated seriously by law-enforcement officials.
On 12 December 2014 the LGL Association lodged a complaint with the Prosecutor General’s Office, asking that criminal proceedings be initiated regarding thirty-one comments posted on the first applicant’s public Facebook page (see paragraph 10 above). The complaint was lodged on the basis of Article 170 §§ 2 and 3 of the Criminal Code (“Incitement against any national, racial, ethnic, religious or other group of people” – see paragraph 30 below) and Article 19 § 1 (3) of the Law on the Provision of Information to the Public, which prohibits publishing in the media information that incites hatred or violence against a group of people because of their sexual orientation (see paragraph 33 below). It was indicated in the complaint that the comments in question had ridiculed and expressed contempt for individuals of homosexual orientation, as well as incited discrimination, hatred and violence against them. The LGL Association also added a hard copy of the photograph in question and the comments posted below it.
On 30 December 2014 a prosecutor at the Klaipėda district prosecutor’s office took the decision not to initiate a pre-trial investigation regarding the LGL Association’s complaint. Having examined the thirty-one comments referred to by the LGL Association, the prosecutor noted that of those thirty-one comments, twenty-seven  people had written one comment each, and two people had written two comments each. For the prosecutor, this was easy to establish, since the commenters had placed those comments under their personal profiles. The prosecutor held that in order to assess whether the comments in question were of a criminal nature, it was necessary to take into account not only the comments as such, but also the context in which those comments had been written. Given that the comments had been written by different people, each comment had to be assessed individually, and not collectively. It was also essential to establish whether those comments constituted an active attempt (aktyvus siekis) to incite other people to disseminate degrading comments and to incite them to commit violence. The prosecutor then considered that active attempts required “systematic action”. In the applicants’ case, however, such a criterion had not been met because various individuals had written only one or two comments, which was not enough to be considered as constituting a systematic attempt to incite hatred or violence against people distinguishable by their sexual orientation. From this it followed that the objective element of a crime, as established under Article 170 §§ 2 and 3 of the Criminal Code, was absent. Furthermore, the fact that the “expression of opinion” in question had been non-systematic and isolated meant that there had been no subjective element – namely, that of direct intent – in the crime in question, because by posting the comments the authors thereof had been merely “expressing their opinion”, instead of seeking to incite hatred or violence against individuals who were distinguishable by their sexual orientation. Even though the authors of the comments had reacted “unethically” in respect of the image portrayed in the photograph of the two applicants, such “immoral behaviour” did not constitute an element of a crime under Article 170 §§ 2 and 3 of the Criminal Code. The prosecutor lastly considered that the Supreme Court was of a similar view, in view of the fact that by a ruling of 18 December 2012 in case no. 2K-677/2012 it had acquitted a person who had posted a comment stating that gay people were “perverts” and “belonged in a psychiatric hospital”. In that case the Supreme Court had considered that such a comment, even though unethical, had not actively incited hatred or discrimination against homosexual people (for a more detailed description see paragraphs 39-41 below). The prosecutor thus saw that his conclusion was in line with the Supreme Court’s practice in such cases – that is to say, that comments of such a tenor were unethical but not criminal.
On 9 January 2015 the LGL Association lodged an appeal against the prosecutor’s decision with the Klaipėda City District Court. The LGL Association pointed out that the prosecutor had taken the decision not to prosecute on two grounds: firstly, that the actions of the people who had commented on the above-mentioned Facebook post had not been systematic in nature, and secondly, that in respect of cases concerning similar situations (that is to say comments of a similar nature) the authorities routinely considered that no crime had been committed. The LGL Association noted that in more than 90% of cases in Lithuania, hatred was promoted through the electronic sphere – for example, by the creation of hatred-promoting groups on the Facebook social network or on Internet forums. The LGL Association also relied on Lithuanian court decisions of 2014 at district court (that is to say, first-instance) level which had found that a single comment had been sufficient to find the author thereof guilty of a crime under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 50 and 51 below). The LGL Association thus disputed the prosecutor’s conclusion that such actions had to be systematic in nature in order for criminal liability to arise. The LGL Association argued that the question of whether or not comments could be deemed to be systematic in nature could be taken into account when assessing the gravity of a crime and imposing a punishment on the author of such comments, but it did not amount to a constitutive element of that crime. As to the applicants’ case in particular, it also argued, inter alia, that several terms contained in the comments had promoted the infliction of physical harm and even the killing of members of the group in question (for example, advocating burning and extermination), which had indicated their authors’ “particular attitude” (ypatingą nusiteikimą) towards people of non-traditional sexual orientation and had clearly intentionally articulated a call for violence. On this point the LGL Association relied on the Court’s judgment in Vejdeland v. Sweden (no. 1813/07, §§ 54 and 55, 9 February 2012), in which it had held that Sweden had not breached the rights of the applicants in that case by prosecuting them, even if their statements had not called for violence. Lastly, the LGL Association argued that if the comments under the photograph of the applicants on Facebook had been only “expressing [the authors’] opinion”, it was totally unclear what could be considered to constitute “publicly ridiculing, expressing contempt, urging hatred or inciting discrimination” within the meaning of Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code. That norm of criminal law was destined to become a “dead letter”, which the law-enforcement authorities chose not to apply “by giving unjustified preference to freedom of expression, or perhaps owing to other motives which, although not related to law, had an influence on law”.
By a ruling of 23 January 2015 the Klaipėda City District Court dismissed the LGL Association’s appeal. The court shared the prosecutor’s view that the authors of the impugned comments “had chosen improper words” (pavartojo netinkamus žodžius) to express their disapproval of homosexual people. Even so, the “mere use of obscenities” (tik necenzūrinių žodžių pavartojimas) was not enough to incur criminal liability under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code. The court considered that in making such comments their authors had not been inciting others to discriminate against or hate homosexuals.
The district court also pointed out that the first applicant’s Facebook page, where the picture of the two men kissing had been posted, had been public, visible and accessible not only to his acquaintances and friends, but also to individuals who were completely unknown to him. Therefore, a person who posted in the public space (viešoje erdvėje) a picture “of two men kissing” should and must have foreseen that such “eccentric behaviour really did not contribute to the cohesion of those within society who had different views or to the promotion of tolerance” (ekscentriškas elgesys tikrai neprisideda prie visuomenėje kitokias pažiūras turinčių asmenų tarpusavio supratimo bei tolerancijos ugdymo). The owner of a social network profile on which such an image was posted, by exercising his freedom to express his convictions and freedom to promote tolerance, had to take into account the fact that that freedom was inseparable from the obligation to respect the views and traditions of others. According to the court, “the majority of Lithuanian society very much appreciate[d] traditional family values” (itin vertina tradicinės šeimos vertybes). Indeed, that view was enshrined in Article 38 of the Constitution, which read that the family should be the basis of society and the State, and that marriage should be undertaken on the basis of the free mutual consent of a man and a woman. The district court also referred to a passage from the Constitutional Court’s ruling of 28 September 2011 (see paragraph 34 below), and from that ruling inferred that “the family, as a constitutional value, is a union between a man and a woman”. Lastly, the court stated that criminal proceedings were an ultima ratio measure and that they should therefore be initiated only when serious grounds and all elements of a crime existed. This was not the situation in the case at hand. The decision not to prosecute the authors of the comments had been reasonable.
The LGL Association lodged an appeal on 29 January 2015. It pleaded that certain comments had been clearly meant to incite violence, thus directly constituting an objective element of a crime under Article 170 §§ 2 and 3 of the Criminal Code. The LGL Association noted that even milder public comments, although concerning racial or ethnic discrimination, had been considered by the Lithuanian courts to constitute a crime. The LGL Association also argued that the subjective element of a crime, that is to say direct intent, should be assessed only after the identification of the alleged perpetrators and during subsequent criminal proceedings, not at the time that a procedural decision was taken regarding whether to start a pre-trial investigation or not. Responding to the district court’s statement that the majority of Lithuanian society very much appreciated “traditional family values”, the LGL Association underlined that a criminal offence could not be justified by the views and traditions of either an individual or the majority of society. In that connection the LGL Association also relied on the Court’s case-law, which held that freedom of expression was applicable not only to “information” or “ideas” that were favourably received or regarded as inoffensive or as a matter of indifference, but also those that offended, shocked or disturbed. The LGL Association lastly referred to the Court’s judgment in Balsytė-Lideikienė v. Lithuania (no. 72596/01, § 82, 4 November 2008) to the effect that one right, such as the freedom of speech of the authors of the comments, could be restricted if such a restriction was necessary because that speech was offensive.
By a final ruling of 18 February 2015 the Klaipėda Regional Court dismissed the LGL Association’s appeal, upholding the prosecutor’s and the district court’s reasoning, including that court’s arguments regarding the applicants’ “eccentric behaviour”. The regional court also underlined the fact that the first applicant had posted the photograph in question publicly and had not restricted it to his friends or “like-minded people” (bendraminčiams), even though the Facebook social network allowed such a possibility. Such an action could therefore be interpreted as constituting “an attempt to deliberately tease or shock individuals with different views or to encourage the posting of negative comments”. The regional court also considered that, in the absence of objective and subjective elements of a crime under Article 170 of the Criminal Code, it would constitute a “waste of time and resources”, or even an unlawful restriction of the rights of others [that is to say Internet commenters’] to open criminal proceedings. Lastly, criminal proceedings constituted an ultima ratio measure, and not all actions merited them.
In their application to the Court the applicants stated that the proceedings before the domestic courts had generated a lot of interest in both the local and international media. As a result, they had experienced an increased level of attention and hostility both in the private and in the public space. The first applicant had been summoned by his secondary-school headmaster, who had requested him “not to disseminate his ideas”. The second applicant had been summoned by the dean of the university theology faculty, who had requested him to change his course of study because his “lifestyle did not correspond with the faculty’s values”. On several occasions the applicants had been verbally harassed in public places. They had also received a number of threatening private messages in their social network mailboxes. None of those incidents had been reported to the police, because the applicants had been steadily losing their faith in the effectiveness of the law-enforcement system in Lithuania in the light of their unsuccessful attempts to launch a pre-trial investigation in connection with the initial hateful comments.
For their part, the Government referred to a number of educational programmes at the first applicant’s secondary school aimed at raising children’s understanding of such issues as respect, solidarity and non-discrimination. They also could not speculate on the reasons for the second applicant changing his course of study. The Government lastly pointed out that the applicants themselves had never attempted to persuade the domestic authorities to initiate any kind of pre-trial investigation regarding any alleged subsequent discriminatory acts.
The Constitution reads:
“... Human dignity shall be protected by law.
It shall be prohibited to torture or injure a human being, degrade his dignity, subject him to cruel treatment, or to establish such punishments...”
“Private life shall be inviolable.
...
The law and courts shall protect everyone from arbitrary or unlawful interference with his private and family life, as well as from encroachment upon his honour and dignity.”
“Everyone shall have the right to have his own convictions and freely express them.
No one must be hindered from seeking, receiving, or imparting information and ideas.
The freedom to express convictions, as well as to receive and impart information, may not be limited otherwise than by law when this is necessary to protect human health, honour or dignity, private life, or morals, or to defend the constitutional order.
The freedom to express convictions and to impart information shall be incompatible with criminal actions – incitement to national, racial, religious, or social hatred, incitement to violence or to discrimination, as well as defamation and disinformation ...”
“All persons shall be equal before the law, courts, and other State institutions and officials.
Human rights may not be restricted; no one may be granted any privileges on the grounds of gender, race, nationality, language, origin, social status, belief, convictions, or views.”
“The family shall be the basis of society and the State.
Family, motherhood, fatherhood and childhood shall be under the protection and care of the State.
Marriage shall be concluded upon the free mutual consent of man and woman ...”
“...
There shall be no State religion in Lithuania.”
Civil Code reads:
“1. Marriage is a voluntary agreement between a man and a woman to create legal family relations executed in the procedure provided for by law.
A man and a woman who have registered their marriage in the procedure provided for in law shall be deemed to be spouses.”
In Lithuania, there is no legislation in force that would regulate partnership between a man and a woman, or between two persons of the same sex. Attempts to pass such legislation have been unsuccessful. In particular, as early as in 2000 the Law on the Approval, Entry into Force and Implementation of the Civil Code provided that the norms of the Civil Code, regarding partnership – common life between a man and a woman before entering into marriage – would enter into force once the Law on Partnership would be adopted. No such law had been passed to this day.
The old Criminal Code of 1961 provided that sexual intercourse between two men was criminal (Article 122). The criminal liability for such conduct was lifted in 1993, Lithuania having regained independence in 1990.
The Law on Associations at the relevant time read:
“1. An association shall be a public legal person of limited civil liability who has its name and whose purpose is to coordinate activities of the association members, to represent interests of the association members and to defend them or to meet other public interests.”
The Criminal Code, at the relevant time, between 2007 and 2017, read:
“...
A person who publicly ridicules, expresses contempt for, urges hatred of or incites discrimination against a group of people or a person belonging thereto on the grounds of sex, sexual orientation, race, nationality, language, descent, social status, religion, convictions or views
shall be punished by a fine or by restriction of liberty or by arrest or by imprisonment for a term of up to two years.
A person who publicly incites violence or the physically violent treatment of a group of people or a person belonging thereto on the grounds of sex, sexual orientation, race, nationality, language, descent, social status, religion, convictions or views or finances, or who otherwise supports such activities
shall be punished by a fine or by restriction of liberty or by arrest or by imprisonment for a term of up to three years ...”
Methodological recommendation no. 12.14-40 of 23 December 2009 issued by the Prosecutor General’s Office to the heads of regional and district prosecutors’ offices and the police “On the organisation, supervision and specifics of the conduct of the pre-trial investigation with regard to criminal acts that are committed on the grounds of race, nationality, xenophobia, homophobia or other [forms of] discrimination” reads:
“33. ... the launch of a pre-trial investigation by the pre-trial investigation bodies and prosecutors’ offices should not be formalistic. A person who has provided information about an alleged criminal act in a non-standard ... way (e.g. orally, by telephone or by other electronic means) should not be requested to lodge a written complaint, if that person evidently does not wish to do so or refuses to do so because he/she does not wish to disclose his/her identity or for other reasons. Information about hate-related incidents (or allegedly committed criminal acts of such a nature) that is provided in such manner cannot be left without procedural evaluation. ... Information regarding an allegedly committed criminal act should be evaluated as factual grounds for the pre-trial investigation officer or prosecutor while they themselves establish the elements of the criminal act [in question]. ... In the event that an anonymous application (submitted in whatever form) is received, the same procedure indicated in this paragraph is applicable.
[C]riminal acts that are committed on the grounds of racial, national, xenophobic, homophobic [or] religious hatred or on other grounds of a discriminatory nature ... usually attract quite a high degree of public awareness, both within society and in the domestic and foreign media ... [They] [i] can do harm to the international reputation of the State, [ii] can make the [courts] the object of criticism by society and endanger the security of society. Therefore expeditious and serious reaction on the part of the pre-trial investigation officials or the prosecutors to a written application received ... or any oral or written information submitted in any ... way about criminal acts that are allegedly committed on the grounds of ... homophobia ... or other reasons of a discriminatory nature, and the expeditious, qualified and immediate evaluation of the facts ... by adopting without delay the relevant procedural decisions ... leads to the stabilisation of the situation in society, suppression of anxiety, which was raised by the public incidents or attacks of an extremist nature in all society or in its most vulnerable members, and prevents the deterioration of the international reputation of the State.”
The Code of Criminal Procedure, as worded at the relevant time, provided that when elements of a crime are discovered, a prosecutor or the investigating authorities must, within the limits of their authority, undertake all measures provided by law to institute criminal proceedings in order to establish that a criminal act has been committed and ensure that the guilty parties are punished (Article 3 of the Code). A prosecutor must employ all measures available under the law in order to eliminate any violations of laws (Article 24).
The Law on the Provision of Information to the Public (Visuomenės informavimo įstatymas), in so far as relevant, reads:
“1. It shall be prohibited to make public in the media information that:
...
3) instigates war or hatred, ridicule, humiliation, ... discrimination, violence, or the physically violent treatment of a group of people or a person belonging to that group because of age, sex, sexual orientation, ethnic origin, race, nationality, citizenship, language, origin, social status, belief, convictions, views or religion ...”
“1. The Inspector of Journalistic Ethics (hereinafter – “the Inspector”) is a State official who oversees how the principles of this Law are implemented ...”
“1. The Inspector performs the following functions:
1) examines complaints (applications) [lodged by] persons regarding a violation of their honour and dignity in the media;
2) examines complaints (applications) [lodged by] persons regarding a violation of their right to private life;
...
8) on the basis of the conclusions by the groups of experts ... establishes whether information made public in the media incites discord [skatina nesantaiką] on the grounds of gender, sexual orientation, race, nationality, language, descent, social status, convictions or views ...”
By a ruling of 28 September 2011 in a case regarding the compliance with the Constitution of the Seimas’ resolution “On the Approval of the State Family Policy Concept” which was related to the question whether only married persons and children born in such a union could be considered to constitute a family, the Constitutional Court held:
“15.1. In the context of the constitutional ... case at issue it needs to be noted that the constitutional concept of family may not be derived solely from the institution of marriage, which is entrenched in the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 38 of the Constitution. The fact that the institutions of marriage and family are entrenched in the same Article 38 of the Constitution indicates an inseparable and unquestionable relationship between marriage and family. Marriage is one of the foundations of the constitutional institution of the family [and serves] the [purpose of] the creation of family relations. It is a historically established family model that undoubtedly has exceptional value in the life of society and which ensures the viability of the nation and the State, as well as their historical survival.
However, this does not mean that the Constitution – inter alia, the provisions of Paragraph 1 of Article 38 thereof – does not protect and defend families other than those founded on the basis of marriage – inter alia, the relationship between a man and a woman living together without having concluded a marriage, which is based on the permanent bonds of emotional affection, reciprocal understanding, responsibility, respect, shared upbringing of children and similar bonds, as well as on the voluntary determination to take on certain rights and responsibilities, which form a basis for the constitutional institutions of motherhood, fatherhood and childhood.
Thus, the constitutional concept of family is based on mutual responsibility between family members, understanding, emotional affection, assistance and similar relations, as well as on the voluntary determination to take on certain rights and responsibilities – that is to say the content of the relationship – whereas the form of expression of such relationships has no essential significance for the constitutional concept of family.”
More recently, by a ruling of 11 January 2019 in a case concerning the issuance of a temporary residence permit in Lithuania to a foreign national in the event of family reunification, and in response to a request for interpretation lodged by the Supreme Administrative Court regarding the constitutionality of the Law on the Legal Status of Aliens, the Constitutional Court held that a refusal to issue such a permit may not be based solely on the gender identity and/or sexual orientation of a foreign national.
As to the State’s obligation to protect human dignity, it held:
“29. ... Under paragraph 2 of Article 21 of the Constitution, human dignity is protected by law; paragraph 3 of the same Article establishes a prohibition, inter alia, on degrading human dignity.
When interpreting those constitutional provisions, the Constitutional Court has held that dignity is an inalienable characteristic of a human, being of the greatest social value; every member of society has innate dignity; all people by nature are to be deemed equal in their dignity and rights. Human dignity should be regarded as constituting a special constitutional value. Dignity is characteristic of every human being, irrespective of how he/she assesses himself/herself or other people assess him/her.
The Constitution establishes the State’s duty to ensure the protection and defence of human dignity. State institutions and officials have the duty to respect human dignity as a special value ...
...
1. The Constitutional Court has held that private life is the personal life of an individual: his or her way of life, marital status, ... relationships with other people, views, convictions, or habits ..., his/her physical or psychological state, health, honour, dignity, etc. The inviolability of private life, which is enshrined in the Constitution, gives rise to the right of a person to privacy, which includes ... the physical and psychological inviolability of a person, his/her honour and reputation ...
The provision of Paragraph 4 of Article 22 of the Constitution is one of the most important guarantees of the inviolability of an individual’s private life: the private life of an individual is protected from unlawful interference by the State, other institutions, their officials, and other persons; this provision enshrines one of the aspects of the family concept confirming the constitutional significance of the family as a protected and fostered constitutional value.
If the private life of an individual is interfered with in an arbitrary and unlawful manner, then, at the same time, his/her honour and dignity are encroached upon; the protection of human dignity is inseparable from the protection of the private life of a person.
...
2. The Constitutional Court has held that discrimination is most often understood as a restriction of the rights of an individual on the basis of gender, race, nationality, language, origin, social status, belief, convictions, views, or other characteristics...
... It should be noted that one of the forms of discrimination prohibited under Article 29 of the Constitution is the restriction of the rights of a person on the grounds of his/her gender identity and/or sexual orientation; such a restriction should also be regarded as degrading human dignity.
3. [O]nly ... a State that has respect for the dignity of every human being can be considered to be truly democratic. It should be emphasised that, as noted by the Constitutional Court, the Constitution is an anti-majoritarian act, which protects an individual.
In view of this fact, ... it should be noted that, in a democratic state [operating] under the rule of law, the attitudes or stereotypes prevailing over a certain period of time among the majority of members of society may not, on the basis of the constitutionally important objectives, inter alia, ensuring public order ... or public policy, serve as constitutionally justifiable grounds for discriminating against persons solely on the basis of their gender identity and/or sexual orientation [or] for limiting the right, as guaranteed under Paragraphs 1 and 4 of Article 22 of the Constitution, to the protection of private and family life [or] the protection of relationships with other family members.
4. The Constitutional Court has noted on more than one occasion that the constitutional principle of the equality of persons, which is enshrined in Article 29 of the Constitution, should be followed both in passing and applying laws.”
Regarding the concepts of family and marriage, the Constitutional Court extrapolated:
“32.3. In its ruling of 28 September 2011, the Constitutional Court held that the constitutional concept of the family may not be derived solely from the institution of marriage, as enshrined in Paragraph 3 of Article 38 of the Constitution [see also paragraph 34 above];
...
the duty, stemming from Paragraph 1 of Article 38 of the Constitution, for the State to establish, by means of laws and other legal acts, a legal regulation that would ensure the protection of the family as a constitutional value implies the obligation of the State not only to establish such a legal regulation that, inter alia, would create the preconditions for the proper functioning of families, strengthen family relationships, and defend the rights and legitimate interests of family members, but also to regulate, by means of laws and other legal acts, family relationships in such a way that no preconditions would be created in respect of discrimination against certain participants in family relationships (such as against a man and a woman who live together without having registered their union as a marriage, their children/adopted children, or single parents raising their child/adopted child).
4. In this context, it should be noted that Paragraph 3 of Article 38 of the Constitution enshrines the constitutional concept of marriage concluded by the free mutual consent of a man and a woman. It should be emphasised that a different concept of marriage may not be enshrined under the laws of the Republic of Lithuania unless Paragraph 3 of Article 38 of the Constitution is amended accordingly.
The Constitutional Court has noted that marriage is one of the grounds for the constitutional institution of the family for the [purpose of the] creation of family relationships; it is a historically established family model that has undoubtedly been of exceptional value in the life of society and ensures the viability of the nation and the State, as well as their historical survival.
5. ... It should be noted that, unlike the constitutional concept of marriage, the constitutional concept of the family, among other things, is neutral in terms of gender. Under Paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 38 of the Constitution – interpreted in conjunction with the principle of the equality of persons and the prohibition of discrimination, as established in Article 29 of the Constitution – the Constitution protects and defends all families that meet the constitutional concept of the family, which is based on ... permanent or long-lasting relationships between family members (i.e. reciprocal understanding and responsibility, emotional affection, and help and similar bonds, as well as on the voluntary determination to take on certain rights and duties).” (References to earlier rulings of the Constitutional Court omitted.)
In this ruling the Constitutional Court made numerous references to the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union (hereinafter referred to as the CJEU), including the 5 June 2018 judgment in case C-673/16 (also see paragraph 66 below). The Constitutional Court also extensively relied on the case-law of the Court.
On 13 June 2000 the Constitutional Court examined the compliance of certain provisions of the Law on Education with the Constitution. It held:
“5. ...
The freedom of convictions and their expression establishes ideological, cultural and political pluralism. No views or ideology may be declared mandatory and thrust on an individual, i.e. the person who freely forms and expresses his own views and who is a member of an open, democratic, and civil society. This is an innate human freedom. The State must be neutral in matters of convictions, it does not have any right to establish a mandatory system of views.
Paragraph 7 of Article 43 of the Constitution establishes the principle of the absence of a State religion in Lithuania. This constitutional norm and the norm providing that there are traditional churches and religious organisations in Lithuania, mean that the tradition of religion should not be identified with its belonging to the State system: churches and religious organisations do not interfere with the activity of the State, its institutions and that of its officials, they do not form State policy, while the State does not interfere with the internal affairs of churches and religious organisations; they function freely according to their canons and statutes...
Construing the norm set down in Paragraph 7 of Article 43 of the Constitution that there shall not be a State religion in Lithuania, that of Paragraph 4 of the same article that churches and religious organisations shall function freely according to their canons and statutes, that of Paragraph 1 of Article 40 that State and municipal establishments of teaching and education shall be secular, as well as other constitutional provisions in a systemic manner, the conclusion should be drawn that the principle of the separateness of the State and the church is established in the Constitution. The principle of the separateness of the State and the church is the basis of the secularity of the State of Lithuania, its institutions and their activities. This principle, along with the freedom of convictions, thought, religion and conscience which is established in the Constitution, together with the constitutional principle of equality of all persons and the other constitutional provisions, determine neutrality of the State in matters of world view and religion.”
On 18 December 2012 the Supreme Court delivered a ruling in criminal case no. 2K-677/2012. The proceedings concerned the conviction of J.J. under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code and her acquittal under Article 170 § 3. Those verdicts had been reached by trial and appellate courts. J.J. was found guilty of having posted on the Internet site of a daily newspaper underneath an article entitled “Young people protesting in front of the Seimas have not captured parliamentarians’ attention” (Prie Seimo protestuojantys jaunuoliai nesulaukė parlamentarų dėmesio) the following comment:
“[S]ome people who empathise with ... such fags showing off are themselves the same [kind of] perverts and mentally ill people. Comments are being posted here also by participants in that public assembly of perverts. Shame on the organisers and participants of that assembly. There is a word – REPROBATE [PASILEIDĖLIS] – that characterises the person who cannot control his or her urges. Accordingly – reprobates are in front of our eyes. And not ordinary [reprobates], but reprobates of a special kind – these are PERVERTS [IŠKRYPĖLIAI]. They should be urgently sent to a psychiatric hospital. Their place is THERE.”
The Supreme Court firstly noted that, under Article 25 of the Constitution, everyone had the right to have his own convictions and to freely express them, but that that freedom was incompatible with criminal actions, including incitement to hatred, violence and discrimination. That principle was specified in more detail by Article 170 of the Criminal Code, which mainly aimed at protecting the equality of persons but also at protecting their honour and dignity. The Supreme Court also pointed out that for criminal liability under Article 170 § 2 to arise, it was sufficient for the person concerned to publicly make “negative, degrading or demeaning” (neigiami, niekinantys ar žeminantys) statements towards one of the groups of persons defined in that provision, or by “inciting and urging” (skatindamas ir kurstydamas) negative feelings, hatred or discrimination in others in respect of that group of persons, or a member thereof. In that connection, the crime was considered to have been committed once such statements were made (nusikaltimo sudėtis formalioji), and it was not relevant whether any consequences arose because of such statements (pasekmių atsiradimas nėra svarbus). As to the manner in which such a crime was committed – a necessary constitutive element of such a criminal act – the actions (or statement) in question had to be made publicly. In addition, the subjective element of a crime was that of direct intent (tiesioginė tyčia).
Regarding the facts of that particular case, the Supreme Court considered that the trial and appellate courts had failed to take into account the “context of the events” which had prompted the comment in question. Namely, they had overlooked the fact J.J. had been referring to an unauthorised event (nesankcionuotas renginys) that had taken place near the Seimas. Accordingly, for the Supreme Court, “the convicted person’s negative reaction towards the unlawful event as such had [constituted] her natural civic position (natūrali pilietiška pozicija)”. In that connection one also had to bear in mind the “provocative aspect” of the event and the unlawful manner, that is to say in the course of an unsanctioned public gathering, in which the participants of that event had chosen to express their views (pažiūros) and ideas. The Supreme Court held:
“The unauthorised event near the house of the Seimas [and] the eccentric behaviour of the participants truly did not contribute towards ... an understanding of others who had other points of view or towards building tolerance. The participants in that event, when using their right to freely express their beliefs and promote tolerance, should have had regard to the fact that that freedom is inseparable from the obligation to respect the views and traditions (pažiūros ir tradicijos) of others. This has a basis in Article 38 of the Constitution, [which states that] the family shall be the basis of society and the State ... and marriage shall be concluded upon the free mutual consent of a man and a woman. ... Under the legal regulation that today is in force in Lithuania, and the values protected by the Constitution, family – as a value protected by the Constitution – is a union between a man and a woman ...”
The Supreme Court furthermore noted that J.J. had been found guilty under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code of having publicly ridiculed (viešai niekino) “persons of homosexual orientation” by using the words “perverts” and “reprobates”. The Supreme Court then pointed out that according to both the Lithuanian Language Dictionary (Lietuvių kalbos žodynas) and the Contemporary Lithuanian Language Dictionary (Dabartinės lietuvių kalbos žodynas), a “pervert” was one who has a perversion, was a “degenerate” (išsigimėlis), or “a person who did not have a proper lifestyle” (netvarkingai gyvenąs žmogus). A “reprobate” was a person who was “naughty” (išdykęs), “fidgety” (nenuorama), “debauched” (palaidūnas) or “profligate” (ištvirkėlis). The Supreme Court thus concluded that even though those words had “negative and demeaning” (neigiama ir niekinama) connotations in the Lithuanian language, the mere use of those words in the impugned comment, without any concrete and direct statement inciting hatred or discrimination towards this group of persons, meant that there were no objective elements of a crime, as listed in Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code.
The Supreme Court likewise considered that although J.J.’s use of the terms “pervert” and “reprobate” to express her opinion of an unsanctioned public gathering of homosexual persons had not been ethical, they had not been dangerous enough to render her criminally liable under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code. Lastly, the use of only two such unethical terms in the public space was not sufficient to establish the subjective element of a crime – namely that of the direct intent to incite hatred or discrimination in Internet users reading J.J.’s comment against homosexual persons.
On 1 March 2016 the Supreme Court delivered a ruling in criminal case no. 2K-86-648/2016, which concerned V.G.’s conviction under Article 170 §§ 2 and 3 of the Criminal Code by the trial court and his acquittal by the appellate court. Although the prosecutor lodged an appeal on points of law, arguing that V.G.’s comment “Such broken-asses should be given some trimming” (Duot į kailį tokiems išdraskytašikniams) underneath an article about gay persons’ rights posted on the Internet portal of a major daily news website merited criminal liability, the Supreme Court did not share that view. It admitted that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation was just as perilous as discrimination on the basis of race or colour of skin. Moreover, comments on the Internet, in the event that they instigated hatred or violence, were dangerous, given the fact that persons could be inclined to write such comments because of the protection that anonymity afforded them and the fact that because of the nature of the Internet such comments could be read by a large number of persons, especially when such comments were published on one of the most popular websites, as was the situation in that case. The Supreme Court also pointed out that “the topic of sexual minorities’ rights in Lithuania was pertinent (tema aktuali) and was surrounded by a certain social tension that was linked, among other things, to a rather conservative (or negative) attitude on the part of part of society towards sexual minorities”.
That being so, the comment at issue in those criminal proceedings was not such as to merit limitations on freedom of expression and the application of the criminal law as an ultima ratio measure. The Supreme Court acknowledged that V.G.’s comment had been of a negative and demeaning nature and directed against homosexuals. Nevertheless, even if the author of that comment had used his right to freedom of expression inappropriately, such a comment could not have posed a real danger to the values protected by Article 170 of the Criminal Code, that is to say it could not have breached homosexuals’ right of equality, collectively or individually, or their dignity. The comment also could not have genuinely incited readers of the Internet portal in question to commit violence against that group or individuals belonging to that group. For the Supreme Court, that conclusion stemmed from the fact that the comment in question had been “laconic” rather than specific (that is to say the author had not further elaborated on his views in order to incite others against the group of persons in question); and “violence had been discussed only in an abstract manner and through the means of idiom”. The Supreme Court thus concluded that V.G.’s actions had lacked both the objective and subjective elements of a crime and that he had therefore been correctly acquitted.
On 2 March 2010 the Supreme Court delivered a ruling in criminal case no. 2K-91/2010, which concerned V.I.’s conviction for having used the expression “fucking nigger” in respect of a person of colour. The court noted that V.I. had used that term on one occasion in a public space – on the street in Vilnius. In an appeal on points of law V.I. had pleaded that she had used the term “negro”. The Supreme Court considered that the latter term, if used in Lithuania – which had no history of slave labour, segregation or social conflict on the basis of certain people belonging to another race and where the word “negro” therefore did not have a demeaning connotation – could not have been considered as discriminatory on the basis of race. This also stemmed from the fact that “[historically], there were practically no persons of non-Caucasian race living in Lithuania”. The image of a “negro” in Lithuanian culture was linked to that of a person who had been exploited and was hard-working, and who therefore deserved compassion. However, the word “nigger”, which came from the English language, had a demeaning and vulgar connotation, especially when used together with word “fucking”. Accordingly, V.I. had been correctly convicted under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code.
On 3 October 2017 the Supreme Court delivered a ruling in criminal case no. 2K-206-693/2017 upholding R.P.’s conviction under Article 170 §§ 2 and 3 of the Criminal Code for having posted a number of offensive and discriminatory comments in respect of persons of Russian ethnicity underneath articles posted on a major Internet news portal. The Supreme Court referred to the Court’s judgments in Mižigárová v. Slovakia (no. 74832/01, § 114, 14 December 2010) and Nachova and Others v. Bulgaria ([GC], nos. 43577/98 and 43579/98, § 145, ECHR 2005VII) to the effect that discrimination on account of, inter alia, a person’s ethnic origin was a form of racial discrimination – a particularly invidious kind of discrimination that, in view of its perilous consequences, required from the authorities special vigilance and a vigorous reaction.
On 14 January 2011, in criminal case no. 1A-111/2011, the Vilnius Regional Court upheld the acquittal of Ž.R., who had been on trial under Article 170 § 1 of the Criminal Code for having once shouted: “These bastards ... should go back to their homeland, to Israel” during a public demonstration in Vilnius. Although the prosecutor argued that that statement had been discriminatory towards the Jewish people, the appellate court found that the Jewish nation had not been explicitly mentioned in that statement. In the view of the court, Israel was the homeland not only of the Jews, but also of persons of other nationalities, such as Arabs. Furthermore, a large number of Jewish people lived in the United States of America, and those people considered that country to be their homeland.
On 26 May 2011 the Klaipėda Regional Court, in case no. 1A-411-107/2011, found V.M. guilty under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code and gave him a fine. The case concerned a comment posted by V.M. on the Internet: “Children should be educated not to become faggots. And should they wish to become such, they should be thrown out of home like trash” (Vaikus reikia auklėti, kad netaptų pederastais. O jei užsimano juo būti, reikia iš namų išmesti, kaip kokią šiukšlę). The court considered that although the comment had not called for violence against homosexuals, it had clearly been degrading and discriminatory. The court also emphasised that the comment posted on the Internet had been public and accessible to a large number of people, not only to one or several persons participating in a discussion on the Internet. Moreover, by placing such a comment in a public space (viešojoje erdvėje) the author had aimed at his opinion becoming known to other Internet users, and this was the manner in which his intent to commit the crime manifested itself.
In the appeal (see paragraph 19 above), the LGL Association relied on the following decisions of 5 June 2014 and 27 June 2014.
By a final decision of 5 June 2014 in criminal case no. 1-900-560/2014, the Kaunas District Court found T.K. guilty under Article 170 § 3 of the Criminal Code for having posted underneath an article on the Internet site of a major newspaper the comment “Fucking faggots, they should all be hanged without mercy, they should all be exterminated”. T.K. had confessed in full and had expressed regret for having posted such a comment. The criminal proceedings in that case had been brought by a non-governmental organisation, the Human Rights Monitoring Institute.
By a final decision of 27 June 2014 in criminal case no. 1-1048-288/2014 the Kaunas District Court convicted but released on parole T.M., who had placed the comment “I would categorise homosexual people as handicapped” underneath an article on an Internet news portal. The court delivered that decision having established that although the comment had been correctly deemed to fall under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code, T.M. had fully confessed and regretted his actions. In that case T.M.’s identity had been established through his computer’s IP address, which had been provided by his Internet service provider, and criminal proceedings had been opened on the basis of a complaint lodged by a non-governmental organisation, the Tolerant Youth Association (Tolerantiško jaunimo asociacija). The court also cited the conclusion reached by the Inspector to the effect that the comment at issue had been intended to ridicule homosexuals.
On 24 May 2016, in criminal case no. 1A-335-209/2016, the Vilnius Regional Court found D.B.-L. guilty of inciting hatred against Jews. The court noted that D.B.-L., having received a university education, and being mentally healthy, understood the meaning of words such as “Juden RAUS!”, “Lithuania for Lithuanians, and Jews to the oven”, that she had posted in the comments sections underneath a number of articles on the Internet website of a major daily newspaper. The court confirmed that the crimes set out in Article 170 §§ 2 and 3 were committed once the expression containing a hateful comment had been made. The court also underlined that D.B.-L. had “posted her so-called comments twelve times! Such acts cannot be seen as accidental or imprudent (atsitiktinės ar neapgalvotos)”. That being so, the court held that the statements that D.B.-L. had made had not incited violence and that her actions therefore fell under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code, instead of the third paragraph of that provision.
On 7 July 2017 in criminal case no. 1A-151-360/2017 the Klaipėda Regional Court upheld V.L.’s conviction under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code. It established that on an unidentified social media profile V.L. had posted numerous anti-Semitic and anti-homosexual comments, as well as comments praising Lithuania’s occupation by the USSR. The appellate court pointed out that V.L.’s actions had not been accidental; they had been undertaken systematically and with the aim of stirring up discord in society (sukiršinti visuomenę).
By court order (baudžiamasis įsakymas) of the Kaunas District Court in case no. 1-2500-738/2014 P.Š. had been found guilty under Article 170 § 3 of the Criminal Code for having made a single anti-homosexual comment “One should call Breivik to come to the [gay parade in Kaunas]” on Facebook page. P.Š. had confessed of the crime and been given a fine.
On 27 August 2014 the Kaunas District Court in case no. 1-2540-311/2014 found R.P. guilty under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code for having made a single comment on the Internet site of a major daily “better don’t go to the streets faggots, because there will be much blood”. R.P. had also fully confessed of the crime and been given a fine.
On 17 April 2015 the Trakai District Court found L.B. guilty under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code and sentenced him to six months of deprivation of liberty, for having thrown eggs during a concert at a singer of homosexual orientation.
According to the information on the Internet site of the LGL Association, it is the only non-governmental organisation in Lithuania exclusively representing the interests of the local LGBT community. It is one of the most stable and mature organisations within the civic sector in the country, founded in December 1993. It aims at attaining effective social inclusion and integration of the local LGBT community in Lithuania and strives for consistent progress in the field of human rights for LGBT people.
The statutes of the LGL Association, approved in 2015, provide that one of its main tasks is that of promoting measures to prevent homophobic hate crimes (point 10.1) and assisting people who have suffered discrimination to realise their right to a defence, as well as representing such persons before pre-trial and other institutions and before courts at all instances (point 10.3).
The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (hereinafter – “the ECRI”) on 7 June 2016 published a report on Lithuania. The report noted that in addition to incidents of racist hate speech and violence, which were mainly directed at historical minorities, Lithuania was experiencing a problem involving the widespread incitement of homophobic/transphobic hatred and acts of violence against LGBT people. The growing level of intolerance against sexual minorities had remained largely unchecked. Furthermore, discrimination against LGBT people persisted in many areas of social life.
As to homophobic/transphobic hate speech, including that posted on the Internet, the ECRI report specifically noted:
Homo-/transphobic hate speech
“22. In 2012, out of the 263 recorded incidents of hate speech, 47 were of a homo-/transphobic nature. In 2011, there had been 208 such incidents. According to human rights organisations met by ECRI’s delegation, homo- and transphobic hate speech, verbal harassment and inappropriate comments are common amongst the general public, as well as in the media and political discourse, resulting in LGBT persons feeling constantly discriminated against and excluded in day-to-day life. LGBT NGOs report a general atmosphere of intimidation, which results in LGBT persons not feeling confident to be open about their identity. Homo-/transphobic hate speech has also been described by civil society organisations as creating an atmosphere in which violence against LGBT persons becomes increasingly accepted. ...”
Hate speech on the Internet
“25. In Lithuania, hatred is often incited in cyberspace through online comments, blogs, social networks and other fora. Some 90% of reported hate speech cases ... are occurring in this sphere. Human rights activists monitoring hate speech in Lithuania noticed a trend towards creating web-pages hosted on US servers to post hate speech and attempt to circumvent Lithuanian anti-hate speech legislation. The sites are usually not restricted or shut down and remain available to be viewed also by Lithuanian Internet users.
Homo- and transphobic hate speech is widespread on the Internet, in particular in online fora and in comments sections of news portals, rather than the articles themselves. Online hate speech goes largely unchecked and unpunished...
The Internet is also used to make threats of violence. There have been several cases of threats against members of minorities, such as Poles and Jews. On numerous occasions, threats of violence were also made against LGBT persons or groups, especially through social networks”.
As to measures taken by the Lithuanian authorities, the ECRI report noted:
“Measures taken by the authorities
“28. ECRI considers hate speech particularly worrying because it is often a first step in the process towards actual violence. Appropriate responses to hate speech include law enforcement channels (criminal and administrative law sanctions, civil law remedies) but also other mechanisms to counter its harmful effects, such as self-regulation, prevention and counter speech. The Lithuanian authorities have taken various measures to combat hate speech, but more needs to be done.
- Criminal law, administrative law and civil law responses
The Prosecutor General’s Office reported that out of the thirty six pre-trial investigations under Article 170 of the Criminal Code on incitement against a national, racial, religious or other group carried out in 2010, 23 cases were transferred to the courts. 13 persons were found guilty and sentenced. In 2014, out of 106 cases reported to the law enforcement authorities, 43 resulted in prosecution.
...
... The woman, who in 2009 had posted homophobic comments on a news website ... was convicted by the Kaunas District Court on 9 March 2012 of incitement to hatred under Article 170 § 2 of the Criminal Code. However, on 18 December 2012, the Supreme Court overturned the verdict and found that her words had been merely inappropriate, but did not constitute incitement to hatred. The Supreme Court was also of the opinion that the woman’s homophobic comments were provoked by the nature of the pro-LGBT event in front of the Seimas and the “eccentric conduct” of the protesters which violated the constitutionally protected traditional family values. Moreover, the Supreme Court emphasised that, in its view, criminal prosecution of homophobic hate speech should only be a measure of last resort [see paragraphs 39-43 above]. In spite of the Supreme Court judgement mentioned above, a Vilnius district court, in January 2013, found a person guilty of encouraging mockery, defiance, discrimination and physical violence against a group of people because of their sexual orientation and ordered him to pay a fine ... for having posted on Facebook: “What we need is another Hitler to exterminate those fags because there’s just too many of them multiplying.”
ECRI would like to point out to the Lithuanian authorities that in a general climate of homo-/transphobia, firm, proportionate and appropriate actions, including criminal prosecutions, need to be taken to combat hate speech.
A number of threats of violent attacks have been investigated by the prosecutorial authorities, but human rights defenders met by ECRI’s delegation criticise that some cases were dismissed by the courts on the basis that the threats did not appear sufficiently likely to be carried out.
...
Training of law enforcement officials and members of the judiciary
In 2012, 37 judges and 15 prosecutors were trained on legal and social aspects in the fight against discrimination. Furthermore, the Lithuanian authorities trained a total of 350 police officers on the fight against racism and on promoting tolerance in general, but have not yet carried out planned trainings for them on relevant provisions of the Criminal Code, notably [Article 170], which had been part of one of ECRI’s priority recommendations ... However, the authorities informed ECRI that an agreement between the Ministry of Interior and the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) of the OSCE to provide assistance for such trainings, was concluded.
ECRI recommends that the authorities fully investigate racist and/or homo-/transphobic threats and ensure that a lack of probability does not constitute an obstacle for convicting a perpetrator. Furthermore, the training programme for police officers on the fight against racism and promotion of tolerance should be expanded and the planned training sessions on relevant provisions of the Criminal Code be conducted. ECRI also recommends that the authorities carry out an evaluation of the impact the trainings had with a view to ensuring that further elements necessary to enable law enforcement officials and members of the judiciary to fight racist and homo-/transphobic hate speech, including threats, more effectively are identified and included in future training programmes.
Monitoring and combatting online hate speech
The previously existing Special Investigation Division within the Prosecutor General’s Office, which also dealt with hate crime, was dissolved in 2010, mainly due to lack of finance. The functions of this division have been allocated to two specialised prosecutors in the Prosecutor General’s Office and some 20 prosecutors at district level. The authorities also informed ECRI’s delegation that cybercrime investigation units have been established at 10 district police headquarters. These units are tasked to investigate criminal offences committed on the Internet, including racist and homophobic hate speech. Furthermore, the Cybercrime Law came into effect on 1 January 2015 and is the new legal basis for being able to close websites and Internet fora in cases where criminal content is discovered.
Lithuania also participated in the EU programme Safer Internet, under which the Inspector for Journalist Ethics monitors online content. In 2014, 102 texts were reviewed and in 48 cases, expert advice was sought. Most of the investigated texts were not found in the news sections themselves, but in the readers’ comments sections. The largest group concerned racist hate speech, followed by anti-LGBT hate speech. The Inspector also organised eight training sessions for journalists in 2014.”
The ECRI report then specifically tackled the issue of homophobic/transphobic violence:
“Homo-/transphobic violence
All LGBT and human rights activists met by the ECRI delegation agreed that homo- and transphobic violence is a growing problem in Lithuania. There is, however, no full official data on such acts. According to LGBT representatives, this is mainly due to a fear of revealing one’s LGBT identity and lack of trust in the willingness of the police to investigate such crimes. According to the 2013 EU LGBT Survey, 39% of the 821 respondents in Lithuania said they were physically/sexually attacked or threatened with violence, but only 16% reported incidents of hate-motivated violence to the police. A monitoring report prepared by a local NGO reveals nine instances of violence against LGBT persons that occurred between January and November 2013, including one case of extreme physical violence, four cases of assault, and four cases of damage against property. The authorities, on the other hand, did not record any cases for 2013.
The scale of the problem is also underestimated because of lack of awareness among police officers of the importance to register homo-/transphobic motivations as such. An example is the case of a young man who was beaten up in a bar in Vilnius, after having been approached by the perpetrator with the words ‘Are you gay?’ When he reported the case, the police were unwilling to record it as a homophobic attack and in the course of collecting testimony from the victim an investigator allegedly implied that he had been attacked because he provoked the perpetrator with unwanted advances of a sexual nature.
Fear of living openly with one’s LGBT identity increases further as a result of violent attacks against public figures who do so, in particular if the bias-motivation is not formally acknowledged and the perpetrators are not apprehended and convicted. On 24 July 2014, for example, an explosive device was thrown at the openly homosexual singer R.K. during a concert in the village of Linksmakalnis. This was not the first attack against the singer. In February 2013, eggs were thrown at him during a concert, hitting him in the face [see also § 54 in fine above]. In early July 2014, the partner of a transsexual artist was severely beaten by two attackers who also burned his face. They used homophobic insults prior to the attack.”
As to measures taken by the Lithuanian authorities to combat hate crimes, the ECRI report specifically noted:
“Measures taken by the authorities
According to the OSCE/ODHIR hate crime statistics, two cases were prosecuted per year in 2011, 2012 and 2013. These six court cases, with five convictions achieved, cover 40% of the 15 cases recorded by the police during this period.
The authorities report that within the framework of the Inter-Institutional Action Plan on the Promotion of Anti-discrimination for 2012-2014, training courses were organised for police officers, prosecutors and judges on racist and homo-/transphobic violence. Although an evaluation of these trainings is not available, there seems to be a growing trend to investigate incidents of racist violence more effectively, including attacks against property. In a case of vandalism against a synagogue, for example, the perpetrator was speedily identified, prosecuted and sentenced to payment of a fine. The same cannot be said, however, for homo-/transphobic acts of violence...
The police service has an internal complaints mechanism, which also deals with complaints made by persons alleging to be victims of acts of racist and/or homo-/transphobic violence by police officers. There is, however, no independent specialised police complaints mechanism, which could be approached by individuals whose lack of trust in the police service prevents them from lodging a complaint.
ECRI recommends further training for police officers, prosecutors and judges on how to deal with racist, and in particular homo-/transphobic acts of violence. This should include improved procedures for recognising bias-motivations, as well as confidence-building measures between the police and minority representatives and LGBT groups. ECRI also recommends the creation of an independent police complaints service that will be tasked to investigate, inter alia, allegations of racist and/or homo-/transphobic violence committed by law enforcement officials.”
As to other topics specific to Lithuania, including legislation on the protection of minors against harmful impact and the position taken by the Inspector, the ECRI report also noted:
“Legislation: Restrictions of public information and awareness-raising
Current legislation limits some types of public activities of LGBT persons. [The] Law on the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effect of Public Information ... bans ‘public defiance of family values’, which includes public information which ‘expresses contempt for family values, (or) encourages the concept of entry into a marriage and creation of a family other than that stipulated in the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania and the Civil Code of the Republic of Lithuania’, which defines marriage as between a man and a woman.
This law has been applied on several occasions recently. In May 2014, following complaints from the Lithuanian Parents’ Forum and a group of conservative MPs to the Ministry of Culture and the Lithuanian University of Educational Sciences (LEU), the children’s book Gintarinė širdis (Amber Heart) by author [N.D.], which had been published six months previously by the LEU, was withdrawn from bookshops. The book contains fairy tales featuring members of socially vulnerable groups, such as same-sex couples, Roma, and disabled people, and aims at promoting tolerance and respect for diversity among children. Following the complaints, the LEU explained the withdrawal of the book by suddenly describing it as ‘harmful, primitive and biased homosexual propaganda’. Furthermore, the Office of the Inspector of Journalistic Ethics concluded that two fairy tales that promote tolerance for same-sex couples are harmful to minors. The Inspectorate’s experts deemed the stories in violation of the Law on the Protection of Minors because they encourage ‘the concept of entry into a marriage and creation of a family other than stipulated in the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania and the Civil Code of the Republic of Lithuania’. The experts also considered the stories to be ‘harmful, invasive, direct and manipulative’.
In September 2014, fearing a potential violation of the Law on Protection of Minors, Lithuanian TV stations refused to broadcast a TV spot promoting tolerance towards LGBT people which had been prepared by an NGO for the campaign Change It. Subsequently, this decision was confirmed by the Inspector of Journalistic Ethics on the grounds that the TV spot seemed to portray a same-sex family model in a positive light, which the Inspectorate considered to have a negative impact on minors and to be in violation of the law.”
Most recently, on 6 June 2019 the ECRI published conclusions on the implementation of the recommendations in respect of Lithuania, subject to interim follow-up:
“2.) In its report on Lithuania (fifth monitoring cycle), ECRI recommended that the Lithuanian authorities, as part of the Inter-Institutional Action Plan for 2015-2020 on Non-Discrimination, set up an inter-institutional working group to develop a comprehensive strategy to tackle effectively the problem of racist and homo-/transphobic hate speech. This group should include the relevant authorities, as well as civil society organisations, including, amongst others, representatives of the LGBT community.
In November 2016, the Lithuanian Ministry of Interior created a working group on hate crime monitoring, analysis and evaluation. ECRI has been informed by the authorities that this working group consists of experts from the Ministry of Interior, including the Ministry’s Information Technology and Communications Department, the Police Department, the Criminal Police Bureau, the Prosecutor’s Office, the Government Department for National Minorities, the Law Institute and civil society organisations, including the Human Rights Monitoring Institute, the Lithuanian Centre for Human Rights and representatives of the Jewish community and the LGBT community. The group met twice in 2016 and 2017. No meetings took place in 2018 and uncertainties remain as to the agreed tasks of the working group. Some activities, however, continued. On 8 March 2018, a seminar took place organised by the OSCE/ODIHR and the EU-FRA, jointly with the Ministry of Interior, for civil society members of the working group on improving monitoring of hate crime and the collection of related data in Lithuania in line with international standards.
ECRI was also informed that the Prosecutor’s Office, the Office of the Inspector for Journalist Ethics and the Ministry of Interior started the implementation of a joint 20-months project entitled ‘Strengthening responses to hate crimes and hate speech in Lithuania’. The project aims to ensure effective investigations, prosecutions and adequate sentencing in hate crime cases; raise awareness among national authorities about the impact of hate crime and hate speech; understand the needs of vulnerable communities; address the problem of under-reporting and intensify efforts to counter on-line hate speech.
Furthermore, in 2017, 12 police officers took part in the OSCE/ODIHR’s ‘Training against Hate Crimes for Law Enforcement (TAHCLE)’ programme and in 2018 the Police Commissioner General ordered the training of some 200 law enforcement officers on hate crime issues at the Lithuanian Police School and its partner institutions. Such training for police officers is implementing measures foreseen in the Action Plan for the Promotion of Non-discrimination (2017-2019). While ECRI recognises the positive intentions contained in the Action Plan, its overall level of coordination does not appear to be well developed, which is also highlighted by the fact that the Action Plan was adopted by only one Ministry, namely the Ministry of Social Security and Labour, and shows no evidence of being based on an integrated interagency strategy.
In spite of some useful steps taken by the authorities, ECRI concludes that the various measures do not yet constitute a comprehensive strategic approach to effectively tackle the problem of racist and homo-/transphobic hate speech. The inter-institutional working group has also not arrived at developing such a strategy. ECRI encourages the Lithuanian authorities to continue and scale up its efforts to prevent and combat hate speech and hate crime and to overcome fragmentation by making effective use of the existing working group.
ECRI considers that this recommendation has been partially implemented.”
On 2 April 2012 the European Union Fundamental Rights Agency launched, online, a study entitled the “European Union survey of discrimination and victimisation of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons”. The results showed that in Lithuania 61% of Lithuanian LGBT respondents had felt discriminated against or harassed on the grounds of their sexual orientation within the previous twelve months – the highest proportion in the EU, where the overall average stood at 47%. Furthermore, 27% of Lithuanian respondents had felt discriminated against while at work within the previous twelve months – the second highest number in the EU, where the overall average stood at 19%. The average number of violent incidents against LGBT people in Lithuania was 525 per 1,000 respondents – again, the highest proportion in the EU.
On the 1 October, 2015 the European Commission (EC) published the results of the Eurobarometer survey “Discrimination in the EU in 2015”. 27,718 respondents from the European Union (EU) (including 1,004 respondents from Lithuania) took part in the survey that was conducted from 30 May to 8 June, 2015. Lithuanian respondents indicated that the most widespread forms of discrimination are on the grounds of sexual orientation (57%), age (50%), and gender identity (46%).
50% of all Lithuanian respondents stated that gay, lesbian and bisexual people should not necessarily have the same rights as heterosexual people (EU average was 23%). 71% of Lithuanians who participated in the study would not support same-sex marriages being legalized throughout Europe (EU average was 33%). 59% would feel uncomfortable about having an LGB person in the highest elected political position (EU average was 21%); 44% of Lithuanians would feel uncomfortable about having an LGB person as one of their colleagues at work (EU average was 13%); 66% disapproved of sexual relationships between two persons of the same sex (EU average was 27%); 47% of Lithuanians do not agree that curriculum and material at school should include information about diversity in terms of sexual orientation (EU average was 27%).
On 7 November 2013, in Joined Cases C‑199/12 to C‑201/12, the Court of Justice of the European Union (hereinafter – the CJEU), when interpreting Directive 2004/83EC in connection with questions concerning minimum standards relating to the conditions for the granting of refugee status or subsidiary protection status, including membership of a particular social group, held:
“When assessing an application for refugee status, the competent authorities cannot reasonably expect, in order to avoid the risk of persecution, the applicant for asylum to conceal his homosexuality in his country of origin or to exercise reserve in the expression of his sexual orientation.”
On 5 June 2018, in Case C-673/16, the Grand Chamber of the CJEU delivered a preliminary ruling, holding that in a situation in which a Union citizen has made use of his freedom of movement by moving to and taking up genuine residence in a Member State other than that of which he is a national, and, whilst there, has created or strengthened a family life with a third-country national of the same sex to whom he is joined by a marriage lawfully concluded in the host Member State, Article 21(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, providing the Union citizens’ right to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States, must be interpreted as precluding the competent authorities of the Member State of which the Union citizen is a national from refusing to grant that third-country national a right of residence in the territory of that Member State on the ground that the law of that Member State does not recognise marriage between persons of the same sex.