The case originated in an application (no. 46193/13) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Yuriy Vasylyovych Chanyev (“the applicant”), on 9 July 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. S. Zlati, a lawyer practising in Reni. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms N. Sevostianova, from the Ministry of Justice.
On 3 September 2013 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in Izmayil.
On 28 November 2012 the applicant was arrested by the police on suspicion of having murdered Mr S. earlier the same day.
On 30 November 2012 the investigating judge of the Reni Local Court of the Odessa Region ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 27 January 2013.
On 25 January 2013 the investigating judge extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 27 February 2013.
On 26 February 2013 the indictment in the applicant’s case was approved.
On 27 February 2013 the indictment and the criminal case file were forwarded by the prosecutor to the court.
On 28 February 2013 the applicant’s lawyer requested the Head of the Izmail SIZO to release the applicant immediately given that the period of detention ordered by the court had expired on 27 February. By a letter of the same day, the Head of the Izmail SIZO replied to the applicant’s lawyer that, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, after the forwarding of the criminal case file to the trial court it was for that court to decide on the applicant’s continued detention.
The same day the lawyer complained to the prosecutor about the failure of the prison authorities to release the applicant. In reply to that letter, the Odessa Regional Prosecutor’s Office informed the applicant’s lawyer that the applicant’s pre-trial detention had been extended in January 2013 until 27 February 2013 and that on the latter date the criminal case file against the applicant had been forwarded to the trial court; the prosecutor’s office therefore considered that the applicant’s rights and interests had not been violated.
On 11 March 2013 the lawyer submitted a request to the investigating judge for the applicant’s release. He noted that the applicant’s pre-trial detention ordered by the judge had expired on 27 February 2013 and that no decision had been taken on the applicant’s continued detention.
On 14 March 2013 the investigating judge rejected the above request. With reference to Article 331 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”), the judge noted that on the last date of the applicant’s pre-trial detention, that is, on 27 February 2013, his criminal case had been referred to the trial court, which had two months to decide on his continued detention. The judge concluded that there had been no grounds for the applicant’s release on 28 February 2013.
On 25 March 2013 the Odessa Regional Court of Appeal upheld the decision of 14 March 2013.
On 15 April 2013 the Izmayil Local Court of the Odessa Region held a preliminary hearing in which it ordered the applicant’s continued detention.
On 5 November 2013 the applicant was found guilty of murder and sentenced to eleven years’ imprisonment.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
“Every person has the right to freedom and personal inviolability.
No one shall be arrested or held in custody other than pursuant to a reasoned court decision and [then] only on the grounds of and in accordance with the procedure established by law.
...
Any person who is arrested or detained shall be informed without delay of the reasons for his or her arrest or detention and apprised of his or her rights, and from the moment of detention shall be given the opportunity to defend himself or herself in person or to have the legal assistance of defence counsel.
Any person who is detained has the right to challenge his or her detention in court at any time.
The relatives of an arrested or detained person shall be informed immediately of his or her arrest or detention.”
The relevant provisions of the CCP read as follows:
Article 176
General provisions on preventive measures
“1.  Preventive measures are:
...
(5)  detention on remand.
...
Preventive measures shall be applied during the investigation by the investigating judge at the request of the investigator following agreement with the prosecutor, or at the request of the prosecutor; during the trial, they shall be applied by the court at the request of the prosecutor.”
Article 197
Term of validity of the ruling on detention or continued detention
“1.  The term of validity of the ruling by the investigating judge or the court ordering an accused’s detention or continued detention may not exceed sixty days.
...
The period of detention may be extended by the investigating judge within the time-limits of the pre-trial investigation in accordance with the procedure laid down in this Code...”
Article 203
Immediate termination of preventive measures
“1.  A ruling on the application of a preventive measure shall cease to have effect after expiry of the period of validity of the ruling on the choice of preventive measure, following delivery of a judgment acquitting the defendant, or after termination of the criminal proceedings in accordance with the procedure prescribed by this Code.”
Article 206
General duties of judges regarding the protection of human rights
“1.  Any investigating judge whose territorial jurisdiction covers a person held in custody shall be entitled to issue a ruling ordering any public authority or official to ensure respect for that person’s rights.
Whenever an investigating judge receives information from any source which gives ground for a reasonable suspicion that there is a person within the court’s territorial jurisdiction who has been deprived of his or her liberty without a valid court decision ... that judge shall be obliged to issue a ruling ordering any public authority or official in whose custody the person is held to bring that person immediately before the investigating judge in order to verify the grounds for the deprivation of his or her liberty.
The investigating judge shall be obliged to release the person deprived of his or her liberty unless the public authority or official holding the person in custody presents a court decision which has already entered into force or demonstrates the existence of other legal grounds for depriving the person of his or her liberty.
...
Irrespective of the request by the investigator or public prosecutor, the investigating judge shall be obliged to release the person from custody unless the public authority or official keeping him or her in custody demonstrates:
(1)  the existence of legal grounds for detaining the person concerned without a ruling by the investigating judge or the court...”
Article 315
Resolution of issues related to preparation for trial
“...
During the preparatory court hearing the court shall be entitled, at the request of participants in the trial, to impose, alter or revoke measures to ensure the conduct of the criminal proceedings, including any preventive measures imposed on the accused. When considering such requests, the court shall follow the rules set forth in Chapter II of this Code [Measures to Ensure the Conduct of Criminal Proceedings]. In the absence of such a request from the parties to the trial, the measures to ensure the conduct of the criminal proceedings that were selected at the pre-trial investigation stage shall be deemed to be extended.”
Article 331
Imposing, revoking or altering a preventive measure in court
“1.  During the trial the court, at the request of the prosecution or the defence, may issue a ruling altering, revoking or imposing a preventive measure against the accused.
...
Regardless of whether such requests have been made, the court shall be obliged to examine the reasonableness of the accused’s continued detention within two months from the date of receipt of the indictment by the court ... or from the date of the court ruling ordering the accused’s detention as a preventive measure...”
The Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers, which under Article 46 § 2 of the Convention has the duty to supervise the execution of the Court’s judgments, is currently examining the execution by Ukraine of the Court’s judgment in Kharchenko v. Ukraine (no. 40107/02, 10 February 2011), which summarised shortcomings identified in the Ukrainian system of detention on remand. One of the issues highlighted in that judgment was the detention of persons without any judicial decision during the period between the end of the investigation and the beginning of the trial. According to information published on the Committee’s website, the case is currently under “enhanced supervision”. The most recent developments were in February-March 2013. On 21 February 2013 the Ukrainian Government submitted a Revised Action Plan in which they reiterated that Parliament had adopted a new Code of Criminal Procedure which had come into force and had largely eliminated the legislative shortcomings underlying recurrent violations of Article 5 of the Convention. At its 1164th meeting (5-7 March 2013) the Committee of Ministers noted, among other things, that further clarifications were required from the Ukrainian authorities regarding the legislative changes in question.