The case originated in an application (no. 48093/15) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Sorin Antohi (“the applicant”), on 24 September 2015.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Grigoriu, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 20 April 2016 notice of some of the applicant’s complaints under Articles 3 and 6 of the Convention was given to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1972 and is detained in Jilava Prison.
On 31 October 2011 the Bucharest prosecutor’s office indicted the applicant for embezzlement, fraud and the forgery of signed documents (fals ȋn ȋnscrisuri sub semnătură privată) and sent his case for trial.
The applicant was assisted by his chosen legal representative throughout the proceedings.
During hearings held between 15 November 2011 and 3 December 2013 the Bucharest District Court (“the District Court”), sitting in a singlejudge formation (Judge O.R.N.), heard the applicant. The court also heard twenty-seven witnesses in the case, including the witnesses L.B. and I.O.
During hearings held between 3 December 2013 and 25 February 2014 the District Court’s single-judge formation which examined the applicant’s case changed repeatedly.
At a hearing on 23 September 2014 the District Court, sitting in a singlejudge formation (Judge F.M.P.), heard a financial expert in respect of objections raised by the applicant to the expert financial report which had been produced in the case, and dismissed the applicant’s objections. In addition, the court dismissed an application by the applicant to have the witnesses F. H., L.B., and I.O. heard by the court. It held that hearing these witnesses was unnecessary, because there was sufficient evidence in the file for the applicant to support his defence. The court dismissed an application by the applicant for him to be allowed to give a supplementary statement (supliment de declarație). It held that there were no new elements that would require the applicant to be heard again. It also held that, during the deliberations, he could have presented precise arguments in his defence by relying on all of the available evidence.
On 29 October 2014 the District Court, sitting in a single-judge formation (Judge F.M.P.), convicted the applicant of embezzlement, fraud and the forgery of signed documents, sentenced him to thirteen years’ imprisonment, and ordered him to pay compensation in respect of the pecuniary damage caused as a result of his actions. It held that the applicant’s actions had been proved by the evidence adduced in the case. Thus, the testimonies of the representatives of the injured parties and the available documents had been corroborated by the witness testimonies, the expert financial report, the financial expert’s oral and written submissions, the available financial documents, a graphology report, other documents, and partly by the applicant’s statements. The court noted that in his statements given to the authorities the applicant had acknowledged committing the offence of forging signed documents. However, his statements concerning the offences of embezzlement and fraud had been inconsistent and had tried to minimise the criminal aspect of his actions and the damage caused.
The applicant appealed against the judgment. He argued that the single-judge formation of the court which had examined his case during the first-instance proceedings had changed repeatedly (see paragraph 9 above). Consequently, the judge who had convicted him had not been the judge who had heard him and the witnesses directly. Moreover, the District Court had dismissed his application to hear the witnesses F. H., L.B., and I.O. (see paragraph 10 above), even though they could have provided relevant clarification as to the embezzlement offence and how much damage had actually been caused by the fraudulent acts of which he had been accused.
At a hearing on 19 March 2015 the Bucharest Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”), sitting as a panel of two judges, namely Judges C.B. and I.C, heard the applicant with regard to the charges which had been brought against him. Amongst other things, the applicant acknowledged that he had committed the offences of fraud and the forgery of signed documents. However, he stated that he had not intended to cause damage by committing fraud. With regard to the embezzlement offence, he also acknowledged only that he had appropriated some funds in order to pay off a debt, because a creditor had been blackmailing him. The applicant signed his statement and certified that he had read and agreed with its contents.
On the same date the court dismissed an application by the applicant for the court to hear the financial expert, F.H., R.S. and nine other witnesses. It held that the points that could be proved by the testimonies of the expert and those witnesses had already been covered by other evidence which had been added to the case file, in particular documents and other testimonies. The court took into account a statement by the applicant that he was asking for the evidence to be added to the file because he intended to prove that he had not been an administrator, and therefore could not have committed the offence of embezzlement.
By a final judgment of 26 March 2015 the Court of Appeal, sitting as a panel of two judges, namely Judges C.B. and I.C, dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The court held that the procedural guarantees set out by the new Code of Criminal Procedure (the “CCP” – see paragraph 20 below) had been respected in the applicant’s case. In particular, the single judge who had convicted the applicant had also been present during the oral arguments (dezbatere) in the case. Therefore, the changes in the singlejudge formation of the court had not affected the applicant’s right of defence, including his right to have evidence adduced before a judge.
The court further held that according to the available evidence – namely documents, the testimonies of the witnesses heard by the investigating authorities and the courts, and the expert financial report – the elements of the offence of embezzlement had been present. In addition, the court held that the elements of the offence of fraud had also been present. In this connection, the court relied on L.B.’s testimonies (see paragraph 8 above) in conjunction with the conclusions of the expert financial report. Lastly, the court held that the elements of the offence of forgery of signed documents had been present, relying on the applicant’s repeated admissions that he had committed this offence, other documents, and the conclusions of the expert graphology report produced in the case.
In his initial letters to the Court, the applicant complained under Article 3 of the Convention of the conditions of his detention after 1 July 2013 in Bucharest police station no. 15 and central remand facility no. 1, Jilava Prison, and the cells he had been quartered in at the courthouse, including the failure to separate smokers from non-smokers. He referred to: overcrowding, squalid cells, being detained with smokers even though he was a non-smoker, insufficient light, and sanitary facilities lacking privacy.
On 24 April 2018 the applicant informed the Court that he wished to withdraw his above-mentioned complaint because his prison sentence had been reduced on account of the inadequate conditions of his detention, as required by recently adopted domestic legislation on the serving of prison sentences.
The relevant provisions of the former CCP concerning the composition of judicial panels, in force until 31 January 2014, are set out in the case of Cutean v. Romania (no. 53150/12, § 37, 2 December 2014).
Article 354 §§ 2 and 3 of the new CCP, in force from 1 February 2014 onwards, provide that a judicial panel must remain the same throughout a trial. Where this is not possible, the panel may be changed before the oral arguments on the merits of the case begin. If the panel changes after the oral arguments have begun, the oral arguments must be heard again.