The case originated in an application (no. 4239/08) against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ugandan national, Ms C.N. (“the applicant”), on 24 January 2008. The Vice-President of the Section at the time acceded to the applicant’s request not to have her name disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms G. Morgan of Bindmans LLP, a law firm based in . The  Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms L. Dauban of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
On 11 March 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1979.
The applicant travelled to the United Kingdom from  on 2 September 2002. She claimed that she had been raped several times in Uganda and that her purpose in travelling to the  was to escape from the sexual and physical violence which she had experienced. She intended to work to support herself in the  and to pursue further education.
According to the applicant’s account, a relative named S. and a Mr A. helped her obtain a false passport and a visa to enable her to enter the . However, the applicant claimed that on arrival in the  S. took her passport and travel documents and did not return them to her.
The applicant lived for a number of months at various houses belonging to S. in . She claimed that during this time he constantly warned her that she should not talk to people and that she could easily be arrested or otherwise come to harm in . She was also shown violence on television and told that this could happen to her if she was not careful.
In January 2003 S. introduced the applicant to a man called M. who ran a business providing carers and security personnel for profit. The applicant attended a short carers’ training course and thereafter did some overnight shifts as a carer and as a security guard in a number of locations. The applicant asserted that on each occasion payment was made by the client to M., who transferred a share of the money to S.’s bank account in the apparent belief that he would pass it on to her. However, she claimed that she did not receive any payment for the work that she did.
In early 2003 the applicant began to work as a live-in carer for an elderly Iraqi couple (“Mr and Mrs K”). She found the role physically and emotionally demanding as Mr K. suffered from Parkinson’s disease and she was required to change his clothing, feed him, clean him and lift him as necessary. As a result, she was permanently on-call during the day and night. On one Sunday every month she was given a couple of hours leave but on these occasions she would usually be collected by M. and driven to S.’s house for the afternoon. She accepted that after a couple of years she was permitted to take public transport but said she was warned that it was not safe and that she should not speak with anyone.
The applicant claimed that the GBP 1,600 Mr and Mrs K. paid every month for her services was sent directly to M. by cheque. A percentage of that money was passed by M. to S. on the apparent understanding that it would be paid to her. However, she received no significant payment for her labour. Occasionally Mr and Mrs K would give the applicant presents or second-hand clothes and from time to time S. would give her GBP 20 or GBP 40 when she went to his home on her monthly afternoon of leave. It was sometimes suggested that S. was saving up her income for her education, but she denied that any money was ever given to her.
In August 2006 Mr and Mrs K. went on a family trip to . The applicant was unable to accompany them because she did not have a passport. In their absence, the applicant was taken to a house belonging to S. When he left for a business trip to , she remained in the house with his partner, H. The applicant asserted that H. effectively prevented her from leaving the house and warned her not to speak with anyone.
On 18 August 2006 the applicant left the house. She went to a local bank, where she asked someone to call the police. Before the police arrived, she collapsed and was taken to St Mary’s Hospital, where she was diagnosed as HIV positive. She was also suffering from psychosis, including auditory hallucinations.
The applicant remained in hospital for one month. H. visited the applicant in hospital and the applicant claimed that during these visits she tried to persuade her to return to S.’s house. In particular, she warned her that when she left the hospital she would have to pay for anti-retroviral medication and if she did not return to the house she would be “on the streets”.
Following her discharge from hospital, the applicant was housed by the local authority. On 21 September 2006 she made an application for asylum. The application was refused on 16 January 2007. The Secretary of State for the Home Department considered that the applicant could access protection in  to prevent further sexually motivated attacks. Moreover, he found that if she had been genuinely afraid of S., she would have tried to escape from him earlier. The applicant appealed. Her appeal was dismissed on 20 November 2007. In dismissing the appeal, the Immigration Judge expressed serious concerns about the applicant’s credibility and found much of her account to be implausible.
In April 2007 the applicant’s solicitor wrote to the police and asked that they investigate her case. The Metropolitan Police Human Trafficking Team, a police unit specialising in the investigation of human trafficking offences, commenced an investigation to ascertain whether or not she had been the victim of a criminal offence. The police interviewed the applicant on 21 June 2007. During the investigation, the Human Trafficking Team sought the views of the United Kingdom Human Trafficking Centre in Sheffield, a multi-agency organisation which provided a central point of expertise in the field of human trafficking. However, the Centre advised that there was no evidence to substantiate the allegation that the applicant had been trafficked into the United Kingdom and observed that during her time working with Mr and Mrs K she had been well looked after.
On 26 September 2007 the police informed the applicant’s former solicitor that there was “no evidence of trafficking for domestic servitude in the interview”.
On 26 August 2008 the applicant’s current solicitor wrote to the police asking for the reasons for discontinuing the investigation. On 5 September 2008 the police noted that the Head of Legal Services at the United Kingdom Human Trafficking Centre had advised that there was no evidence to substantiate the applicant’s allegation that she had been trafficked into the . He further advised that while the applicant worked with the K family she was well looked after and given some money. There was, however, a dispute over money and it may have been that “her cousin kept more than he should have done”.
On 5 September 2008 the police informed the applicant’s solicitor that “a decision was taken not to proceed with the matter as there was no evidence that she [the applicant] had been trafficked”. On 18 September 2008 the police reiterated that following the interview “it was decided that there was insufficient evidence to substantiate the allegation of trafficking and thus further investigation was not warranted”.
On 5 December 2008 the applicant’s solicitor wrote to the police to ask them to consider prosecutions for other offences, including a jus cogens offence of slavery or forced labour.
On 18 December 2008 the applicant was assessed by the POPPY Project, a Government funded project providing housing and support for victims of trafficking. The POPPY Project concluded that she had been “subjected to five of the six indicators of forced labour” (as identified by the ILO). In particular, her movement had been restricted to the workplace, her wages were withheld to pay a debt she did not know about, her salary was withheld for four years, her passport was retained, and she was subjected to threats of denunciation to the authorities.
On 5 January 2009 the police began to conduct further investigations. On 14 January 2009 the police noted that a statement had been obtained from the agent who arranged the applicant’s work with Mr and Mrs K (presumably the man previously identified as M.). He stated that he had been introduced to the applicant by a person he believed to be her relative. He was supplied with a passport, a national insurance number and a criminal records check. The agent stated that the applicant came to the agreement with her relative that her wages would be paid to him. She only complained about this arrangement in or around June 2006. The agent also stated that he feared the applicant’s relative, who was a wealthy and powerful man well-connected to the Ugandan government.
The police were unable to make contact with Mr and Mrs K. Eventually they made contact with a member of the K family. However, no statement appears to have been taken as the (unidentified) woman told the police that she was leaving the country for medical treatment.
On 25 February 2009 the police informed the applicant’s solicitor that the evidence did not establish an offence of trafficking. They noted that “at this stage there is no evidence that would support exploitation of any kind”.
Police officers met with the applicant and her representative on 11 March 2009. The applicant’s solicitor asserted that at this meeting a police officer indicated that it was the Metropolitan Police’s provisional view, given expressly without formal authority, that there was no offence in English criminal law which applied to the facts of the case. The solicitor further asserted that the police apologised for the cursory manner in which the case had been dealt with previously and confirmed that the applicant’s account was credible.
In an entry dated 27 March 2009 the police noted that:
“It is clear that this female was not trafficked into the  for labour exploitation. She having applied for a visa in her real name to come to the  was refused. She then in agreement with her father then obtained a false passport with a forged visa stamp. These false documents were paid for by her father with the assistance of her uncle...
She willingly commenced work that was arranged by her uncle as a live-in carer for an elderly couple.
The family at first wanted to pay her wages direct. But on the request of the victim she stated the money should be paid to the agency and then the money should then be transferred to her uncle’s account who in turn would send the money back to . This agreement was made in order to hide from the authorities the fact that the victim did not have a national insurance number. If money was paid to her then she would have had to pay tax and her false identity would have come to the notice of the tax office and then to the [United Kingdom Border Agency]. This would then lead to her arrest and eviction from the ...
...There is no evidence to show that this female is/was a victim of slavery or forced labour. She willingly worked and was in fact paid but she choose that the money should go via her uncle in order to conceal being in the . It is basically a situation that one criminal (her uncle) has taken all the proceeds of their crime...”
At that meeting the applicant’s solicitor pointed out that S. had taken the applicant’s identity documents from her upon her arrival in the  and that this was grounds to prove possible forced labour. However, the police indicated that the documents taken from the applicant were false documents purchased by her and her father to enable her to enter the .
On 31 March 2009 the police spoke again with the applicant’s solicitor. While they accepted that not every enquiry had been carried out, such as production orders relating to relevant bank accounts, it was important to ensure that the limited resources of the Human Trafficking Team were used to best effect and they could not, therefore, carry out any further investigation into the applicant’s complaints.
The applicant was assessed by a clinical psychologist specialising in violence against women. The psychologist concluded in her 16 May 2009 report that the applicant was “suffering to a severe degree from a complex form of chronic Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), in conjunction with a Major Depressive Disorder and she presents a moderate risk of suicide.” In particular, she noted that the applicant presented “in ways consistent with a victim of trafficking and forced labour, in the context of a history of sexual assaults”.
On 11 August 2009 the police noted that they would write to the applicant’s solicitor to confirm that “this particular case does not fulfil the requirements of human trafficking as per UK legislation and that legislation does not exist in relation to sole and specific allegations of domestic servitude where trafficking is not a factor”.
On 12 August 2009 the police wrote to the applicant’s solicitor in the following terms:
“I can confirm that after undertaking an investigation of the case including interviewing Ms N. a decision has been made to conclude the investigation. This decision is based on several factors, one being that after consultation with the legal representative of the Human Trafficking Centre the circumstances of Ms N.’s case did not appear to constitute an offence of trafficking people for the purposes of exploitation contrary to the Asylum and Immigration Act 2004.
	I am not aware of any specific offence of forced labour or servitude beyond that covered by section 4 of the Asylum and Immigration Act 2004 though regulation of working conditions are controlled by such areas as health and safety legislation and in certain instances the Gangmasters Act 2004...”
Section 71 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009, which received Royal Assent on 12 November 2009, made slavery, servitude and forced or compulsory labour criminal offences punishable by a fine and/or up to fourteen years’ imprisonment. Section 71 came into force on 6 April 2010 but did not have retrospective effect.
Section 4 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004 created the offence of trafficking people for exploitation. It provides that:
“(1) A person commits an offence if he arranges or facilitates the arrival in the  of an individual (the “passenger”) and—
(a) he intends to exploit the passenger in the  or elsewhere, or
(b) he believes that another person is likely to exploit the passenger in the  or elsewhere.
(2) A person commits an offence if he arranges or facilitates travel within the United Kingdom by an individual (the “passenger”) in respect of whom he believes that an offence under subsection (1) may have been committed and—
(a) he intends to exploit the passenger in the  or elsewhere, or
(b) he believes that another person is likely to exploit the passenger in the  or elsewhere.
(3) A person commits an offence if he arranges or facilitates the departure from the  of an individual (the “passenger”) and—
(a) he intends to exploit the passenger outside the , or
(b) he believes that another person is likely to exploit the passenger outside the .
(4) For the purposes of this section a person is exploited if (and only if)—
(a) he is the victim of behaviour that contravenes Article 4 of the Human Rights Convention (slavery and forced labour),
(b) he is encouraged, required or expected to do anything as a result of which he or another person would commit an offence under the Human Organ Transplants Act  or the Human Organ Transplants (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I.  (N.I. 21)),
(c) he is subjected to force, threats or deception designed to induce him—
(i) to provide services of any kind,
(ii) to provide another person with benefits of any kind, or
(iii) to enable another person to acquire benefits of any kind, or
(d) he is requested or induced to undertake any activity, having been chosen as the subject of the request or inducement on the grounds that—
(i) he is mentally or physically ill or disabled, he is young or he has a family relationship with a person, and
(ii) a person without the illness, disability, youth or family relationship would be likely to refuse the request or resist the inducement.
(5) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable—
(a) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 14 years, to a fine or to both, or
(b) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding twelve months, to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum or to both.”
On 12 November 2009 the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 received Royal Assent. Section 71, which will come into force “on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint”, provides as follows:
“71 Slavery, servitude and forced or compulsory labour
(1) A person (D) commits an offence if—
(a) D holds another person in slavery or servitude and the circumstances are such that D knows or ought to know that the person is so held, or
(b) D requires another person to perform forced or compulsory labour and the circumstances are such that D knows or ought to know that the person is being required to perform such labour.
(2) In subsection (1) the references to holding a person in slavery or servitude or requiring a person to perform forced or compulsory labour are to be construed in accordance with Article 4 of the Human Rights Convention (which prohibits a person from being held in slavery or servitude or being required to perform forced or compulsory labour).
(3) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding the relevant period or a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or both;
(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 14 years or a fine, or both.
(4) In this section—
“Human Rights Convention” means the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms agreed by the Council of Europe at  on 4 November 1950;
“the relevant period” means—
(a) in relation to England and , 12 months;
(b) in relation to , 6 months.”
Articles 1 and 2 of the Convention provide as follows:
“Article 1
Each Member of the International Labour Organisation which ratifies this Convention undertakes to suppress the use of forced or compulsory labour in all its forms within the shortest possible period.
With a view to this complete suppression, recourse to forced or compulsory labour may be had, during the transitional period, for public purposes only and as an exceptional measure, subject to the conditions and guarantees hereinafter provided.
At the expiration of a period of five years after the coming into force of this Convention, and when the Governing Body of the International Labour Office prepares the report provided for in Article 31 below, the said Governing Body shall consider the possibility of the suppression of forced or compulsory labour in all its forms without a further transitional period and the desirability of placing this question on the agenda of the Conference.
Article 2
For the purposes of this Convention the term forced or compulsory labour shall mean all work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself voluntarily.
Nevertheless, for the purposes of this Convention, the term forced or compulsory labour shall not include--
(a) any work or service exacted in virtue of compulsory military service laws for work of a purely military character;
(b) any work or service which forms part of the normal civic obligations of the citizens of a fully self-governing country;
(c) any work or service exacted from any person as a consequence of a conviction in a court of law, provided that the said work or service is carried out under the supervision and control of a public authority and that the said person is not hired to or placed at the disposal of private individuals, companies or associations;
(d) any work or service exacted in cases of emergency, that is to say, in the event of war or of a calamity or threatened calamity, such as fire, flood, famine, earthquake, violent epidemic or epizootic diseases, invasion by animal, insect or vegetable pests, and in general any circumstance that would endanger the existence or the well-being of the whole or part of the population;
(e) minor communal services of a kind which, being performed by the members of the community in the direct interest of the said community, can therefore be considered as normal civic obligations incumbent upon the members of the community, provided that the members of the community or their direct representatives shall have the right to be consulted in regard to the need for such services.”
The ILO has developed indicators of forced labour which provide a valuable benchmark in the identification of forced labour. These indicators are:
“1. Threats or actual physical harm to the worker.
Restriction of movement and confinement to the work place or to a limited area.
Debt bondage: where the worker works to pay off a debt or loan, and is not paid for his or her services. The employer may provide food and accommodation at such inflated prices that the worker cannot escape the debt.
Withholding of wages or excessive wage reductions, that violate previously made agreements.
Retention of passports and identity documents, so that the worker cannot leave, or prove his/her identity and status.
Threat of denunciation to the authorities, where the worker is in an irregular immigration status.”
The  ratified the Convention on 17 December 2008 and it came into force on 1 April 2009.
Article 4 defines “trafficking in human beings" as follows:
 “(a) the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs;
(b) The consent of a victim of “trafficking in human beings” to the intended exploitation set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article shall be irrelevant where any of the means set forth in subparagraph (a) have been used;
Article 19 provides that:
“Each Party shall consider adopting such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offences under its internal law, the use of services which are the object of exploitation as referred to in Article 4 paragraph (a) of this Convention, with the knowledge that the person is a victim of trafficking in human beings.”
Article 5 of this Convention, which the  ratified in 1927, provides that:
“The High Contracting Parties recognise that recourse to compulsory or forced labour may have grave consequences and undertake, each in respect of the territories placed under its sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection, suzerainty or tutelage, to take all necessary measures to prevent compulsory or forced labour from developing into conditions analogous to slavery.
It is agreed that:
(1) Subject to the transitional provisions laid down in paragraph (2) below, compulsory or forced labour may only be exacted for public purposes.
(2) In territories in which compulsory or forced labour for other than public purposes still survives, the High Contracting Parties shall endeavour progressively and as soon as possible to put an end to the practice. So long as such forced or compulsory labour exists, this labour shall invariably be of an exceptional character, shall always receive adequate remuneration, and shall not involve the removal of the labourers from their usual place of residence.
(3) In all cases, the responsibility for any recourse to compulsory or forced labour shall rest with the competent central authorities of the territory concerned.”
Recommendation 1523 (2001) provides, as relevant, that:
“1. In the last few years a new form of slavery has appeared in Europe, namely domestic slavery. It has been established that over 4 million women are sold each year in the world.
In this connection the Assembly recalls and reaffirms Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR), which prohibits slavery and servitude, and also the definition of slavery derived from the opinions and judgments of the European Commission of Human Rights and the European Court of Human Rights.
The Assembly also recalls Article 3 of the ECHR, which provides that no one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and Article 6, which proclaims the right of access to a court in civil and criminal matters, including cases where the employer enjoys immunity from jurisdiction.
... ... ...
It notes that the victims’ passports are systematically confiscated, leaving them in a situation of total vulnerability with regard to their employers, and sometimes in a situation bordering on imprisonment, where they are subjected to physical and/or sexual violence.
Most of the victims of this new form of slavery are in an illegal situation, having been recruited by agencies and having borrowed money to pay for their journey.
The physical and emotional isolation in which the victims find themselves, coupled with fear of the outside world, causes psychological problems which persist after their release and leave them completely disoriented.
... ... ...
It regrets that none of the Council of Europe member states expressly make domestic slavery an offence in their criminal codes.
It accordingly recommends that the Committee of Ministers ask the governments of member states to:
make slavery and trafficking in human beings, and also forced marriage, offences in their criminal codes;
... ... ...
protect the rights of victims of domestic slavery by:
generalising the issuing of temporary and renewable residence permits on humanitarian grounds;
taking steps to provide them with protection and with social, administrative and legal assistance;
taking steps for their rehabilitation and their reintegration, including the creation of centres to assist, among others, victims of domestic slavery;
developing specific programmes for their protection;
increasing victims’ time limits for bringing proceedings for offences of slavery;
establishing compensation funds for the victims of slavery.”
Recommendation 1663 (2004) further provides, as relevant, that:
“The Assembly thus recommends that the Committee of Ministers:
in general:
bring the negotiations on the Council of Europe draft convention on action against trafficking in human beings to a rapid conclusion;
encourage member states to combat domestic slavery in all its forms as a matter of urgency, ensuring that holding a person in any form of slavery is a criminal offence in all member states;
ensure that the relevant authorities in the member states thoroughly, promptly and impartially investigate all allegations of any form of slavery and prosecute those responsible;
recommend that member states review their immigration and deportation policies, granting victims of domestic slavery at least temporary residence permits (if possible, in conjunction with work permits) and allowing them to file complaints against their abusive husbands or employers if they wish to do so;
urge member states to provide an efficient support network for victims (including emergency accommodation, health care, psychological and legal counselling services) and attribute funds to non-governmental organisations working in this area;
ensure that victims of slavery are provided with reparation, including compensation, restitution, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition;
as concerns domestic servitude:
elaborate a charter of rights for domestic workers, as already recommended in  on domestic slavery. Such a charter, which could take the form of a Committee of Ministers’ recommendation or even of a convention, should guarantee at least the following rights to domestic workers:
– the recognition of domestic work in private households as “real work”, that is, to which full employment rights and social protection apply, including the minimum wage (where it exists), sickness and maternity pay as well as pension rights;
– the right to a legally enforceable contract of employment setting out minimum wages, maximum hours and responsibilities;
– the right to health insurance;
– the right to family life, including health, education and social rights for the children of domestic workers;
– the right to leisure and personal time;
– the right for migrant domestic workers to an immigration status independent of any employer, the right to change employer and to travel within the host country and between all countries of the European Union and the right to the recognition of qualifications, training and experience obtained in the home country;
recommend the introduction of a system of accreditation for agencies placing domestic workers, which would commit these agencies to certain minimum standards, such as charging reasonable fees, tracking the employees they have placed and providing emergency help in cases of difficulty. Accredited agencies could have visa applications put forward on their behalf validated automatically;
ensure regular monitoring by appropriate authorities of the agencies accredited under the system referred to in sub-paragraph b above.”