The case originated in an application (no. 65734/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Valeriy Vladimirovich Shukhardin (“the applicant”), on 11 January 2001.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mrs Y. Liptser, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, the Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 8 September 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government's objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lived until his arrest in .
On 8 March 1999 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of having committed franchise fraud, that is, having organised a financial pyramid scheme in which more than one hundred persons had been enrolled and which had caused fraud losses of over 23,000,000 Russian roubles. Three days later a prosecutor authorised the applicant's placement in custody on the ground that he was charged with a serious criminal offence and did not have a permanent place of residence and work in the Omsk Region, thus being liable to abscond and pervert the course of justice.
On 6 May and 2 July 1999 the Omsk Regional Prosecutor extended the applicant's detention until 8 July and 8 September 1999 respectively, having regard to the gravity of the charges.
On 3 September and 29 November 1999 a deputy Prosecutor General of the , invoking the same grounds as in the previous detention orders, authorised the extension of the applicant's detention until 8 December 1999 and 8 March 2000 respectively.
On 25 February and 26 June 2000 the acting Prosecutor General of the  authorised further extensions of the applicant's detention until 8 July and 8 September 2000 respectively. The reasons for both extensions were similar: the gravity of the charges and the applicant's liability to abscond and pervert the course of justice.
According to the Government, on 11 July 2000 the pre-trial investigation was closed and three days later the applicant began studying the case file. However, as appears from a report issued on 5 July 2000 by a senior investigator from the Omsk Regional Police Department, the applicant was provided with the case file on 11 May 2000. According to the same report, the applicant had “intentionally procrastinated in reading the material in the case file” because between 15 May and 1 June 2000 he had read from 26 to 42 pages each day and in June 2000 he had read from 2 to 50 pages each day. He was warned that such behaviour was not permissible. The applicant countersigned the report and made a handwritten note stating that he had been able to study the file from two to five hours each day, had made notes and had copied documents with which he had not been issued.
The Government submitted a detailed schedule showing the times and dates when the applicant had consulted the file and the volumes and pages of the file which he had studied. As appears from the schedule, in July and August 2000 the applicant studied from 20 to several hundred pages each day. On 17 August 2000 the applicant made a handwritten note in the schedule which reads as follows:
“I have read the entire case file. I ask you to provide me with a copy of a record certifying that the pre-trial investigation has ended and that the defendants and counsel have finished reading the file in accordance with Articles 201-203 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure.”
On 15 August 2000 the Omsk Regional Prosecutor asked the  to extend the applicant's detention for an additional six months because the applicant needed additional time to read the case file. The prosecutor also noted that the applicant and his co-defendants had participated in an organised criminal offence, had been charged with serious criminal offences, and had influenced other defendants, witnesses and victims. They were liable to abscond and pervert the course of justice.
On 23 August 2000 the President of the Omsk Regional Court wrote in the corner on the first page of the prosecutor's application that he authorised the extension of the applicant's and his co-defendants' detention until 8 March 2001.
On the same day the applicant was provided with several volumes of the case file for consultation. He refused to read them and an entry to this effect was made in the schedule. On 25 and 28 August 2000 an investigator brought the case file to facility no. 1, where the applicant was detained. The applicant confirmed his refusal to consult the file. According to a handwritten note made by the investigator in the schedule, on 29 August 2000 the applicant began reading volume no. 66. However, a subsequent handwritten note made by the applicant indicated that he had finished studying the file on 17 August 2000 and had no intention to do so any further. Statements with similar contents were made by the investigator and the applicant in the schedule on 30 and 31 August 2000. The schedule for September 2000 consisted of notes to similar effect by the applicant and the investigator.
On an unspecified date the applicant appealed against the order of 23 August 2000. He claimed that the maximum eighteen-month period of his detention would expire on 8 September 2000. An extension of the detention beyond eighteen months was only possible if the defendant needed more time to read the case file. The applicant insisted that on 17 August 2000 he had finished studying the file and that there were therefore no grounds for a further extension.
On 22 November 2000 the Supreme Court of the  examined the applicant's and his co-defendants' appeals against the order of 23 August 2000, quashed it and remitted the matter to the  for a fresh examination. The relevant part of the Supreme Court's decision reads as follows:
“By virtue of Articles 220-1 and 220-2 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure the judge has to examine the lawfulness and well-foundedness of the request for extension of the detention of Mr Shukhardin... and has to issue a reasoned decision as required by paragraph 8 of Article 220-2 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure.
Moreover, paragraph 2 of Article 102 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure requires that [a court] should prepare minutes of a court hearing in which the issue of extension of detention is examined... [the minutes] should indicate who participated in the hearing and should reflect the progress of the examination of the materials.
The minutes of the court hearing and the reasoned decision of the judge were not included in the materials presented to the Supreme Court of the , which constitutes a gross violation of the requirements of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure.
Accordingly, the decision [of the President of the ] should be quashed and the case file should be sent for re-examination.
The Supreme Court cannot accept counsel's requests for release of Mr Shukhardin... because [the Supreme Court] is unable to conclude from the presented decision whether [he] is detained lawfully or unlawfully, and counsel's arguments are based on this circumstance.
In the course of the fresh consideration of the file, the [Regional] Court has to examine thoroughly all the arguments set out in the application by the Omsk Regional Prosecutor and to give a reasoned decision.
On the basis of the foregoing, and in accordance with Articles 332 and 339 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure, the Court decides:
To quash the decision of 23 August 2000 of the President of the Omsk Regional Court by which an extension of Mr Shukhardin's... detention was authorised and to refer the case back for fresh consideration...
The measure of restraint applied to Mr Shukhardin... should remain unchanged, namely detention on remand.”
On 19 January 2001 the  extended the applicant's detention until 8 March 2001, noting the gravity of the charges against him. The  held that the gravity of the charges could serve as the sole ground for the detention, but it also pointed to the applicant's failure to finish studying the file.
According to the Government, on 21 February 2001 the applicant finished reading the file.
On 3 May 2001 the Supreme Court upheld the decision of 19 January 2001, stating that the applicant had been charged with especially serious criminal offences and his detention had been authorised and extended a number of times in accordance with the requirements of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure. The request for extension of the applicant's detention until 8 March 2001 had also been lodged in compliance with Russian law. The applicant did not have a permanent place of residence in the Omsk Region, where the investigation was being conducted, and he was liable to abscond. The extension of the applicant's detention was necessary because he had refused to read all the material in the case file.
On 2 March 2001 the bill of indictment was served on the applicant. He was charged with aggravated fraud, forgery of documents, money laundering and organisation of a criminal enterprise. Five days later the case was referred for trial.
On 10 July 2001 the  scheduled the first trial hearing. It also examined requests by the applicant and his co-defendants for release and dismissed them on the ground of the gravity of the charges.
In July 2001 the applicant and his lawyer appealed against the order, arguing that the  had failed to issue a reasoned decision concerning the extension of his detention.
On 25 October 2002 the Supreme Court of the  upheld the decision of 10 July 2001, noting that the  had acted within its competence. The Supreme Court further held as follows:
“By virtue of Article 96 § 1 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure... in force at the time the Regional Court issued its decision [of 10 July 2001], detention could be authorised as a measure of restraint in respect of persons suspected or accused of having committed a criminal offence punishable by more than two years' imprisonment.
As appears from the presented materials, Mr Shukhardin... was charged with criminal offences punishable by more than two years' imprisonment. Having regard to this circumstance, the investigating authorities correctly applied the measure of restraint.
By virtue of Article 222 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure, when a judge schedules a court hearing, he should, among other issues, determine matters concerning the adjustment or annulment of measures of restraint.
When there is a necessity to annul a measure of restraint or to change it to a stricter or a more lenient one, a judge determines the matter and gives a decision accordingly.
As appears from the materials submitted, the [] did not determine an issue concerning the change or annulment of the measure of restraint, and accordingly there was no need to issue a decision on the matter.”
On 1 July 2002 the new Code of Criminal Procedure became effective.
On the same day the Omsk Regional Court, by the same decision, extended the applicant's and his co-defendants' detention until 1 October 2002, holding that they were charged with especially serious criminal offences, had no place of residence in the Omsk Region and were liable to abscond.
Ten days later the applicant lodged an appeal against the decision of 1 July 2002. In October 2002 he amended his grounds of appeal, asking to be released on the basis of guarantees provided by two persons, the president of a regional NGO working in the field of human-rights protection and a representative of the Moscow-based NGO “Assistance to the Reform of Criminal Justice”.
On 25 October 2002 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation upheld the decision of 1 July 2002, confirming that the gravity of the charges could serve as the sole ground for the applicant's and his co-defendants' continuing detention.
On 1 October 2002 the  authorised a further extension of the applicant's and his co-defendants' detention until 1 January 2003. It relied on the gravity of the charges against them as the ground for the extension.
The applicant and his lawyer appealed, arguing that the gravity of the charges could no longer serve as the reason for the applicant's continuing detention and that his detention was excessively long.
On 17 April 2003 the Supreme Court of the  upheld the decision of 1 October 2002, holding that the applicant and his co-defendants were charged with serious criminal offences and that that ground was sufficient to authorise their detention for an additional three months.
On 25 December 2002 the , once again relying on the gravity of the charges, extended the applicant's and his co-defendants' detention for an additional three months, until 1 April 2003.
The applicant and his lawyer appealed. In the meantime, on 31 March 2003 the  authorised a further extension of the detention for an additional three months, until 1 July 2003, on the ground of the gravity of the charges.
On 17 April 2003 the Supreme Court of the  quashed the decision of 25 December 2002 and authorised the applicant's release on a written undertaking not to leave the town. The relevant part of the decision reads as follows:
“By virtue of Article 255 of the Russian Federation Code of Criminal Procedure, a court which has jurisdiction to examine a case has the right to extend the detention of a defendant after the expiry of the six-month period following the committal of the case for trial.
A court decision concerning a measure of restraint, the type of measure taken, an extension of detention or a change of a measure of restraint should be reasoned.
When indicating the grounds for its decision concerning the extension of the detention, the court has to take into account not only the seriousness of a criminal offence with which a defendant was charged, but also other grounds and circumstances, as indicated in Articles 97 and 99 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
This requirement of the law was not complied with when the [Regional] Court determined the matter of the extension of the defendants' detention.
As follows from the materials submitted, when extending the detention of Mr Shukhardin... and identifying the grounds for the extension of the detention, the court referred only to the fact that the defendants were charged with serious and particularly serious criminal offences.
Furthermore, the court decision did not indicate what had served as the ground for the extension of the detention or whether the court could have concluded that the defendants would abscond, continue criminal activities, threaten witnesses and other parties to the proceedings, and so on.
When the gravity of the charges is taken into account, [the court] should also have regard to all the legal characteristics of the criminal offence and of the person who committed it.
In particular, it is necessary to consider the character and degree of a threat to society posed by the criminal offence in question, the state of health of the defendant, his family status, including the right of detainees to trial within a reasonable time or to release pending trial as provided for by Article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
As is rightfully pointed out in the grounds of appeal, the court did not take into account those circumstances and did not examine the [defendants'] arguments.
...
Having regard to the fact that the court breached the requirements of the law while determining the issue of detention and that the case is currently at the final stage of court proceedings..., the [Supreme Court] considers that the defendants cannot influence other parties to the proceedings, that they have permanent places of residence, and that they were detained for a long time [over four years], which had a negative influence on the state of their health,... and the measure of restraint should be changed to written undertakings not to leave the town.”
According to the Government, on 17 April 2003 a copy of the decision of the Supreme Court was sent by special courier to , where the applicant was being detained, and arrived there on 21 April 2003. The applicant was released on the same day. According to the applicant, a copy of the decision of 17 April 2003 was sent by regular mail and arrived in  on 27 April 2003. However, his lawyer brought a certified copy of that decision to  on 21 April 2001. That is why he was released on the same day.
On 21 April 2004 the  found the applicant guilty of aggravated fraud and sentenced him to nine years' imprisonment. On 25 November 2004 the Supreme Court upheld the conviction and reduced the sentence by one year.
Until 1 July 2002 criminal-law matters were governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (Law of 27 October 1960, “the old CCrP”). From 1 July 2002 the old CCrP was replaced by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001, “the new CCrP”).
“Preventive measures” or “measures of restraint” include an undertaking not to leave a town or region, a personal guarantee, bail and detention on remand (Article 89 of the old CCrP, Article 98 of the new CCrP).
The Russian Constitution of 12 December 1993 provides that a judicial decision is required before a defendant can be detained or his or her detention extended (Article 22).
Under the old CCrP, a decision ordering detention on remand could be taken by a prosecutor or a court (Articles 11, 89 and 96).
The new CCrP requires a judicial decision by a district or town court on a reasoned request by a prosecutor supported by appropriate evidence (Article 108 §§ 1, 3-6).
When deciding whether to remand an accused in custody, the competent authority is required to consider whether there are “sufficient grounds to believe” that he or she would abscond during the investigation or trial or obstruct the establishment of the truth or reoffend (Article 89 of the old CCrP). It must also take into account the gravity of the charge, information on the accused's character, his or her profession, age, state of health, family status and other circumstances (Article 91 of the old CCrP, Article 99 of the new CCrP).
Before 14 March 2001, detention on remand was authorised if the accused was charged with a criminal offence carrying a sentence of at least one year's imprisonment or if there were “exceptional circumstances” in the case (Article 96). On 14 March 2001 the old CCrP was amended to permit defendants to be detained on remand if the charge carried a sentence of at least two years' imprisonment, if they had previously defaulted, had no permanent residence in Russia or if their identity could not be ascertained. The amendments of 14 March 2001 also repealed the provision that permitted defendants to be detained on remand on the sole ground of the dangerous nature of the criminal offence they had allegedly committed. The new CCrP reproduced the amended provisions (Articles 97 § 1 and 108 § 1) and added that a defendant should not be detained on remand if a less severe preventive measure was available.
The Codes make a distinction between two types of detention on remand: the first being “during the investigation”, that is, while a competent agency – the police or a prosecutor's office – is investigating the case, and the second being “before the court” (or “during the trial proceedings”), at the judicial stage. Although there is no difference in practice between them (the detainee is held in the same detention facility), the calculation of the time-limits is different.
After arrest the suspect is placed in custody “during the investigation”. The maximum permitted period of detention “during the investigation” is two months but this can be extended for up to eighteen months in “exceptional circumstances”. Under the old CCrP, extensions were authorised by prosecutors of ascending hierarchical levels but they must now be authorised by judicial decisions, taken by courts of ascending levels (under the new CCrP). No extension of detention “during the investigation” beyond eighteen months is possible (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 4 of the new CCrP).
The period of detention “during the investigation” is calculated up to the day when the prosecutor sends the case to the trial court (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 9 of the new CCrP).
Access to the materials in the file is to be granted no later than one month before the expiry of the authorised detention period (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 5 of the new CCrP). If the defendant needs more time to study the case file, a judge, on a request by a prosecutor, may grant an extension of the detention until such time as the file has been read in full and the case sent for trial (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 8 (1) of the new CCrP). Under the old CCrP, such an extension could not be granted for longer than six months.
Under the old CCrP, the trial court had the right to refer the case back for “additional investigation” if it established that procedural defects existed that could not be remedied at the trial. In such cases the defendant's detention was again classified as “during the investigation” and the relevant time-limit continued to apply. If, however, the case was remitted for additional investigation but the investigators had already used up all the time authorised for detention “during the investigation”, a supervising prosecutor could nevertheless extend the detention period for one additional month starting from the date he received the case. Subsequent extensions could only be granted if the detention “during the investigation” had not exceeded eighteen months (Article 97).
From the date the prosecutor refers the case to the trial court, the defendant's detention is classified as “before the court” (or “during the judicial proceedings”).
Before 14 March 2001 the old CCrP set no time-limit for detention “during the judicial proceedings”. On 14 March 2001 a new Article 239-1 was inserted which established that the period of detention “during the judicial proceedings” could not generally exceed six months from the date the court received the file. However, if there was evidence to show that the defendant's release might impede a thorough, complete and objective examination of the case, a court could – of its own motion or on a request by a prosecutor – extend the detention by no longer than three months. These provisions did not apply to defendants charged with particularly serious criminal offences.
The new CCrP provides that the term of detention “during the judicial proceedings” is calculated from the date the court received the file up to the date on which the judgment is given. The period of detention “during the judicial proceedings” may not normally exceed six months, but if the case concerns serious or particularly serious criminal offences, the trial court may approve one or more extensions of no longer than three months each (Article 255 §§ 2 and 3).
Under the old CCrP, the detainee or his or her counsel or representative could challenge the detention order issued by a prosecutor, and any subsequent extension order, before a court. The judge was required to review the lawfulness of and justification for a detention or extension order no later than three days after receipt of the relevant papers. The review was to be conducted in camera in the presence of a prosecutor and the detainee's counsel or representative. The detainee was to be summoned and a review in his absence was only permissible in exceptional circumstances if the detainee waived his right to be present of his own free will. The judge could either dismiss the challenge or revoke the pre-trial detention and order the detainee's release (Article 220-1). An appeal to a higher court lay against the judge's decision. It had to be examined within the same time-limit as appeals against a judgment on the merits (see paragraph 96 below) (Article 331 in fine).
Under the new CCrP, an appeal may be lodged with a higher court within three days against a judicial decision ordering or extending detention on remand. The appeal court must rule on the appeal within three days of its receipt (Article 108 § 10).
Upon receipt of the case file, the judge must determine, in particular, whether the defendant should be held in custody or released pending the trial hearings (Article 222 § 5 and Article 230 of the old CCrP, Article 228 (3) and Article 231 § 2 (6) of the new CCrP) and rule on any application by the defendant for release (Article 223 of the old CCrP).
At any time during the judicial proceedings the court may order, vary or revoke any preventive measure, including detention on remand (Article 260 of the old CCrP, Article 255 § 1 of the new CCrP). Any such decision must be given in the deliberation room and signed by all the judges on the bench (Article 261 of the old CCrP, Article 256 of the new CCrP).
An appeal against such a decision lies to a higher court. It must be lodged within ten days and examined within the same time-limit as an appeal against the judgment on the merits (Article 331 of the old CCrP, Article 255 § 4 of the new CCrP – see paragraph 96 below).
Under the old CCrP, within fourteen days after receipt of the case file (if the defendant was in custody), the judge was required either: (1) to fix the trial date; (2) to refer the case back for further investigation; (3) to stay or discontinue the proceedings; or (4) to refer the case to a court having jurisdiction to hear it (Article 221). The new CCrP empowers the judge, within the same time-limit, (1) to refer the case to a competent court; (2) to fix a date for a preliminary hearing; or (3) to fix a trial date (Article 227). In the latter case, the trial proceedings must begin no later than fourteen days after the judge has fixed the trial date (Article 239 of the old CCrP, Article 233 § 1 of the new CCrP). There are no restrictions on fixing the date of a preliminary hearing.
The duration of the entire trial proceedings is not limited in time.
Under the old CCrP, the appeal court was required to examine an appeal against the first-instance judgment within ten days after it was lodged. In exceptional circumstances or in complex cases or in proceedings before the Supreme Court this period could be extended by up to two months (Article 333). No further extensions were possible.
The new CCrP provides that the appeal court must start the examination of the appeal no later than one month after it is lodged (Article 374).