The case originated in an application (no. 39510/98) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr A.S. The President of the Chamber acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr K. Drzewicki and, subsequently, by Mr Jakub Wołąsiewicz.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his detention effected in the periods from 1 to 27 May 1997 and from 1 to 6 January 1999 had been unlawful; that after his arrest he had not been brought promptly before a “judge or an officer authorised by law to exercise judicial power” as required by Article 5 § 3 of the Convention and that his right to compensation for unlawful detention had been breached.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 9 October 2003, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Second Section (Rule 52 § 1).
On 22 February 1996 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of drug trafficking. The next day he was remanded in custody by the Wrocław Regional Prosecutor (Prokurator Wojewódzki). His appeal against the remand order was dismissed on 22 March 1996 by the  (Sąd Wojewódzki).
In March 1996 the prosecutor ordered expert opinions on tool mark identification and microtraces.
On 16 May 1996 the  prolonged the applicant’s detention until 31 August 1996, considering, inter alia, that the number of suspected persons and the translation of certain documents from German into Polish made it impossible to complete the proceedings within the originally fixed three month time-limit. On 5 June 1996 the Wrocław Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) dismissed the applicant’s appeal against that decision.
On 26 August 1996 the Wrocław Court of Appeal prolonged his detention until 30 September 1996, referring to the applicant’s connections with certain individuals residing abroad and the expert opinions which had to be obtained.
On 30 September 1996 the same court prolonged the detention until 31 December 1996. It pointed out that the case was very complex and several items of evidence had to be examined. The court further noted that there was a reasonable suspicion that the applicant had committed the offence. On 1 the Supreme Court (Sąd Najwyższy) dismissed the applicant’s appeal against that decision, observing, however, that the need to obtain expert opinions on pyrotechnics and forged documents could not constitute a ground for the prolongation of the applicant’s detention, as it did not relate to the counts of which he was suspected.
On 19 December 1996 the Wrocław Court of Appeal prolonged the applicant’s detention until 22 February 1997, relying, inter alia, on a fear that he would induce witnesses to give false testimony and a risk of absconding if the applicant were to be released. It noted that further expert opinions had to be ordered. The Supreme Court upheld that decision.
On 17 February 1997 the Supreme Court prolonged the applicant’s detention until 30 April 1997. It found that although the proceedings could have been conducted more speedily, the need to obtain evidence in  had significantly affected their length. The court further noted that the applicant and other suspected persons’ frequent petitions contesting decisions concerning their detention contributed to the delay, as they had resulted in transferring the case file to the courts, thus making it impossible for the prosecutor to continue investigations. It finally observed that the risk that the applicant would induce witnesses to give false testimony was serious and there was evidence that he had already attempted to do so.
On 1 April 1997 the Wrocław Regional Prosecutor refused the applicant’s request for release, pointing out that he was suspected of a serious offence and it was quite likely that he would be sentenced to imprisonment. On 17 and 22 April 1997 the Wrocław Appellate Prosecutor (prokurator Prokuratury Apelacyjnej) dismissed the applicant and his lawyer’s appeals, relying, inter alia, on the findings of the investigations that the applicant and his brother had had a leading role in the organisation of a drug trafficking network.
On 2 the Wrocław Regional Prosecutor submitted the bill of indictment to the . It contained charges against ten persons. Twenty witnesses were to be heard and 224 pieces of evidence to be examined.
At the beginning of May 1997, the applicant’s counsel requested the applicant’s immediate release, submitting that the last detention order had expired on 30 April 1997 and had not been extended.
On 27 May 1997 the  prolonged the applicant’s detention until 22 February 1998, relying on the grounds invoked by the courts in the previous decisions.
On 2 June 1997 the court dismissed the request for release lodged by the applicant’s counsel, considering that it had not been obliged to take an earlier decision because, before the expiry of the previous detention order, the bill of indictment had been issued.
On 26 June 1997 the Wrocław Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal against the ’s decision of 27 May 1997.
From 12 to 1 the applicant was given access to the case file in the remand centre where he was detained. The file was also made available to him from 8 to 12 December 1997.
The first hearing before the , scheduled for 17 November 1997, was adjourned due to the absence of one of the accused.
At the hearing held on 15 December 1997, the court refused the request for release lodged by the applicant’s counsel.
On 22 December 1997 it ordered a psychiatric examination of one of the accused. The court adjourned the examination of the case because of the absence of two of the accused, one of whom was being searched for by a “wanted” notice.
Hearings were held on 19 January and 9 February 1998.
On 10 February 1998 the Supreme Court granted the request of the  to prolong the applicant’s detention, relying on the complexity of the case and the reasonable suspicion that he had committed the offence in question. The court prolonged the applicant’s detention until 31 July 1998, instead of 31 December 1998, as requested by the , considering that detention on remand is a preventive measure and should not become actual imprisonment.
On 9 March 1998 the court held a hearing. It adjourned the examination of charges against two accused persons to another set of proceedings.
Hearings were held on 23 March, 30 March, 6 April, 11 May, 18 May, 1 June and 15 June 1998. The applicant was given access to the case file on two occasions in April and from 19 to 29 May 1998.
The hearing scheduled for 22 June 1998 was adjourned because of the illness of one of the accused.
On 3 July 1998 the  requested the Supreme Court to prolong the applicant’s detention until 31 December 1998. On 30 July 1998 the Supreme Court granted that request, pointing out that the delay in the proceedings had been caused by difficulties in assembling all the persons concerned at the hearings. It further noted that the accused had contributed to the delay by their petitions challenging the judges. The court finally reminded the trial court that it could use all appropriate measures in order to speed up the proceedings.
The hearing scheduled for 17 August 1998 was adjourned due to the absence of three of the accused. The court held hearings on 24 August and 14 September, as well as on 5 and 19 October 1998. The applicant was given access to the case file from 25 September to 2 October 1998.
Hearings were held on 26 October, 9 November and 30 November 1998.
On 7 December 1998 the  submitted to the Supreme Court a request for prolongation of the applicant’s detention.
On 1 a hearing was held.
On 22 December 1998 the registry of the Supreme Court sent a fax to the remand centre where the applicant was detained with the information that it would deal with the ’s request on 6 January 1999. The registry stated that until that date the applicant’s detention would be based on Article 2 § 2 of the Law of 6 December 1996, in conjunction with Article 3 § 2 of the Interim Law of 6 June 1997, regardless of the fact that the previous detention order would expire on 31 December 1998.
On 31 December 1998 the applicant requested that he be either provided with a court decision prolonging his detention, or immediately released. His lawyer submitted a similar request. On the same day the applicant was informed about the fax from the Supreme Court.
At the hearing held on , the applicant’s counsel requested that the applicant and the other accused be immediately released, because their detention lacked any legal basis. The  rejected the request.
On 6 January 1999 the Supreme Court prolonged the applicant’s detention until 30 April 1999. It observed, however, that the  could have conducted the proceedings more speedily.
On 11, 18 and 25 January, as well as 8 February and 1 March 1999 the court held hearings. At the hearing held on 8 March 1999, it ordered an expert opinion on graphology.
At the hearing of 15 March 1999 the court imposed fines on two witnesses for their failure to appear before it.
Hearings were held on 22 and 29 March, as well as on 6, 12, 13, 19 and 20 April 1999. The hearings scheduled for 26 and 27 April 1999 were adjourned due to the illness of one of the accused’s counsel. The hearings scheduled for 30 April and  were adjourned because of, inter alia, the illness of the applicant’s counsel.
On 29 April 1999 the Supreme Court granted the ’s request for the prolongation of the applicant’s detention until 15 June 1999, relying, inter alia, on the necessity to question a witness. It noted that, after its previous decision of 6 January 1999, the proceedings had accelerated and were likely to end by 15 June 1999.
The  held further hearings on 17 and 20 May 1999.
On 31 May 1999 the court gave judgment on the merits of the case. The applicant was convicted of drug trafficking and sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment and a fine of PLN 250,000.
On 31 May 1999 the same court prolonged the applicant’s detention until 30 September 1999. On 2 the Wrocław Court of Appeal dismissed his appeal against that decision.
On 6 September 1999 the  informed the applicant that the reasoning of the judgment of 31 May 1999 could not be completed within the time-limit laid down in the Code of Criminal Procedure and submitted to the applicant, because of the complexity of the case. It also observed that that time-limit had only an instructional character. On 21 September 1999 a copy of the judgment with the reasoning was sent to the applicant. Subsequently, he lodged an appeal.
On 16 February 2000 the Wrocław Court of Appeal in part amended and in part upheld that judgment. It observed, inter alia, that, contrary to the applicant’s allegations, he had had access to the case file. With reference to the applicant’s complaint that certain pieces of evidence proposed by him had not been examined, the Court of Appeal noted that that evidence did not relate to the subject matter of the proceedings. The court was of the opinion that the applicant’s petitions concerning that evidence had been aimed at the prolongation of the proceedings. It observed that the applicant had requested the preparation of expert opinions on issues already exhaustively examined by experts. The applicant’s counsel lodged with the Supreme Court a cassation appeal against the Court of Appeal’s judgment. He referred, inter alia, to the trial court’s refusal to admit and examine certain items of evidence, as well as its failure to provide the applicant with the possibility to examine certain witnesses at a hearing.
On 30 October 2001 the Supreme Court dismissed that appeal, as well as cassation appeals lodged by two other convicted persons. It observed that witness D.M. had gone into hiding in the course of the proceedings and despite “wanted” notices had not been found. Therefore, the trial court’s decisions rejecting counsel’s requests to have that witness examined, and authorising reliance on the testimony given by her at an earlier stage of the proceedings, had been justified. The Supreme Court noted that another witness, W.M., had been examined on a number of occasions by defence counsel and only at the end of the trial had he refused to further testify.
At the relevant time, the authorities competent to decide on detention on remand were specified in Articles 210 and 212 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969, which read as follows:
Article 210
"1. Preventive measures [i.e. detention on remand, bail and police supervision] shall be imposed by the court; before a bill of indictment is lodged with the court, it shall be ordered by the prosecutor ..."
Article 212
"1. A decision concerning preventive measures may be appealed [to a higher court] ...
A prosecutor’s order for detention on remand may be appealed to the court competent to deal with the merits of the case ..."
These provisions were amended on 29 June 1995 by the Law of 29 June 1995 on Amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure and Other Criminal Statutes, which entered into force on . Thereafter, detention on remand could only be imposed by a court order.
A new Code of Criminal Procedure was enacted by the Sejm (Parliament) on 6 June 1997. Its Article 250, in its relevant part, reads:
“1. Detention on remand shall be imposed by a court order.
In the investigative stage of proceedings, detention on remand shall be imposed, at a prosecutor’s request, by a district court in the jurisdiction of which the investigations are being conducted. After a bill of indictment is lodged with a court, a decision to impose detention on remand shall be given by a court competent to deal with the merits of the case.
The prosecutor, when submitting to a court a request referred to in § 2, shall at the same time order that the suspect be brought before a court.”
At the time of the applicant’s arrest, the relations between the organs of the  were set out in interim legislation, i.e. the Constitutional Act of 17 October 1992 (Mała Konstytucja). Article 1 of the Act laid down the principle of the separation of powers in the following terms:
"The legislative power of the State shall be vested in the Sejm and the Senate of the ; the executive power shall be vested in the President of Poland and the Council of Ministers, and judicial power shall be vested in the independent courts."
Pursuant to Article 1 of the Act of 20 June 1985 (Ustawa o sądach powszechnych), the courts are entrusted with the administration of justice in the . The courts are courts of appeal, regional courts and district courts. Under Article 9 of the Law, the Supreme Court exercises supervisory jurisdiction over lower courts.
Article 1 of the Act of 20 June 1985 on Prosecuting Authorities (Ustawa o Prokuraturze) which determines general principles concerning the structure, functions and organisation of prosecuting authorities, at the material time read as follows:
"1. The prosecuting authorities shall be the Prosecutor General, prosecutors and military prosecutors. Prosecutors and military prosecutors shall be subordinate to the Prosecutor General.
The Prosecutor General shall be the highest prosecuting authority; his functions shall be carried out by the Minister of Justice."
Article 2 of the Act reads:
"The prosecuting authorities shall ensure the observance of the rule of law and the prosecution of criminal offences."
Under Article 7 of the Act, in carrying out his statutory duties, a prosecutor shall abide by the principles of impartiality and equality of citizens before the law. Pursuant to Article 8 of the Act, a prosecutor is independent in carrying out his or her duties, within the limits set out in this Article. A prosecutor shall abide by the instructions, guidelines and orders of his superiors. However, if an order relates to the substance of any action to be taken in proceedings, a prosecutor may request his superior to issue the order concerned with reasons in writing, to alter the order, to relieve him from performing an act prescribed by that order, or to remove him from the case in question.
Chapter III of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969, applicable at the material time, entitled "Parties to proceedings, defence counsel, representatives of victims and representatives of society", described a prosecutor as a party to criminal proceedings. According to all the relevant provisions of the Code read together, a prosecutor performed investigative and prosecuting functions in the course of criminal proceedings. In particular, after completing the investigation, he drew up a bill of indictment and represented the prosecuting authority before the court competent to deal with the case.
Until 1 September 1998 there were no specific provisions governing detention on remand after the bill of indictment was lodged with the competent court. In particular, there were no provisions to the effect that lodging a bill of indictment automatically prolonged or replaced a previous detention order, or that this event itself authorised detention for an unlimited period, or until a judgment at first instance was given. Nor was there any case-law to that effect. Nevertheless, according to the domestic practice, once a bill of indictment had been lodged with the court competent to deal with the merits of the case, detention was assumed to be prolonged pending trial, without any further judicial decision being given.
On 6 February 1997 the Supreme Court, in an interpretative ruling of certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969 as amended by the Law of 29 June 1995, addressed the problems posed by the practice of keeping an accused in detention under the bill of indictment. In its resolution (no. I KZP 35/96) the Supreme Court replied – in the affirmative – to the question whether, after lodging a bill of indictment with the court competent to deal with the merits of the case, that court was obliged to give a decision prolonging detention on remand, which had meanwhile exceeded the period fixed (or further prolonged it) at the investigation stage. The relevant parts of the resolution read as follows:
“Under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure which applied before [4 August 1996, when] the amendment of 29 June 1995 took effect, an obligation to determine the period of detention imposed by a prosecutor at the investigation stage was laid down in Article 211 § 2. However, it did not emerge explicitly from Article 222 §§ 1 and 2 (1) of the Code that, at the investigation stage, a prosecutor or the court competent to deal with the case had each time to fix the length of the detention. It was deemed to be obvious that, when prolonging detention at the investigation stage, both the prosecutor and the court competent to deal with the case had to determine the time until which detention was to last under a given decision. It was therefore assumed that the obligation to determine the period of detention arose if a decision on that matter was given before the expiry of the maximum statutory terms applicable at a given stage of the proceedings.
Comparing the old legislation with the present one leads [this Court] to the conclusion that the legislator, when amending the code in June 1995, simply extended [the scope of] the rules applicable to continuing and prolonging detention on remand – which had previously applied only at the investigation stage – to the phase of court proceedings.
Before the amendment, the legislation was based on the precept that a suspect should not be detained indefinitely as long as his case was not being dealt with by an independent court. Now, the starting-point is that a suspect (and an accused) should not be detained indefinitely as long as a first-instance judgment has not been rendered.
Under the previous legislation there was no need to determine the period of detention after a bill of indictment had been lodged with the court because at this point proceedings had reached the phase when there was no statutory time-limit [for that measure]. For this reason, the court concerned had no interest in [knowing] until when detention had been prolonged under the last decision[;] detention could continue because ‘detention of limited duration’ had become ‘detention of unlimited duration’. There was therefore only a need to ascertain whether there were grounds for continuing detention under Article 213 of the code.”
Until , when the Law of 29 June 1995 on Amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure and Other Criminal Statutes came into force, the national law did not set out any statutory time-limits concerning the length of detention on remand in criminal proceedings in their judicial phase. However, pursuant to Article 222 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in force before , the prosecutor could order detention on remand for a period not exceeding three months. When, in view of the particular circumstances of the case, the investigation could not be completed within three months, detention on remand could, if necessary, be prolonged by either the court competent to deal with the merits of the case, at the prosecutor’s request, for a period not exceeding one year, or by the Supreme Court, at the request of the Prosecutor General, for such further fixed term as was required to terminate the investigations.
The courts, when ruling on a prosecutor’s request under Article 222 of the Code, were obliged to fix the precise period for which detention could be prolonged. If they refused to prolong detention, or if the prosecutor failed to submit a request for a further prolongation before or on the expiry of the last detention order (regardless of whether it had been made by him or by a court), the detainee had to be released immediately.
The above mentioned Law of 29 June 1995 was supposed to enter into force on 1 January 1996. However, as it was apparent that the Supreme Court would not be able to process all requests for prolongation before the expiry of previous detention orders, on 1 December 1995 a law was enacted which provided that the part of the Law of 29 June 1995 concerning detention on remand would only come into force on 4 August 1996. That part related to, inter alia, time-limits concerning detention on remand in criminal proceedings and the exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to issue decisions prolonging detention beyond those limits.
According to Article 10 (a) of the Law of 29 June 1995, as amended by the Law of 1 December 1995, different rules applied in respect of persons whose detention on remand started before . This Article provided:
“1. In cases where the total period of detention on remand which started before 1 August 1996 exceeds the time-limits referred to in Article 222 §§ ... and 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the accused shall be kept in detention until the Supreme Court gives a decision on a request for prolongation of such detention under Article 222 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
In cases referred to in § 1, if no [such] request has been lodged, detention shall be quashed not later than 1 January 1997.”
Article 2 § 2 of the Law of 6 December 1996, which added certain new grounds for prolonging detention beyond the time-limits, provided:
“In cases where a request for prolongation of detention imposed before 4 August 1996 is lodged on the basis of Article 222 § 4, as amended by Article 1 of this law, the detention shall continue until that request has been examined by the Supreme Court.”
On 6 June 1997 Parliament enacted a new Code of Criminal Procedure. It entered into force on 1 September 1998, pursuant to the Interim Law of 6 June 1997. That law stipulated that all provisions relating to the matters regulated by the new Code, in particular, the provisions of the 1969 Code, were to be repealed on its entry into force. Article 3 § 2 of the Interim Law reads, however:
“Previous provisions relating to matters regulated in the [new] Code of Criminal Procedure remain in force if they have the character of a lex specialis (mają charakter przepisów szczególnych).”