The case originated in an application (no. 58874/11) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Roman Minarik (“the applicant”), on 12 September 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr P. Zima, a lawyer practising in . The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. A. Schorm, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 12 January 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
Proceedings on the deletion of the company from the Companies Register
On 3 March 2011 the  dismissed the applicant’s constitutional appeal. It interpreted the relevant provisions of the domestic law in a way that, in its view, was compatible with the Convention, taking into account especially the Court’s judgment in Kohlhofer and Minarik v. the Czech Republic, nos. 32921/03, 28464/04 and 5344/05, 15 October 2009. It held that the applicant could have instituted proceedings under Article 131 § 4 of the Commercial Code claiming just satisfaction caused by an unlawful decision of a general meeting. In those proceedings the courts, as a necessary preliminary question, would have to decide on the legality of the decision, which was the issue that the applicant had been seeking access to court for. Consequently, the applicant’s right of access to court was sufficiently safeguarded in other proceedings. The relevant part of the judgment reads:
“Although the European Court of Human Rights found the existence of a legitimate aim of the decisive legal regulations embodied in Article 131 § 3(c) and Article 220 § 4 of the Commercial Code, it did not agree that it is a ‘proportionate’ measure, not even with regard to the existence of related and anticipated proceedings on the ‘review of the compensation’, damages and just satisfaction. ...
However, at present – with regard to the presented legal interpretation of the interconnection between the proceedings concerned, envisaged in Articles 220v, or 220h of the Commercial Code (on additional compensation Article 220k, damages or just satisfaction) and the proceedings on the invalidity of the general meeting’s resolution – [the proportionality of the measure] can already be regarded as proved if it was newly stipulated, in addition to the legal elements ‘at play’ before the European Court of Human Rights, that [the proceedings] are characterised (in Article 131 § 4 of the Commercial Code) by the basis, which is provided for in the grounds for the invalidity of the general meeting’s resolution (even ‘if the court does not declare the general meeting’s resolution null and void for reasons mentioned in § 3’). This corresponds to the above conclusion that the issue of validity, or invalidity, of a general meeting’s resolution is an issue that the court examines as a preliminary question in related proceedings on those ‘new’ claims; in such proceedings, in which the appellant is (could be) a fully-fledged participant, he can appropriately defend his rights, including adequate opposition to the general meeting’s resolution. It has also been said that the ‘declaration’ sought by the appellant in the reasoning of the order discontinuing the proceedings on the invalidity of the general meeting’s resolution lacks the decisive nature (if it ever had one), and it was also noted that the granting of ‘certain claims for damages and just satisfaction’ is already thereby capable of expressing that the previously challenged general meeting’s resolution contained some of the deficiencies claimed by the appellant.”
On 30 November 2007 the  decided that the amount of compensation the applicant had received was inadequate and ordered the defendant to pay to the applicant a sum amounting to 289,735.60 Czech korunas (CZK, 11,802 euros (EUR)) together with interest rate of 7.5 per cent starting from 31 December 2001.
On 18 September 2009 the High Court upheld the judgment. It nevertheless partly modified the judgment’s operative part by including a declaration that the applicant, together with another petitioner, was entitled to additional compensation as provided for by Articles 200k and 220v of the Commercial Code.
On 14 August 2012 the Supreme Court quashed the decision in part and remitted the case to the High Court. It considered that that court had erred when it included the declaration in the operative part.
The relevant domestic law and practice are set out in the Court’s judgment Kohlhofer and Minarik v. the Czech Republic, nos. 32921/03, 28464/04 and 5344/06, §§ 40-70, 15 October 2009.
With effect from 1 January 2012 Act no. 355/2011 amending Act no. 125/2008 on the Transformation of Companies and Cooperatives was adopted. The new wording of section 57 of that act reads as follows:
“(1)  After the registration of the transformation in the Companies Register it is not possible
...
(b)  to declare the transformation project null and void or to declare the decision on the approval of transformation null and void; this shall be without prejudice to the members’ right to [additional] compensation and damages, or to just satisfaction, [...]
(2)  If court proceedings are pending on a motion for the declaration of the transformation project null and void or a motion for the declaration of the decision on the approval of transformation null and void at the moment of the registration of the transformation in the Companies Register, within a time limit set by the court, which must be at least 30 days, the petitioner can modify the motion for the initiation of the proceedings, even without the court’s approval, in a way that he seeks a declaration of whether the transformation project, or the decision on the approval of the transformation, is contrary to law, memorandum of association or articles of association. ...
(3)  If the court declares that the transformation project or the decision on the approval of the transformation are contrary to law, memorandum of association or articles of association, or that they are null and void, then the persons
(a)  who suffered damage in consequence of such violation or invalidity shall be entitled to damages, and
(b)  whose rights were interfered with by such violation, shall have the right to just satisfaction, which can also be provided in money.
(4)  Persons referred to in subsection 3 shall have the right mentioned therein
(a)  against all persons participating in the transformation or their legal successors if such a violation or the reason for the invalidity of the transformation project or the invalidity of the decision on the transformation are based on the content of the transformation project, or
(b)  against a person participating in the transformation whose [governing] body decided on the transformation, or against its legal successor, if such a violation or the reason for the invalidity of the decision on the transformation is not based on the content of the transformation project. ...”
In its decision of 30 March 2011, no. 29 Cdo 1048/2008 the Supreme Court referred to the Constitutional Court’s judgment in the present case and accepted its conclusions that the issue of validity, or invalidity, of a general meeting’s resolution is an issue that the court would examine as a preliminary question in continued proceedings on the right to damages or just satisfaction, or additional compensation.