The case originated in six applications (nos. 34262/14, 35948/14, 38276/14, 56232/14, 62138/14 and 63655/14) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by six Azerbaijani nationals, Mr Ilham Telman oglu Huseynov (“the first applicant”), Mr Tazakhan Maharram oglu Miralamli (“the second applicant”), Mr Bahruz Gazanfar oglu Hasanov (“the third applicant”), Mr Tofig Israyil oglu Dadashov (“the fourth applicant”), Mr Turkel Ahmad oglu Alisoy (“the fifth applicant”) and Mr Agaverdi Khudamali oglu Rushanov (“the sixth applicant”), on various dates in 2014 (see Appendix).
All the applicants were represented by Mr R. Mustafazade and Mr A. Mustafayev, lawyers practising in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
On 21 April 2015 the complaints concerning Articles 5, 6, 11 and 14, raised in all the applications, Article 10, raised only in application no. 56232/14, and Articles 13 and 18, raised only in applications nos. 62138/14 and 63655/14, were communicated to the Government. On the same date the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible.
The applicants’ dates of birth and places of residence are given in the Appendix.
At the material time all the applicants were members of an opposition party, the Popular Front Party of Azerbaijan (“the PFPA”), which together with some other parties formed a political union, Milli Shura. The first applicant was chairman of the Youth Committee of the PFPA and a journalist for the Azadlig newspaper. The fourth applicant was a member of that committee and the fifth applicant was a member of its board. The second applicant was chairman of the Jalilabad district branch of the PFPA and had also been a candidate of the PFPA-Musavat political bloc in the parliamentary elections of 2010. The third and sixth applicants were bodyguards for a chairman of the PFPA, Mr A.K.
It appears that the period from 2011 to 2013 was marked by an increase in political sensitivity in the country generated, inter alia, by the presidential elections, which took place in October 2013.
During the same period all the applicants participated in a number of peaceful opposition demonstrations. In the course of many of them, most of the applicants were arrested and subsequently convicted, as the assemblies had not been authorised. In particular, the second and third applicants were arrested during a demonstration on 20 October 2012 and the fourth and fifth applicants were arrested during a demonstration on 26 January 2013. The second and fourth applicants were also arrested during a demonstration on 11 March 2013.
According to the applicants, they had also intended to participate in upcoming protests planned by Milli Shura (including a protest scheduled for 9 March 2014, which was eventually cancelled). In addition, the fourth applicant was an organiser of a protest scheduled for 23 February 2014. According to him, he had created a Facebook group calling for the resignation of the Baku city mayor, who had allegedly insulted the Azeri nation in a speech by saying that the only man in the country was the President. The group had invited the public to participate in a demonstration against the mayor.
All the applicants were arrested in either February or March 2014. The fourth applicant was arrested on 22 February, the first, second and third applicants on 27 February, and the sixth applicant on 5 March. The fifth applicant claimed that he had also been arrested on 5 March, but according to the official records, he was arrested early in the morning (at around 7 a.m.) on 6 March.
According to the official records:
.  All the applicants contested the official version of their arrest:
At the respective police stations or offices, administrative offence reports (inzibati xəta haqqında protokol) were issued against the applicants, setting out the charges against them. All the applicants were charged with an administrative offence under Article 310.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) (failure to comply with a lawful order of a police officer). The first applicant was also charged under Article 296 of the CAO (minor hooliganism).
According to the applicants, they were never served with copies of the administrative offence reports or with other documents from their case files. They were also not given access to a lawyer after their arrest or while they were in police custody.
According to a record (protokol) issued by a police officer (who had arrested the fifth applicant and prepared an administrative offence report on him) and signed by that police officer and the fifth applicant, a State-funded lawyer was proposed to the applicant, but the applicant refused his assistance. The lawyer’s name and signature are missing from that record.
According to a statement (ərizə) written by the fourth applicant at a police office on the day of his arrest, he had refused the services of a lawyer.
On various dates the applicants were brought before the respective first-instance courts, which adopted their decisions on the merits on the same dates (see Appendix).
According to all the applicants, they were not given an opportunity to appoint lawyers of their own choosing. State-funded lawyers were appointed to assist them.
According to the documents in the respective case files, the first, third, fifth and sixth applicants refused the assistance of State-funded lawyers and decided to defend themselves in person.
According to the transcripts of the respective hearings, in their oral submissions the State-funded lawyer for the second applicant (Mr K.K.) briefly asked the court to discontinue the administrative case, and the Statefunded lawyer for the fourth applicant (Ms S.H.) briefly asked the court to consider the young age of the applicant.
.  In their statements before the courts the first, second, third, fourth and sixth applicants contested (see paragraph 11 above) the police officers’ versions of the events. The first applicant argued that he had been arrested for his political activity. The third applicant argued that the police’s allegation that they were investigating a car accident was a lie and that the police had wanted to frame him. The fourth applicant argued that he had been arrested for the comments he had posted on Facebook against the Baku city mayor.
The courts disregarded those statements.
The fifth applicant, however, gave a self-incriminatory statement confirming the police officers’ account of the events. He subsequently claimed that he had done so because the previous day he had been threatened with more serious charges and had still felt under the control of the police.
During the hearings with regard to the first, second, fourth and fifth applicants only the police officers who, according to the official records, had arrested the applicants and/or issued administrative offence reports on them were questioned as witnesses. In their statements those police officers reiterated the official version of the reasons for the applicants’ arrests (see paragraph 10 above).
In the case of the third applicant the court questioned three prosecution witnesses. All three stated that the applicant “had argued with the police officers, resisted and insulted them, saying to a police major ‘why have you brought these puppies here?’”.
.  In the case of the sixth applicant the court did not question any witnesses.
The courts found that the applicants had committed the administrative offences attributed to them (see paragraph 10 above). They convicted the applicants under Article 310.1 of the CAO and sentenced them to periods of administrative detention varying from ten to twenty days (see Appendix). The first applicant was also convicted under Article 296 of the CAO.
On various dates the applicants lodged appeals with the Baku Court of Appeal, presenting their version of the facts surrounding their arrests, and arguing that they had been unlawfully arrested for their political activity, including their active participation in demonstrations (the first, second, third, fifth and sixth applicants) or the comments they had posted on social media (the fourth applicant). The applicants also complained that the hearings before the respective first-instance courts had not been fair.
In addition, the fifth applicant submitted that previously he had given self-incriminatory statements for fear of being framed for the offence of illegal possession of drugs. He also complained that he had been kept in the police station overnight from 5 to 6 March 2014 without any official decision or record of his detention.
All the applicants were represented before the Baku Court of Appeal by lawyers of their own choosing.
On various dates the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicants’ appeals and upheld the decisions of the respective first-instance courts, stating that the conclusions reached by those courts were correct (see Appendix).
Article 410 of the Code of Administrative Offences of 2000 (“the CAO”) provided, at the material time, as follows:
“... 410.3.  A copy of the administrative-offence report shall be given to an individual who is subject to administrative-offence proceedings ...”
The relevant extracts of Resolution 1917 (2013) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, “The honouring of obligations and commitments by Azerbaijan”, read as follows:
“... 12. Recently adopted amendments to the Criminal Code and the Administrative Code, which have increased penalties for the organisers of, and participants in, “unauthorised” gatherings, raise concern. Considering the authorities’ ongoing blanket ban on protests in the Baku city centre, these amendments are likely to have a further negative impact on freedom of assembly and freedom of expression. ...”
The relevant extracts of Resolution 2062 (2015) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, “The functioning of democratic institutions in Azerbaijan”, adopted on 23 June 2015, read as follows:
“... 6. [T]he lack of independence of the judiciary remains a concern in Azerbaijan, where the executive branch is alleged to continue to exert undue influence. Dubiously motivated criminal prosecutions and disproportionate sentences remain a concern. Fairness of trials, equality of arms and respect for the presumption of innocence are other major concerns. ...
The Assembly is alarmed by reports by human rights defenders and international NGOs, confirmed by the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights, concerning the increase in criminal prosecutions against NGO leaders, journalists, lawyers and others who express critical opinions, based on alleged charges in relation to their work ... The Assembly calls on the authorities to end the systemic harassment of those who are critical of the government and to release those wrongfully detained. ...”
The European Parliament in its Resolution (2015/2840(RSP)) of 10 September 2015 emphasises, inter alia, that “the overall human rights situation in Azerbaijan has deteriorated continuously over the last few years, with growing intimidation and repression and intensification of the practice of criminal prosecution of NGO leaders, human rights defenders, journalists and other civil society representatives” and that “peaceful protesters have been effectively banned from demonstrating in central Baku since 2006, and new, harsh fines and longer periods of administrative detention for those who organise or participate in unauthorised public gatherings have recently been introduced”.
Amnesty International in its Report of May 2014, “Behind Bars: Silencing Dissent in Azerbaijan”, refers, inter alia, to decrease of public protests, due to the harshening from 1 January 2013 of penalties for breach of rules on organisation and holding of peaceful assemblies. It also emphasises that “those who have called for public protest have been dealt with harshly, with criminal proceedings initiated against them under fabricated charges”.
In the public statement of 7 March 2014, “Azerbaijan: Opposition party loses HQ after explosion and sees seven members arrested within 2 weeks”, Amnesty International reports, inter alia, on numerous detentions and arrests of the activists of the Popular Front Party of Azerbaijan during the late February and the early March 2014. It also reports on an explosion which occurred on 3 March 2014 in the basement of a building housing this political party and on allegations of the owner of the property that prior to the explosion he had been pressured to evict the party.
For a summary of the relevant provisions concerning administrative proceedings, the relevant provisions concerning freedom of assembly, and the relevant extracts from international documents and press releases, see the judgment in the case of Huseynli and Others v. Azerbaijan (nos. 67360/11, 67964/11 and 69379/11, §§ 67-77, 11 February 2016).