The case originated in five applications against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Romanian nationals and a Romanian company on the various dates indicated in the appended table. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 17 January 2017 the complaint concerning access to court was communicated to the Government and the remainder of applications nos. 24838/10 (Hulpe v. Romania), 66252/11 (Dolha v. Romania), and 57813/13 (Stroe v. Romania) was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The German Government was given notice of application no. 24838/10 (Hulpe v. Romania) owing to the applicant’s German nationality, but they did not exercise their right to intervene under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court.
When Mrs Valeria Dolha, the applicant in application no. 66252/11 (Dolha v. Romania), died on 14 February 2016, her sole heir,
The list of applicants and the relevant details of the applications are set out in the appended table.
The applicants lost court cases which had been examined in civil proceedings held in their absence. The notices of the court proceedings had been served on them solely by means of posting them on a gate or fence (hereinafter “by public notice” – citarea prin afişare). They all argued in their subsequent appeals, whether appeals on points of law (where notices had been served during first-instance proceedings or in appeal hearings) or appeals seeking the quashing of the final decision (contestaţie în anulare) (where the notices had been served during proceedings at final instance), that they had not been aware of the date of the court proceedings as they had never received the relevant court summons. Their complaints to that effect were dismissed by the courts on the grounds that service by public notice was provided for by law. Consequently, their appeals were dismissed without an examination of the merits of the cases.
The relevant domestic law in force at the time on the service of judicial documents by means of public notice is summed up in the Court’s judgment in S.C. Raisa M. Shipping S.R.L. v. Romania (no. 37576/05, § 18, 8 January 2013).