The case originated in an application (no. 59974/08) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national, Mr Epaminonda Eftimov (“the applicant”), on 5 December 2008.
The applicant was represented by Ms P. Gičeva-Petkova, a lawyer practising in Skopje. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings in which he was convicted had been unfair and lengthy.
On 22 November 2012 these complaints were communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Strumica, where he works as a surgeon at Strumica Hospital (“the hospital”).
On 8 June 1997 the applicant treated Z.R.’s broken and injured arm. In the days that followed Z.R. complained of pain in the arm. The applicant, together with two other doctors and other hospital staff, applied various treatments and referred Z.R. to the children’s clinic in Skopje.
On 11 June 1997 Z.R. was admitted to the children’s clinic in Skopje. It was discovered that he had a serious bacterial infection; consequently, his right hand was amputated on 19 June 1997.
On 25 September 1997, an investigating judge of Strumica Court of First Instance (“the trial court”), on a request by the public prosecutor, opened an investigation against the applicant. On 19 April 2000 the public prosecutor lodged an indictment against the applicant for aggravated medical malpractice (тешки дела против здравјето на луѓето).
On 10 July 2001 and 13 December 2004 the trial court acquitted the applicant (се ослободува од обвинение). Those judgments were quashed by the Štip Court of Appeal (“the appellate court”) on 30 January 2002 and 9 March 2005 respectively. The appellate court on both occasions observed, inter alia, that the degree of the applicant’s guilt and consequently, the proper qualification of the criminal offence, had not been correctly established in the proceedings before the trial court. It further ordered that the experts’ opinions be supplemented.
On 13 September 2006 the trial court again acquitted the applicant, finding no grounds that a criminal offence had been intentionally committed.
On 13 December 2006 the appellate court, of its own motion, at a session in the presence of both parties, re-qualified the charges and dismissed them (се одбива обвинението) as time-barred. It found that despite its instructions given in the earlier remittal orders, the degree of the applicant’s guilt was not correctly established in the proceedings before the trial court. The appellate court concluded that the applicant’s actions could have been negligent rather than intentional and therefore the criminal prosecution had become time-barred.
On 21 March 2007 the Supreme Court accepted the public prosecutor’s request for the protection of legality, and remitted the case to the appellate court. The Supreme Court held that the appellate court, having re-qualified the charges, established the facts anew without holding a hearing (претрес).
On 8 October 2007 the appellate court held a hearing in the presence of both parties and again dismissed the charges as time-barred.
The applicant and the public prosecutor both lodged appeals before the Supreme Court. The applicant also submitted observations in reply to the public prosecutor’s appeal.
On 26 March 2008 the Supreme Court held a session (седница) in the presence of the public prosecutor. After hearing the public prosecutor’s oral pleadings, in which she sought a dismissal of the applicant’s appeal and for the prosecutor’s appeal to be allowed, relying as well on the parties’ written submissions, the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal, allowed the public prosecutor’s appeal, and reversed the appellate court’s judgment. The Supreme Court accepted the trial court’s findings of facts and law, namely that the imputed offence should be qualified as intentional aggravated medical malpractice. The Supreme Court concluded that the applicant was guilty, and sentenced him to one year’s imprisonment. The applicant’s representative was served with the Supreme Court’s judgment on 19 June 2008, and the applicant himself on 11 July 2008.
On 1 April 2009 the applicant started serving the prison term. On 6 October 2009 the trial court replaced the prison sentence with a conditional discharge. This decision became final on 14 October 2009.
Under section 361 (1) and (3) of the 1997 Criminal Proceedings Act (“the Act”) (Закон за кривична постапка), the chair of the adjudicating panel of the appellate court appoints a judge rapporteur. The latter, in cases involving offences automatically subject to prosecution by the State, forwards the case file to the public prosecutor, who examines and returns it without delay. After receiving the case file, the chair sets a date for the session (седница) of the adjudicating panel. The public prosecutor is notified thereof.
Section 362 (1) and (3) of the Act provides for notification of the date of the appellate court’s session to be given, inter alia, to the defendant and his lawyer, if they so request. Such notification may be given even if there is no such request, if their attendance would contribute to establishing the facts. The second-instance court may seek additional explanations from the parties attending the session. The parties may propose that some documents from the case file are read or that they further develop their arguments submitted earlier.
Section 364 (1) and (2) of the Act provides that the second-instance court will hold a hearing (претрес) only if new evidence needs to be produced or evidence re-produced, or if the case does not need to be remitted for fresh consideration. The defendant and his or her counsel, the public prosecutor, the victim and any witnesses or experts to be heard are summoned to attend the hearing before the second-instance court.
Section 381 (1) of the Act foresees special circumstances under which a second-instance judgment may be appealed against before a third-instance court, namely the Supreme Court. The appellate court’s judgment may be appealed against, inter alia, when the second-instance court has held a hearing and based its decision on the facts as established anew. Section 381 (2) further foresees that statutory provisions regarding the appellate court’s session apply likewise to proceedings before the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court however could not hold a hearing.
Under section 392 § 1 (7) of the Act, a case may be reopened if the European Court of Human Rights has given a final judgment finding a violation of the human rights or freedoms. The same provision is provided for in section 449 (6) of the new Criminal Proceedings Act, which entered into force in 2010 and became applicable after 1 December 2013.
Section 217 (1) of the Criminal Code (“the Code”) sets out the criminal offence of aggravated medical malpractice and prescribes a prison sentence of between one and ten years. According to section 217 (3), in cases of negligence the criminal offence shall be subject to a prison sentence of between three months and three years.