The case originated in an application (no. 18986/06) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 4 May 2006 by two Ukrainian nationals, Mr Andriy Karakutsya, born in 1977 (“the first applicant”), and his wife, Mrs Nadiya Karakutsya, born in 1978 (“the second applicant”).
The applicants were represented by Ms S.V. Novytska, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, most recently, Mr I. Lishchyna of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been deprived of a fair hearing, notably access to the Supreme Court, and unlawfully evicted from their accommodation.
On 21 October 2013 the application was communicated to the Government. Mrs G. Yudkivska, the judge elected in respect of Ukraine, was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28 of the Rules of Court). The President of the Fifth Section decided to appoint Mr S. Goncharenko to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 1(b)).
.  In December 1996 the first applicant concluded a three-year military service contract with the Ministry of Defence.
.  In March 1999 its housing commission allocated him a studio in a residence hall for students and employees of the National Defence Academy of Ukraine (“the Defence Academy”), located on Z. Street in Kyiv, and the applicants moved into this accommodation.
.  In December 1999 the first applicant concluded another three-year military service contract.
.  On an unspecified date in 2001 the applicants’ daughter was born.
.  In December 2001 the first applicant rescinded his contract with the Ministry of Defence and resigned from military service, citing family circumstances.
.  On 4 April 2002 he was employed as a salesman by G., a private company.
.  On an unspecified date and for unknown reasons the first applicant registered himself as a temporary resident at an address on P. Street in Kyiv. However, according to the applicants’ submissions, the family continued to live in and pay charges for the Z. Street studio, which they had renovated and modernised at their own expense.
.  In October 2002 the Defence Academy and Office of the Prosecutor General instituted proceedings in the Shevchenkivskyy District Court in Kyiv, seeking to evict the applicants’ family from the Z. Street accommodation. Relying on Article 132 paragraph 1 of the Housing Code (see paragraph 35 below), the plaintiffs argued that because the first applicant had resigned from military service, he and his family were obliged to vacate the accommodation, which had been provided to them on a temporary basis in connection with the first applicant’s military service.
.  During the trial, the applicants alleged that the first applicant had been “cantoned” or quartered in the disputed accommodation as a military serviceman, a fact which triggered a special duty on the part of the State to keep providing him with housing upon his resignation from the armed forces. Article 132 paragraph 1 of the Housing Code, which concerned accommodation for seasonal and temporary employees, did not apply in their case. They also noted that the first applicant had a dependent wife and young child, and that the family had no other accommodation in Kyiv.
.  On 11 November 2003, after hearing oral submissions of all interested parties and having examined the written evidence presented, the court ruled for the plaintiffs. It found that the disputed accommodation had been provided to the applicants on a temporary basis, as a privilege in connection with the first applicant’s military service. Since it had been his decision to terminate the contract early, there was no right to keep the accommodation or any duty of the State to provide other accommodation under the applicable law. Article 132 paragraph 1 of the Housing Code was therefore applicable and the applicants’ family was legally obliged to vacate the Z. Street accommodation.
.  On 9 December 2003 the first applicant lodged an appeal with the Kyiv City Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”). No copy has been provided to the Court.
.  On 29 January 2004 the Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of 11 November 2003, following a hearing attended by representatives of the Defence Academy but not by the first applicant. The court held, in particular, that his service contract had contained no clauses obliging the Ministry to provide him with housing during his service. The fact that he had been provided with temporary accommodation at the Ministry’s discretion did not mean that the State had a duty to accommodate him or his family after termination of the contract.
.  According to the applicants, the Court of Appeal did not notify them of the date and time of the hearing of 29 January 2004. They further stated that on two occasions – in April 2004 and sometime in 2005 (the applicants could not recall the exact dates) – the first applicant had visited the Court to enquire about the status of the proceedings, but did not receive any meaningful response.
.  According to the applicants, on 28 April 2004 they were evicted from the Z. Street accommodation.
.  On 7 May 2004 the Official Gazette of Ukraine (Офіційний вісник України) published the new Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter “the 2004 Code”), which was adopted on 18 March 2004 and entered into force on 1 September 2005.
.  On 12 August and 26 September 2005 the first applicant lodged written complaints with the President of the Court of Appeal concerning the delay in examining his appeal.
.  On 3 October 2005 the Deputy President of the Court of Appeal informed him that his case had already been decided and that the judgment of 11 November 2003 had been upheld.
.  On 16 and 24 November 2005 the first applicant wrote to the Court of Appeal with a request to be provided with a copy of the decision taken on 29 January 2004.
.  On 29 November 2005 the applicants received a copy of that decision.
.  On 13 December 2005 the applicants lodged a request with the Supreme Court of Ukraine for leave to appeal in cassation out of time against the rulings of 11 November 2003 and 29 January 2004, on the grounds that they had not been notified of the latter ruling until 29 November 2005. They argued, in particular, that the Court of Appeal had failed, in breach of the requirements of the applicable law, to notify them of the date and time of the appeal hearing and the decision taken in their case. They had hence been deprived of their statutory right to attend the appeal hearing and to lodge a cassation appeal within the statutory time-limit. They also argued that the lower courts had erred in their assessment of the facts and application of the law in their case. In particular, since the first applicant had resigned from military service in connection with family circumstances, his situation fell within the ambit of paragraph 3, not paragraph 1 of Article 132 of the Housing Code. Accordingly, his family could only be evicted from the accommodation reserved for military personnel if they had been provided with other comparable accommodation. The applicants also relied on section 12 of the Social Protection of Military Servicemen Act (see paragraph 36 below) as the basis for their entitlement to permanent accommodation.
.  On 20 December 2005 the Supreme Court rejected the applicants’ request for leave to appeal out of time, noting that, in accordance with Article 325 § 2 of the new Code of Civil Procedure of 2004 such leave could only be granted within one year of pronouncement of the decision subject to appeal (see paragraph 34 below).
.  Article 216 of the Code obliged the first-instance courts to send parties who were not actually present at the hearing a copy of the judgment adopted in their absence, within five days of pronouncement. The type of service was not specified.
.  The Code set out a specific time frame for organising an appeal hearing. On receipt of the case file, the appeal judge to whom the case was assigned would carry out the necessary preparatory measures within ten days (Article 299), following which the court would schedule, no later than one month after completion of the preparative measures, a date on which the case would be considered at a hearing. The court’s registry was to immediately notify the parties to the case and other persons taking part in the proceedings of the time and place of that hearing (Article 300).
.  Article 302 provided that the rules of procedure applicable to the consideration of cases on appeal were the same as those for their consideration at first instance, unless expressly stated otherwise in the relevant provisions concerning the appeal procedure.
.  Article 303 stated that if the appellate court did not receive confirmation of delivery of the notification of the hearing to an absent party, the hearing had to be postponed. If the court did receive confirmation, the court could proceed with its consideration of the case in the absence of the party duly notified of the hearing.
.  Under Articles 319 and 320, parties to civil litigation were entitled to appeal on points of law (in cassation) against decisions of first-instance and appellate courts to the Supreme Court of Ukraine, acting as the “court of cassation”.
.  Article 321 provided that appeals on points of law had to be lodged within one month of the date of the ruling of the appellate court. If the above time-limit was missed for reasons which the court recognised as justified, it could, at the request of the person lodging the appeal in cassation, grant leave to appeal out of time (renew the applicable time-limit) if the request was lodged within one year of the date on which the right to appeal on points of law arose.
.  Under Article 336, the Supreme Court of Ukraine had to quash a judgment if the case had been considered in the absence of a party who had not been notified of the hearing on appeal.
.  The Code also set out that enforcement of judgments was possible either after a judgment “took effect” (набирає чинності) or, exceptionally, before that, if the first-instance court decided that “immediate enforcement” was warranted (Article 348). First-instance courts’ judgments took effect either upon expiry of the statutory time-limit for lodging an appeal, or, where an appeal was lodged, after its dismissal at the second instance (Article 231). According to Article 317, rulings of the second-instance courts took effect immediately upon pronouncement (although an appeal on points of law could still be lodged against them). By virtue of Article 219 paragraph 3, it was not possible for a court to order “immediate enforcement” of a judgment, which concerned eviction from residential premises, before that judgment took legal effect in accordance with Article 231 of the Code.
.  The relevant provisions of the 2004 Code, which entered into force on 1 September 2005, read as follows at the material time:
“Rulings and judgments of the appellate courts shall take effect upon the date of their pronouncement.”
“1.  An appeal in cassation (on points of law) ... may be lodged within two months of the date the judgment (ruling) of the appellate court takes effect.
If the time-limit ... has been missed for reasons which the court recognises as justified, the court of cassation may, at the request of the person lodging the appeal, renew that time-limit, within one year of the date on which the right to appeal in cassation arose.
An appeal in cassation lodged out of time ... shall be returned by the court of cassation to the person who lodged it ... if the [request for] renewal [of the time-limit] is refused ...”
“...
Decisions adopted by the appellate courts before the entry into force of this Code may be appealed against in cassation if the time-limit for [lodging] an appeal in cassation under the Code of Civil Procedure of 1963 has not expired ...”
The relevant parts of Article 132 of the Housing Code, as worded at the material time, read as follows:
“Seasonal, temporary employees and persons previously employed under temporary employment contracts who have terminated their employment, ... are subject to eviction from the hall of residence (hostel) [they had been permitted to occupy] in connection with [their] employment, without being provided with other housing ...
Other employees ... living in a hall of residence (hostel) in connection with their employment may be evicted without being provided with other housing in the event that they have terminated their employment at will and [on non-]serious grounds; [or have been dismissed] for breaching working discipline or committing a crime.
Persons who have terminated [their] employment on other grounds ... may only be evicted if [they have been] provided with other housing ...”
.  The relevant parts of Section 12 of the above Act, as worded at the material time, read as follows:
The State shall provide housing to military servicemen ...
... Military servicemen who enter into military service on a contractual basis shall be provided with “service accommodation” or living space in [a] hall of residence (hostel) for the first five years of service, in the event they have no housing in the locality of their service. In the event they continue military service beyond five years, the provision of housing to them shall follow the same general rules [as apply to career servicemen]. ...”
.  Under the provisions of the Enforcement Act, as worded at the material time, a State bailiff could initiate enforcement proceedings upon receipt of a formal enforcement document (such as a writ issued by a competent court), which had to include the date of the decision on the basis of which the writ had been issued, and the date on which it had taken legal effect (sections 18, 18-1 and 19). The Enforcement Act also provided that a decision to initiate enforcement proceedings was to be communicated to the parties concerned, who could appeal against it (section 24) as well as seek a suspension or stay of the enforcement on various grounds (sections 32 and 33).