The case originated in two applications (nos. 11157/04 and 15162/05) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Sergey Borisovich Anchugov and Mr Vladimir Mikhaylovich Gladkov (“the applicants”), on 16 February 2004 and 27 February 2005 respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Mr Ye. Stetsenko, a lawyer practising in Chelyabinsk. The second applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr V. Shukhardin, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, in the proceedings in application no. 11157/04, and by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, in the proceedings in application no. 15162/05.
The applicants complained, in particular, that, as they were convicted prisoners in detention, they were debarred from voting in elections. They relied on Article 10 of the Convention and Article 3 of Protocol No. 1, taken alone and in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention.
The President of the First Section decided to give notice of the applications to the Government on 22 October 2007 and 19 October 2009 respectively. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
On 11 June 2013 the Chamber decided to join the proceedings in the applications (Rule 42 § 1).
The first applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Chelyabinsk. The second applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Moscow.
On 10 January 1995 the first applicant was arrested on suspicion of having committed a criminal offence and remanded in custody.
By a judgment of 23 June 1998 the applicant was convicted at first instance on a charge of murder and several counts of theft and fraud and sentenced to death. On 20 December 1999 his conviction was upheld on appeal, but the death sentence was commuted to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
On the date of his latest correspondence with the Court, the first applicant was serving a sentence of imprisonment in penitentiary facility YuK-25/1 in Orenburg.
On 20 January 1995 the second applicant was arrested on suspicion of having committed a criminal offence and remanded in custody.
On 27 November 1995 the second applicant was convicted at first instance and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment. The sentence was upheld on appeal on 19 June 1996.
In another set of criminal proceedings, on 13 November 1998 the second applicant was convicted of murder, aggravated robbery, participation in an organised criminal group and resistance to police officers and sentenced to death. On 15 February 2000 his conviction was upheld on appeal, but the death sentence was commuted to fifteen years’ imprisonment, of which fourteen were to be served in prison and the last year in a correctional facility.
On 23 April 2008 the second applicant was released from prison on parole.
The first and second applicants were kept in pre-trial detention centres from 10 January 1995 to 20 December 1999 and from 20 January 1995 to 22 March 2000 respectively. During those periods the first applicant voted twice in parliamentary elections and the second applicant voted several times in parliamentary and presidential elections and in regional elections of an executive official.
On an unspecified date the first applicant was transferred to a penitentiary facility to serve his prison sentence. Since that date he has been debarred, as a convicted prisoner, from participating in any elections pursuant to Article 32 § 3 of the Russian Constitution (“the Constitution”).
On 22 March 2000 the second applicant was transferred to a prison to continue serving his sentence. From that date, and until his release from prison on 23 April 2008, the second applicant was debarred from voting in elections under the provisions of the aforementioned Article.
In particular, the applicants were ineligible to vote in the elections of members of the State Duma – the lower chamber of the Russian parliament – held on 7 December 2003 and 2 December 2007 and in the presidential elections of 26 March 2000, 14 March 2004 and 2 March 2008. The second applicant was also unable to vote in additional parliamentary elections held in the electoral constituency of his home address on 5 December 2004.
Both applicants challenged, at various times, the aforementioned constitutional provision before the Russian Constitutional Court (“the Constitutional Court”) stating that it violated a number of their constitutional rights.
In letters of 15 March and 6 April 2004, sent to the first and second applicants respectively, the Secretariat of the Constitutional Court replied that the applicants’ complaints fell outside the Constitutional Court’s competence and therefore had no prospects of success.
The second applicant appealed against that decision to the President of the Constitutional Court.
By a decision of 27 May 2004 the Constitutional Court declined to accept the second applicant’s complaint for examination, stating that it had no jurisdiction to check whether certain constitutional provisions were compatible with others.
On 19 July 2004 the Secretariat of the Constitutional Court forwarded the court’s decision to the second applicant. In a letter of 5 August 2004 a regional office of the Department of Execution of Sentences sent the Secretariat’s letter of 19 July 2004 to the second applicant’s prison. According to the second applicant, this correspondence, including the decision of 19 July 2004, was delivered to him on 1 September 2004.
The second applicant then repeatedly brought court proceedings against election commissions at various levels complaining of their refusals to allow him to vote in parliamentary and presidential elections. His complaints were rejected either on formal grounds or on the merits. Final decisions were taken by the appellate courts on 1 December 2007 and 3 April, 5 May, 4 June and 29 September 2008. The domestic courts mainly referred to Article 32 § 3 of the Constitution and the fact that the second applicant was a convicted prisoner, and stated that the domestic law debarred him from voting in elections. In its decision of 1 December 2007 the Lipetsk Regional Court also held as follows:
“In the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights dated 6 October 2005 in the case of Hirst v. the United Kingdom the applicant’s disenfranchisement on account of his serving a sentence of imprisonment was found to be in breach of Article 3 of Protocol No 1 to the Convention.
The European Court noted in that judgment that prisoners in general continued to enjoy all the fundamental rights and freedoms guaranteed under the Convention save for the right to liberty, where lawfully imposed detention expressly falls within the scope of Article 5 of the Convention.
It was also pointed out that a blanket statutory disenfranchisement of all convicted prisoners in prisons (of the United Kingdom) applies automatically to such prisoners, irrespective of the length of their sentence and irrespective of the nature or gravity of their offence and their individual circumstances. Such a general, automatic and indiscriminate restriction on a vitally important Convention right must be seen as falling outside any acceptable margin of appreciation, however wide that margin might be, and as being incompatible with Article 3 of Protocol No. 1.
... The Russian Federation accepts ... as binding the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights regarding questions of interpretation and application of the Convention and its Protocols in situations of alleged violations of those legal instruments by the Russian Federation where the alleged violation has taken place after their entry into force in respect of the Russian Federation.
However, the aforementioned judgment of the European Court does not allow a conclusion to be reached as to the unreasonableness of restrictions on electoral rights established in the legislation of the Russian Federation in respect of individuals serving a sentence of imprisonment after their conviction by a court.
Apart from the foregoing, the said judgment of the European Court provides that any restrictions on other rights of prisoners (save for the right to liberty) must be justified, although such justification may well be found in considerations of security, in particular the prevention of crime and disorder, which inevitably flow from the circumstances of imprisonment.
Also, it is noted that Article 3 of Protocol No. 1, which enshrines the individual’s capacity to influence the composition of the law-making power, does not therefore exclude that restrictions on electoral rights could be imposed on an individual who has, for example, seriously abused a public position or whose conduct threatened to undermine the rule of law or democratic foundations. The severe measure of disenfranchisement must not, however, be resorted to lightly and the principle of proportionality requires a discernible and sufficient link between the sanction and the conduct and circumstances of the individual concerned.
Therefore, without ruling out the very possibility of restricting electoral rights of convicted prisoners, the European Court attaches decisive weight to the proportionality and reasonableness of establishing this measure in law.
The criteria which the European Court has considered as decisive when determining a question of proportionality of, and justification for, limiting electoral rights of convicted prisoners – the nature and seriousness of their offence and their individual circumstances – were taken into account when [the second applicant’s] punishment was chosen, in accordance with provisions of the [Russian] legislation which were not analysed in the aforementioned judgment.
According to [a relevant provision] of the Russian Penitentiary Code, it is individuals convicted of particularly serious offences, or of particularly serious repeat offences, and sentenced to a term of imprisonment exceeding five years ... who serve their sentence in prison.
It should also be noted that, in accordance with Article 10 § 3 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 16 December 1966, the penitentiary system must comprise treatment of prisoners the essential aim of which must be their reformation and social rehabilitation.
[A relevant provision] of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure also lists the reform of a convicted prisoner as one of the aims of punishment, together with the prevention of further crimes.
Therefore, taking into account the aforementioned criteria, [it can be concluded that] the temporary (for the period of imprisonment) restriction of the electoral rights established in the legislation of the Russian Federation in respect of individuals serving a sentence of imprisonment is, from its inception, reasonable, justified and in the public interest, being a preventive measure aimed at reforming convicted prisoners and deterring them from committing crimes and breaching public order in the future, including in the period when elections are held.
The same [reasoning] applies to the restriction of [the second applicant’s] electoral rights.”
The second applicant also attempted to bring proceedings complaining of the refusal of the head of a local election commission to give him copies of certain documents.
On 27 December 2007 the Lipetsk Regional Court returned the second applicant’s claim, stating that it should be lodged with a lower court.
On 4 June 2008 the Supreme Court upheld the above decision on appeal.
In his first letter to the Court dated 16 February 2004, and dispatched, as is clear from the postmark, on 17 February 2004, the first applicant described the circumstances of his case and complained about his disenfranchisement and inability to vote in a number of elections held in Russia. He later reproduced this in an application form of 30 April 2004, which was received by the Court on 23 June 2004.
The second applicant complained about his disenfranchisement and inability to vote in elections in an application form which he dated 29 December 2004 and which, as is clear from the postmark, he sent on 27 February 2005. The Court received the application form on 30 March 2005.
Subsequently, the applicants updated their applications referring to new elections in which they were still ineligible to vote.
Article 15 (Chapter 1) of the Russian Constitution of 12 December 1993 provides:
“1.  The Constitution of the Russian Federation shall have supreme legal force and direct effect and shall be applicable within the entire territory of the Russian Federation. Statutes and other legal instruments adopted in the Russian Federation shall not contradict the Constitution of the Russian Federation.
...
Generally recognised principles and norms of international law and international treaties and agreements of the Russian Federation shall be a component part of its legal system. If an international treaty or agreement of the Russian Federation establishes other rules than those envisaged by the [domestic] law, the rules of the international treaty or agreement shall be applicable.”
Article 32 (Chapter 2) of the Constitution provides:
“...
Citizens of the Russian Federation shall have the right to elect and to be elected to bodies of state governance and bodies of local self-government, as well as to take part in a referendum.
... citizens detained in a detention facility pursuant to a sentence imposed by a court shall not have the right to vote or to stand for election.
...”.
Article 33 (Chapter 2) of the Constitution reads as follows:
“Citizens of the Russian Federation shall have the right to appeal in person and make individual and collective appeals to State bodies and local bodies of self-government”.
Article 134 (Chapter 9) of the Constitution reads as follows:
“Proposals on amendments to and revision of the provisions of the Constitution of the Russian Federation may be submitted by the President of the Russian Federation, the Federation Council, the State Duma, the Government of the Russian Federation, legislative (representative) bodies of constituent entities of the Russian Federation, and by groups of deputies numbering no less than one fifth of the total number of deputies of the Federation Council or of the State Duma”.
Article 135 (Chapter 9) of the Constitution provides:
“1.  The provisions of Chapters 1, 2 and 9 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation may not be revised by the Federal Assembly.
Where a proposal to revise any provisions in Chapters 1, 2 and 9 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation is supported by three fifths of the total number of deputies of the Federation Council and the State Duma, a Constitutional Assembly shall be convened in accordance with a federal constitutional law.
The Constitutional Assembly may either confirm the inviolability of the Constitution of the Russian Federation or draw up a new draft of the Constitution of the Russian Federation which shall be adopted by two thirds of the total number of deputies to the Constitutional Assembly or submitted to a nationwide vote. In the event of a nationwide vote, the Constitution of the Russian Federation shall be considered as adopted if more than half of those voting have voted for it, provided that more than half of the electorate have taken part in the voting.”
The provisions of Article 32 § 3 of the Constitution are reproduced in section 4(3) of the Federal Law of 12 June 2002 on Fundamental Guarantees of Electoral Rights and Eligibility to Participate in a Referendum of the Citizens of the Russian Federation and in section 3(4) of the Federal Law of 10 January 2003 on Presidential Elections in the Russian Federation.
Article 27 (“Internal law and observance of treaties”) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties reads as follows:
“A party may not invoke the provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to perform a treaty. ...”
At its fifty-third session, in 2001, the International Law Commission (“the ILC”) adopted a text entitled “Draft articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, with commentaries”. The text was submitted to the United Nations General Assembly as a part of the ILC’s report covering the work of that session. The report was published in the “Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 2001”, vol. II, Part Two, as corrected. In its relevant parts, the aforementioned text read as follows:
Article 3: Characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful
“The characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful is governed by international law. Such characterization is not affected by the characterization of the same act as lawful by internal law.”
In its commentary to this article the ILC noted, in particular:
“(1)  Article 3 makes explicit a principle ... that the characterization of a given act as internationally wrongful is independent of its characterization as lawful under the internal law of the State concerned ... [A] State cannot, by pleading that its conduct conforms to the provisions of its internal law, escape the characterization of that conduct as wrongful by international law ...”
...
(3)  That conformity with the provisions of internal law in no way precludes conduct being characterized as internationally wrongful is ... well settled ... The principle was reaffirmed many times:
“...
... a State cannot adduce ... its own Constitution with a view to evading obligations incumbent upon it under international law or treaties in force [Treatment of Polish Nationals and Other Persons of Polish Origin or Speech in the Danzig Territory, Advisory Opinion, 1932, P.C.I.J., Series A/B, No. 44, p. 24].”
...
(9)  As to terminology, in the English version the term “internal law” ... covers all provisions of the internal legal order, whether written or unwritten and whether they take the form of constitutional or legislative rules, administrative decrees or judicial decisions.”
The relevant provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights read as follows:
Article 10
“1.  All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person.
...
The penitentiary system shall comprise treatment of prisoners the essential aim of which shall be their reformation and social rehabilitation ...”
Article 25
“Every citizen shall have the right and the opportunity, without any of the distinctions mentioned in article 2 [race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status] and without unreasonable restrictions:
(a)  To take part in the conduct of public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives;
(b)  To vote and to be elected at genuine periodic elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret ballot, guaranteeing the free expression of the will of the electors;
(c)  To have access, on general terms of equality, to public service in his country.”
In its General Comment no. 25 (1996) on Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Human Rights Committee expressed the following view:
“14.  In their reports, States parties should indicate and explain the legislative provisions which would deprive citizens of their right to vote. The grounds for such deprivation should be objective and reasonable. If conviction for an offence is a basis for suspending the right to vote, the period of such suspension should be proportionate to the offence and the sentence. Persons who are deprived of liberty but who have not been convicted should not be excluded from exercising the right to vote.”
In its views on the Yevdokimov and Rezanov v. Russian Federation case (21 March 2011, no. 1410/2005), the Human Rights Committee, referring to the Court’s judgment in Hirst (no. 2) [GC] (cited above), stated:
“7.5 ... the State party, whose legislation provides a blanket deprivation of the right to vote to anyone sentenced to a term of imprisonment, did not provide any arguments as to how the restrictions in this particular case would meet the criterion of reasonableness as required by the Covenant. In the circumstances, the Committee concludes there has been a violation of article 25 alone and in conjunction with article 2, paragraph 3, of the Covenant...”
This document, adopted by the European Commission for Democracy through Law (“the Venice Commission”) at its 51st plenary session (5-6 July 2002) and submitted to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on 6 November 2002, lays down the guidelines developed by the Commission concerning the circumstances in which people may be deprived of the right to vote or to stand for election. The relevant passages read as follows:
“i.  provision may be made for depriving individuals of their right to vote and to be elected, but only subject to the following cumulative conditions:
it must be provided for by law;
the proportionality principle must be observed; conditions for depriving individuals of the right to stand for election may be less strict than for disenfranchising them;
the deprivation must be based on mental incapacity or a criminal conviction for a serious offence;
Furthermore, the withdrawal of political rights or finding of mental incapacity may only be imposed by express decision of a court of law.”
A comparative law study was carried out in the context of the proceedings before the Grand Chamber of the Court in the case of Scoppola v. Italy (no. 3) ([GC], no. 126/05, §§ 45-48, 22 May 2012). Nineteen of the forty-three Contracting States examined in that study place no restrictions on the right of convicted prisoners to vote: Albania, Azerbaijan, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, “the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia” and Ukraine.
Seven Contracting States (Armenia, Bulgaria, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Russia and the United Kingdom) automatically deprive all convicted prisoners serving prison sentences of the right to vote.
The remaining seventeen member States (Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia and Turkey) have adopted an intermediate approach: disenfranchisement of prisoners depends on the type of offence and/or the length of the custodial sentence.
In some of the States in this category the decision to deprive convicted prisoners of the right to vote is left to the discretion of the criminal court (Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania and San Marino). In Greece and Luxembourg, in the event of particularly serious offences disenfranchisement is applied independently of any court decision.
For other relevant materials see Scoppola (no. 3) [GC], cited above, §§ 43, 49-60.