The case originated in an application (no. 4809/10) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Mykhaylo Yevgenovych Grafov (“the applicant”), on 12 January 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr I.B. Baytsar, a lawyer practising in Chernivtsi, Ukraine. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention that following a mistake of the State bailiffs he was deprived of his property and was not compensated for it.
On 30 March 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1977 and lives in Chernivtsi.
In October 2002 the Zalishchytskyy Local Court of Ternopil Region issued a writ of enforcement in a case against a private company, U. The parties did not provide any documents related to the proceedings against company U.
Under that writ in March 2005 the State Bailiffs’ Service seized, among other property items which belonged to company U., an industrial construction (a 2,000 sq. meters metallic shed) of a declared worth of 98,000 Ukrainian hryvnas (UAH) equivalent at the material time to around 13,950 euros (EUR).
In December 2005 the State Bailiffs’ Service concluded an agreement with a private company M. to hold an auction in order to sell the seized shed.
On 3 April 2006 the applicant participated in this auction and bought the above construction for UAH 26,000 (at the material time around EUR 4,200). The applicant submitted copies of the bills according to which he had paid the above amount in full.
On 10 August 2006 the applicant sold the shed to a private person T. for UAH 50,000.
On an unidentified date, a third person S. lodged an administrative claim against the bailiffs and the applicant seeking to declare the bailiff’s seizure and sale of the shed unlawful as in fact it belonged to him. In view of this claim, in October 2006 the sales contract between the applicant and T. was annulled by the parties and the applicant returned the money to T. On 23 November 2006 the Zalishchytskyy Local Court of Ternopil Region found that the shed belonged to S. and thus the bailiffs had unlawfully seized and sold it. There is no information as to whether there was an appeal against this decision.
In parallel, criminal proceedings for abuse of office were initiated against bailiff D. in charge of the respective enforcement proceedings. On 16 March 2007 the applicant was given victim status in these proceedings. In the relevant resolution it was noted that the applicant sustained pecuniary damage and had not been reimbursed the money he had paid at the auction. The amount of the damage aggravated the charges against the bailiff.
On 2 August 2007 the Zalishchytskyy Local Court convicted the bailiff as charged. In the text of the sentence the applicant is referred to as a witness. Apparently, no civil claim was submitted by the applicant in the course of these criminal proceedings. There is no information whether there was an appeal against this sentence.
In May 2008 the applicant instituted civil proceedings against the Bailiffs’ Service and the local department of the State Treasury claiming compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage. The applicant referred to provisions on compensation of damage of the Civil Code of Ukraine, in particular Article 1174, and to Article 11 of the Law of Ukraine “On the State Bailiffs’ Service” according to which damage caused to an individual by actions or omissions of a state official, in particular, by a bailiff during enforcement proceedings, had to be compensated by the State (see paragraphs 19 and 21 below).
On 1 December 2008 the Sadgirskyy District Court of Chernivtsi found for the applicant based on the above legislative provisions. It awarded the applicant UAH 60,262 (equivalent to around EUR 6,884) which comprised: i) cost of the shed (UAH 26,000); ii) bank commission (UAH 262); iii) lost income (UAH 24,000) and iv) non-pecuniary damages (UAH 10,000).
Following the defendant’s appeal, on 12 March 2009 the Chernivtsi Regional Court of Appeal quashed this decision and rejected the applicant’s claims as unsubstantiated. The court held that since the applicant was not a party to the enforcement proceedings in the case against company U. he could not claim damages from the bailiffs under Article 11 of the Law of Ukraine “On the State Bailiffs’ Service” (see paragraph 21 below). The court of appeal did not examine the applicability of the Civil Code provisions, relied upon by the applicant and the local court. The court further noted that the applicant failed to demonstrate that the shed had been in fact seized from him without any compensation, or that the sales contract with company M. in charge of the auction had been dissolved.
The applicant appealed in cassation stating that he no longer owned or used the shed as its seizure and sale were found unlawful by the court decision of 23 November 2006 (see paragraph 11 above) and it had been returned to S. He noted that the money he paid at the auction had not been reimbursed. He thus sustained damages. To support his claim the applicant reiterated again the Civil Code provisions.
On 23 July 2009 the Supreme Court of Ukraine refused to open cassation proceedings finding the cassation appeal ill-founded.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code as to compensation of damage in force at the material time read as follows:
“1.  Pecuniary damage caused by unlawful decisions, actions or omission to personal non-pecuniary rights of an individual or a legal entity, as well as damage caused to property of an individual or a legal entity, shall be fully compensated by the person who caused it. ...”
“1.  Damage caused to an individual or a legal entity by unlawful decisions, actions or omission of an official of a state authority, an authority of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea or a local self-government body in the exercise of its powers shall be compensated by the State, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea or a local selfgovernment body irrespective of the guilt of the official. ...”
Under Article 28 of the Criminal Procedural Code of Ukraine, a person who has sustained damage as a result of a criminal offence can lodge a civil claim against an accused or persons liable for the actions of the accused at any stage of criminal proceedings before the beginning of the consideration of the case on the merits by a court. If no civil claim has been submitted within criminal proceedings or if it has been left without consideration, a person can lodge a claim in civil proceedings.
The relevant provisions of the Law of Ukraine “On the State Bailiffs’ Service” in force at the material time provide as follows:
“...
Bailiffs are representatives of State power and conduct enforcement of court decisions rendered in the name of Ukraine, and of decisions of other bodies (State officials) the enforcement of which is entrusted to the bailiffs’ service, in the manner established by law. ...”
“Damage caused by a bailiff to individuals or legal persons during the enforcement of a judgment shall be compensated in the manner established by law at the expense of the State. ...”