The case originated in an application (no. 27915/94) against the Republic of Poland  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Maciej Niedbała (“the applicant”), on 5 February 1995. The applicant alleged a violation of Article 5 §§ (3) and (4) and Article 8 of the Convention.
Before the Court the applicant was represented by Mr W. Hermeliński, a lawyer practising in Warsaw. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Krzysztof Drzewicki, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 7 July 1999 the panel of the Grand Chamber determined that the case should be decided by one of the Sections (Rule 100 § 1 of the Rules of Court). It was thereupon assigned to the First Section.
The applicant and the Government each filed a memorial on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 14 March 2000.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Wojciech Hermeliński, Mr Krzysztof Drzewicki, Ms Małgorzata Wąsek-Wiaderek and Ms Renata Kowalska.
On 31 August 1994 the applicant was arrested. On 2 September 1994 the Rybnik District Prosecutor, W., remanded him in custody on suspicion of theft of a car.
The applicant appealed to the Katowice Regional Court. On 12 September 1994 the court dismissed the appeal, finding that there was sufficient evidence to establish that the applicant might have committed the offence concerned and the reasons for which the applicant had been remanded in custody had not ceased to exist.
On 21 September 1994 the Rybnik District Public Prosecutor prolonged the applicant's detention until 30 November 1994, considering that the evidence gathered in the course of investigations strongly indicated that the applicant had committed the offence in question. An expert opinion had still to be taken.
On 10 October 1994 the Katowice Regional Court dismissed the applicant's appeal against this decision, considering that the evidence strongly indicated that the applicant had committed the offence in question.  Further time-consuming evidence still had to be taken, which justified the prolongation of the detention.
On 24 October 1994 the Rybnik District Public Prosecutor refused to release the applicant, considering that the investigations had not been completed, further forensic evidence had to be taken and the reasons for which the detention had originally been decided had not ceased to exist.
On 2 November 1994 the applicant wrote a letter to the Ombudsman, complaining about alleged irregularities in the criminal proceedings against him and about having allegedly been assaulted by the police on his arrest.  The prison authorities forwarded this letter to the Rybnik District Prosecutor. On 23 November 1994 the Rybnik District Prosecutor informed the applicant that the letter to the Ombudsman had been forwarded to the Tychy District Public Prosecutor, for the purpose of investigating the alleged assault. It was later forwarded to the Ombudsman. The letter reached the Ombudsman's office on 27 December 1994 and was registered there under file number RPO 174886/94/II. On 28 November 1994 the applicant sent a further letter to the Ombudsman.
On 15 November 1994 the Katowice Regional Prosecutor dismissed the applicant's appeal against the decision of 24 October 1994. The Prosecutor considered that the evidence strongly indicated that the applicant had committed the offence in question. The reasons for which the detention had been ordered had not ceased to exist. The investigations should be continued and this required that the applicant should remain in detention.
On 9 March 1995 the applicant filed a request with the Katowice Regional Court to have the lawfulness of his detention reviewed as provided for by Article 5 § 4 of the European Convention of Human Rights. This request remained unanswered.
On 20 March 1995 the Katowice Regional Court convicted the applicant of possessing stolen goods and ordered that he be released from detention on remand. The applicant and the Public Prosecutor filed appeals against this judgment.
On 21 April 1995 the applicant was rearrested and the Racibórz District Public Prosecutor decided to put the applicant in detention on remand on suspicion of attempted theft of a car on 20 April 1995. The applicant appealed to the Racibórz District Court, invoking, inter alia, Article 5 § 3 of the Convention. On 27 April 1995 the court dismissed the appeal, considering that the detention on remand had been ordered in accordance with the law. Article 210 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that it is the Public Prosecutor who is competent to decide on detention on remand.
On 12 June 1995, in reply to the applicant's letter of 2 November 1994, the Ombudsman informed the applicant that the ratification of the Convention did not automatically entail the derogation of the provisions of Polish law relating to the authorities competent to decide on deprivation of liberty. Thus the courts and prosecutors were still obliged to apply domestic law currently in force in this respect. The relevant amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure had already been adopted by Parliament, but they had not yet entered into force. Current public debate about the possible direct applicability of the Convention in the domestic legal order was of a purely theoretical nature. The decisions concerning the applicant's detention were therefore in accordance with the law.
On 5 September 1995 the Katowice Court of Appeal amended the impugned judgment of 20 March 1995 in that it found the applicant guilty of aiding and abetting the sale of stolen goods and sentenced him to two years and six months' imprisonment and a fine.
At the relevant time, the authorities competent to decide on detention on remand were provided for in Articles 210 and 212 of the Polish Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969, which read as follows:
	"1. Preventive measures [i.e. detention on remand, bail and police supervision] shall be imposed by the court; before a bill of indictment is lodged with the court, they shall be ordered by the prosecutor (...)."
	"1.  A decision concerning preventive measures may be appealed [to a higher court] .... 
	2.  A prosecutor's order on detention on remand may be appealed to the court competent to deal with the merits of the case...."
These provisions were amended on 29 June 1995 by the Law of 29 June 1995 on Amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure and Other Criminal Statutes, which entered into force on 4 August 1996. Pursuant to this amendment, detention on remand could be imposed only by a court order.
A new Code of Criminal Procedure was enacted by the Sejm (Parliament) on 6 June 1997. Its Article 250, in its relevant part, reads:
At the relevant time the presence of the parties at court sessions other than hearings was regulated in Articles 87 and 88 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969, which, insofar as relevant, provided:
"The Court pronounces its decisions at a hearing if the law provides for it; and otherwise, at a court session held in camera. ..."
"A court session in camera may be attended by a prosecutor (...); other parties may attend if the law provides for it."
Pursuant to Article 249 of the new Code of Criminal Procedure, before deciding on the application of the preventive measures, the court shall hear the person charged with offence. The lawyer of the detainee should be allowed to attend in the court session, if he or she is present. It is not mandatory to inform the lawyer of the date and time of the court session, unless the suspect so requests and if it will not hinder the proceedings.
The court shall inform the lawyer of a detained person of the date and time of court sessions at which a decision is to be taken concerning prolongation of detention on remand, or an appeal against a decision to impose or to prolong detention on remand is to be considered.
At the material time the relations between the organs of the Polish State were set out in interim legislation, i.e. the Constitutional Act of 17 October 1992 (Mała Konstytucja). Article 1 of the Act laid down the principle of the separation of powers in the following terms:
	"The legislative power of the State shall be vested in the Sejm and the Senate of the Republic of Poland; the executive power shall be vested in the President of Poland and the Council of Ministers; and judicial power shall be vested in the independent courts."
Under Article 56 of the Act, the Council of Ministers (Rada Ministrów) shall be composed of the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers.
In pursuance of Article 1 of the Act of 20 June 1985 (Ustawa o sądach powszechnych), the courts are entrusted with administration of justice in the Republic of Poland. The courts are courts of appeal, regional courts and district courts. Under Article 9 of the Law, the Supreme Court exercises supervisory jurisdiction over lower courts.
Article 1 of the Act of 20 June 1985 on Prosecuting Authorities (Ustawa o Prokuraturze) which determines general principles concerning the structure, functions and organisation of prosecuting authorities, at the material time read as follows:
"1.	The prosecuting authorities shall be the Prosecutor General, prosecutors and military prosecutors. Prosecutors and military prosecutors shall be subordinate to the Prosecutor General.
The Prosecutor General shall be the highest prosecuting authority; his functions shall be carried out by the Minister of Justice."
Article 2 of the Act reads: 
"The prosecuting authorities shall ensure the observance of the rule of law and the prosecution of criminal offences."
Under Article 7 of the Act, in carrying out his statutory duties, a prosecutor shall abide by the principles of impartiality and equality of citizens before the law.
Pursuant to Article 8 of the Act, a prosecutor is independent in carrying out his or her duties, within the limits set out in this Article. A prosecutor shall abide by the instructions, guidelines and orders of his superiors. However, if an order relates to the substance of any action to be taken in proceedings, a prosecutor may request [his superior] to issue the order concerned with reasons in writing, to alter the order, to relieve him from performing an act prescribed by that order, or to remove him from conducting the case in question. The requests to be removed from a case shall be decided by a hierarchical superior of the prosecutor who issued the order."
Chapter III of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969, applicable at the material time, entitled "Parties to proceedings, defence counsel, representatives of victims and representatives of society", described a prosecutor as a party to criminal proceedings. According to all the relevant provisions of the Code read together, a prosecutor performed investigative and prosecuting functions in the course of criminal proceedings. In particular, after completing the investigation, he drew up a bill of indictment and represented the prosecuting authority before the court competent to deal with the case.
Under Article 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1969 ”organs conducting criminal proceedings [including a prosecutor] shall examine and take into account evidence in favour of as well as against the accused.”
Under Article 1 of the Ombudsman Act of 15 July 1987, it is the Ombudsman's task to examine, in his capacity as the guardian of human rights, whether the acts or failure to act on the part of the authorities, organisations and institutions whose functions necessarily impinge on these rights, breached the law or the principles of equity. The Ombudsman may undertake measures provided for by law if he receives information from which it transpires that human rights have been breached. Pursuant to Article 13 of the Act, he is competent to investigate individual complaints. When investigating such complaints he may, inter alia, demand that the judicial, prosecuting and administrative authorities submit to him information about a concrete individual case. Under Article 14, once the investigation is completed, the Ombudsman may, if a breach of human rights and liberties has been found, present his opinion to the authority conducting the proceedings. The Ombudsman's actions must be compatible with the principle of the independence of the judiciary. He may also inform a superior authority of his findings and request that appropriate measures provided for by law be taken in respect of the person whose actions amounted to a violation of human rights.
At the relevant time the situation of persons detained on remand was governed by the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences of 19 April 1969. Under Article 89 of that Code, all correspondence of a person detained on remand was subject to censorship, unless a prosecutor and a court decided otherwise. No provision of the Code provided for any remedy to contest the manner or scope of the censorship of a detainee’s correspondence.
The rights of persons detained on remand as regards their correspondence were further set out in Rule 33 of the Rules on Detention on Remand, adopted in 1989. They provided that the correspondence of persons detained on remand was subject to censorship by the authority conducting the criminal proceedings, i.e. either a public prosecutor or a court, depending on the stage reached in the proceedings.
On 6 July 1997 a new Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences was enacted by parliament. Article 102 of this Code, which entered into force on 1 January 1998, provides that the convicted persons are entitled to uncensored correspondence with the State authorities and with the Ombudsman. Article 103 of the Code further provides that convicted persons and their lawyers may lodge complaints with the international agencies established under international treaties on protection of human rights, ratified by Poland. Prisoners’ correspondence in such cases shall be dispatched with no delay and is not subject to censorship.
Pursuant to Article 512 of the new Code, the rights of persons detained on remand shall, in principle, be at least equal with those of persons convicted by a final judgment.
Article 3 of the Ordinance, which was later repealed, provided that the President of the Regional Court carried out supervision over administrative aspects of the administration of justice by district courts within the jurisdiction of the Regional Court, whereas Article 4 provided that the President of the Court of Appeal carried out supervision over administrative aspects of the administration of justice by regional courts within the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal.
The application was declared partly admissible by the Commission on 7 July 1997. In its report of 1 March 1999 (former Article 31 of the Convention) it expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been a violation of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention in that the applicant had been deprived of liberty by a decision of a prosecutor who had not been a judge or other officer authorised by law to exercise judicial power, of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention in that the proceedings concerning review of his detention on remand had not been truly adversarial and of Article 8 of the Convention in that the applicant’s correspondence with the Ombudsman had been intercepted and delayed.