The case originated in 100 applications against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ukrainian nationals, a company based in Ukraine and a Russian national, whose details are specified in the appended tables (“the applicants”).
The applicant Mr Viktor Andriyovych Bondar died (application no. 13890/09). His wife, Ms Nadiya Yefremivna Bondar, manifested a wish to pursue the application on his behalf.
By letter dated 19 December 2012, the Government informed the Court that the applicant Mr Vladimir Shabodinovich Khamzatov (application no. 33262/10) had died. A copy of the letter was forwarded to the deceased applicant’s address on 19 February 2013 by registered post for comments to be submitted by 11 March 2013. The reader was warned that in the absence of response, the Court would assume that the applicant had died and that no individual was entitled and wished to pursue the application. No reply was received.
By letter dated 27 October 2012 the applicant Ms Olena Georgiyivna Mykhaylova (application no. 475/11) informed the Court that she wanted to withdraw the application since the judgment rendered in her favour had been fully enforced.
The Government (“the Government”) are represented by their Agent, Mr Nazar Kulchytskyy.
On 4 October 2012 the applications above were communicated to the Government of Ukraine.
The Russian Government, having been informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings in respect of the applicant in application no. 63882/09 (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court), indicated that they did not wish to exercise that right.
On the dates set out in the appended tables domestic courts and labour disputes commissions delivered decisions according to which the applicants were entitled to various pecuniary amounts or to have certain actions taken in their favour. The decisions became final and enforceable. However, the applicants were unable to obtain the enforcement of the decisions in due time.
Some of the applicants also made submissions concerning factual and legal matters unrelated to the above non-enforcement issues.