The case concerns defamation proceedings brought against the applicant, who complained under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention of a lack of impartiality on the part of the presiding Supreme Court judge in the appeal proceedings and under Article 10 of the Convention of a violation of his right to freedom of expression.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Larnaca. He was represented by Andreas S. Angelides L.L.C, a firm of lawyers practising in Nicosia.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr C. Clerides, Attorney General of the Republic of Cyprus.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is an advocate and a Member of Parliament of the Republic of Cyprus.
On 26 May 2006, during a live political talk show entitled “First Programme” (“Proti Ekpompi” – “Πρώτη Εκπομπή”) on Radio Proto (Ράδιο Πρώτο) the applicant made, inter alia, certain remarks about another politician, Mr C.Th., a former minister and high-ranking member of a political party. In particular, in so far as relevant, he stated:
“From what I carefully heard from colleagues of the Democratic Rally party, I say the following. What was the first act of this man? To visit whom, if you please? The leader of the occupied area. A significant personality for our national cause. So I say unequivocally that it is a stab in the back to the national cause of our country and our people. Because he is a man who governed the country for ten years. A man who immediately after the elections in which the party to which he belonged and [which] led [the campaign] promoting party loyalty so that people supported it and which received 30.6% of the votes – what was his first political act? To visit whom? The occupation leader in the so-called presidential palace. And this is really a stab in the back for the laws and rights of our people. That is to say, only naive people cannot understand the political messages imparted by this unacceptable act, and indeed who was he accompanied by? By Mr C.Th. who, to remind you incidentally, recently received a respectable sum of 7,000 Cyprus Pounds from a Turkish company and the next day went to a television station and stated that there was no pseudo-state. And I also want to note that this in essence constituted an up-grade of the pseudo-state which the English and the Americans seek. By whom? By our own people. And this constitutes huge support for Turkish intransigence. Why should the Turks change their positions when our own people and especially people who hold office with the approval of our people hold these views? That is to say, if we were in the position of the Turks, would we change our views? Namely, when you see people who acted in this way and swore on the Holy Bible that the Annan plan be accepted because it was manna from heaven, they would have to be crazy to change their attitude and positions.
And let me say something more. The people who applied to UNOPS for financial aid, such as Mr S., were those whom party loyalty in DISY rewarded so that they received the most preference votes. These are the messages received by the Turks, and the Turks know their job very well. And I think now the responsibility has to be emphasised of all these people who, due to their naivety, believe that party loyalty is above the interests of the country and the people. We must first preserve the party and let the country go where it will. And become Turkish. And when Mr C. went accompanied by Mr T. and his daughter yesterday, he certainly went also accompanied by all these thousands of votes received by these gentlemen. It is a very sad development.”
C.Th. brought an action for defamation against the applicant before the District Court of Nicosia (civil action no. 3775/06) under section 17 of the Civil Wrongs Act (Cap. 148). His complaint focused on two of the applicant’s remarks: the allegation that he had received money from a Turkish company; and the remark about his position with regard to the “pseudo state”:
“That is to say, only naive people cannot understand the political messages imparted by this unacceptable act, and indeed who was he accompanied by? By Mr C.Th. who, to remind you incidentally, recently received a respectable sum of 7,000 Cyprus Pounds from a Turkish company and the next day went to a television station and stated that there was no pseudo-state”.
On 30 June 2008 the District Court dismissed the action and made an order for costs against the plaintiff. It held that the two remarks in question were not connected and were not defamatory of the plaintiff, whether considered together or separately. Despite that finding, for reasons of completeness the court also examined the applicant’s defence of “fair comment”, which it allowed. Although the applicant had initially also pleaded the defences of justification (truth) and qualified privilege (see paragraphs 3031 below), he did not pursue them.
The plaintiff lodged an appeal before the Supreme Court (civil appeal no. 297/08). The appeal was heard by a bench of three judges.
Following the submission of written observations by the parties but prior to the hearing of the appeal, the appellant changed lawyer.
During the hearing a question arose concerning the scope of the case and, in particular, the defence of fair comment.
The verbatim record of the appeal hearing on 24 June 2011 reports, in so far as relevant, the following exchange (translation):
“Appellant’s lawyer: I move on to the next point, which is that of fair comment. The first-instance court stated that it was not defamatory. For my submissions to be complete I will deal with the defence of fair comment. However, fair comment presupposes a comment. We have to have a comment and then we examine whether this is fair within the meaning of the law. Here, is there anything in the contested sentence that could possibly be characterised as a comment? Or maybe in reality, the case in any event comes down to whether (καταλήγει) it is defamatory or not. If you agree with this...
Court: It is Mr A [the applicant’s lawyer] who has to agree in order to remove this matter from the discussion...
Applicant’s lawyer: Of course, honourable Mr President, we have isolated a sentence from the whole picture...
Court: You are the ones who are mostly seeking the isolation.
Applicant’s lawyer: Indeed. Here is a sentence, from everything that Mr K said, that Mr C.Th had taken money from a Turkish company.
Court: The second [phrase] is that the next day he said that thing...
Applicant’s lawyer: It was not the next day, but anyway...
Court: Even if there were some days’ difference, is this a comment?
Applicant’s lawyer: I could accept it in the way the court has put it.
Court: Consequently, in light of this correct, in our opinion, agreement of the two parties, it is clarified that the subject matter of the trial is whether the sentences in question, on their own or in association with each other, in light of the innuendo that they conceal, are defamatory. If they are defamatory, the appeal has to succeed and there is no issue of examining the alternative position of fair comment. If not, the appeal will fail.
Applicant’s lawyer: I agree
Appellant’s lawyer: I agree
...
Court: The gist of the [first-instance] court’s judgment that is now the subject matter of the appeal, following the limitation of the contested issues which took place beforehand, is whether the words that had been used were, in themselves or in association with each other are, in light of the innuendo, defamatory. Nothing else.
....
Applicant’s lawyer: I have to observe that we support the [first-instance] judgment, following today’s suggestions and the limiting of the examination of the issues before you. [The judgment] was absolutely correct based on the evidence that was before the court and also on the basis of its discretionary power to decide, which it had a duty to judge if these, which are claims of defamation, were indeed defamation. In our opinion no defamation exists.
...”.
On 24 January 2012 the Supreme Court gave judgment upholding the appeal.
It first noted that during the hearing of the case the main issue for examination was whether the remarks had been defamatory. Following an agreement by the parties on that matter, the relevant grounds of appeal concerning fair comment were not pursued.
The Supreme Court held that the act of receiving money attributed to the appellant and his appearance on television could only be characterised as one act and not as two, as found by the first-instance court. The innuendo inferred from the language used could give rise to separate legal proceedings, based on an extended interpretation of the words used, possibly combined with other circumstances which would have to be proved. Consequently, the main issue in the case was not the meaning of the language used in relation to the actions attributed to the plaintiff, but whether it was justified to link the two remarks made by the applicant. The Supreme Court ruled that the combination of both the above-mentioned actions, together with the words used and the synthesis made by the applicant, left no room for any interpretation other than the implication that the plaintiff/appellant had acted as alleged after receiving money from the Turkish company. Such conduct, in the context of the situation in Cyprus, the Turkish invasion and occupation of the northern part by Turkish troops, could create in an average reasonable reader, in the absence of any other reference, feelings of hatred, contempt and derision of the plaintiff/appellant. The Supreme Court concluded that the remarks were defamatory of the plaintiff.
As the trial court had not made a finding on the issue of damages, the Supreme Court remitted the case for a fresh hearing by another trial judge on the award of damages.
After the judgment of the Supreme Court had been given, the applicant discovered that the appellant’s new lawyer (see paragraph 9 above) was the founding partner of the firm for which the son of the presiding judge on the Supreme Courts’ bench, Judge G.C., worked.
On 10 February 2012 the newspaper Phileleftheros published an article on the case, in which the applicant’s lawyer stated that either the judge or the lawyer in question should have revealed the connection between them, as this raised the issue as to whether Judge G.C. should have been excluded from the case.
On 14 February 2012 the Supreme Court issued a statement through the Cyprus News Agency:
“Prompted by the article in the newspaper ‘Phileleftheros’ dated 10/2/2012, the Supreme Court announces that the matter of the relationship between judges [and] lawyers for the purpose of adjudicating cases is settled and regulated by judicial practice and that the participation of the judge in the adjudication of the case referred to in the article was fully in accordance with the relevant judicial practice in force over the years.”
On 23 January 2013 the District Court of Nicosia awarded the plaintiff 25,000 euros (EUR) in damages for defamation, together with statutory interest payable from the date of the lodging of the action until payment. It also awarded the plaintiff costs.
On 22 February 2013 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court (civil appeal no. 79/13). In accordance with the latest information received, those proceedings are still pending.
It appears that the applicant has brought proceedings contesting the costs awarded by the first-instance court. No more information has been provided concerning these proceedings.
The relevant domestic law and practice are set out in detail in the Court’s judgment in the case of Nicholas v. Cyprus, no. 63246/10, §§ 1317, 9 January 2018.
Following the adoption of the above-mentioned judgment, the code of judicial practice was amended by a decision delivered by the Supreme Court on 8 March 2018. The amendments provide that a judge, whether sitting alone or as a member of a bench, cannot hear a case in which a party is represented by a lawyer who is a member of the “family of the judge”. Family is defined as parents, spouses, children, children’s spouses, siblings, siblings’ children and siblings’ spouses and persons with whom a judge has a spiritual relationship (πνευματική συγγένεια), the relationship of fatherinlaw and son-in-law/daughter-in-law, and the relationship between fathers-in-law (σχέση πεθερού-γαμπρού/νύφης ή συμπεθέρου). Furthermore, if a lawyer is the employer, employee or partner, or has a professional relationship with a lawyer who is a family member of a judge, including a trainee lawyer, the judge should inform the parties to the proceedings of all the relevant facts. In such a situation, if an objection is raised concerning the judge’s participation in the hearing of the case, the judge then decides if he or she will recuse himself or herself or not, in light of the relevant case-law, including the recent case-law of the Court. The Supreme Court referred in this connection to the Court’s judgments in Nicholas, cited above, and Ramljak v. Croatia (no. 5856/13, 27 June 2017). If no objection is made and the judge does not consider that there are grounds for his or her recusal, he or she is free to continue hearing the case. This judicial practice does not apply when the court appearance concerns minor matters (τυπικών εμφανίσεων).
Further amendments were made by decisions delivered by the Supreme Court on 28 January and 11 February 2019. They provided, inter alia, that a judge, whether sitting alone or as a member of a bench, cannot hear a case in which a party is represented by a lawyer who is a member of the “family of the judge” and where the lawyer is an employer, employee or partner, or works under the same “professional roof” (επαγγελματική στέγη) with that lawyer. This judicial practice does not apply when the court appearance concerns minor matters as well as cases before the full bench of the Supreme Court consisting of at least seven judges. The amendments have no retrospective effect on cases where the hearing has commenced and is still continuing; and/or cases in which the issuance of a judgment is pending.
The relevant domestic law and practice are set out in detail in the Court’s judgment in the case of Nicholas (cited above, §§ 1823).
In addition, the following domestic case-law was relied on by the applicant.
In Achilleas Korellis (case no. 53/99 concerning civil appeal no. 10277 – certiorari appeal) the Supreme Court, sitting as a full bench on 19 July 1999, dismissed by majority an application to annul the appellate court’s judgment on grounds of the alleged objective partiality of one of the judges on the appeal bench. It held that it did not have inherent jurisdiction to annul or amend a judgment, as this would constitute third-instance jurisdiction, which neither the Constitution nor domestic law allowed for. Three justices dissented, considering that the Supreme Court had inherent jurisdiction to set aside the appeal judgment if it was subsequently ascertained that a judge should not have participated on the grounds of objective partiality.
In the case of Ierotheos Christodoulou alias Ropas v. The Republic of Cyprus (criminal appeal no. 3/2009, judgment of 10 May 2010 (2010) 2 C.L.R 226), the Supreme Court dismissed an application by which the defendant had requested the reopening of appeal proceedings on the basis of newly discovered evidence. It held that it did not have inherent jurisdiction to do so and reopening would be tantamount to exercising third-instance jurisdiction, which it did not have. Referring to the case of the Educational Service Commission v. Zena Poulli (see Nicholas, cited above, § 22) it ruled, inter alia, that following the conclusion of a trial and the issuing of a judgment, reopening could only take place in cases where, for example, an interested party had not been notified of the procedure.
In its judgment of 14 June 2013 in the case of Kayat Trading Limited v. Genzyme Corporation (no. 3) (civil appeal no. 58/2012, (2013) 1 B C.L.R 1263), the Supreme Court dismissed an application to set aside a judgment given on appeal on alleged grounds of a breach of the rules of natural justice and an unfair trial. It held, inter alia, that in the circumstances there had not been a violation of the rules of natural justice in the trial and therefore the principles outlined in the Zena Poulli case (cited above) were not applicable.
Section 17(1) of the Civil Wrongs Law (Cap. 148) defines defamation as follows:
“Defamation consists of the publication by any person by means of print, writing, painting, effigy, gestures, spoken words or other sounds, or by any other means whatsoever, including broadcasting by wireless telegraphy, of any matter which –
(a) imputes to any other person a crime; or
(b) imputes to any other person misconduct in any public office; or
(c) naturally tends to injure or prejudice the reputation of any other person in the way of his profession, trade, business, calling or office; or
(d) is likely to expose any other person to general hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
(e) is likely to cause any other person to be shunned or avoided by other persons.
For the purposes of this subsection, ‘crime’ means any offence or other act punishable under any enactment in force in the Republic and any act wheresoever committed, which, if committed in the Republic, would be punishable therein.”
Section 19 of the above-mentioned law sets out the defences to defamation: (a) justification (truth); (b) fair comment; (c) privilege (absolute and qualified); and (d) offer of amends. In so far as relevant, this section provides as follows:
“In an action for defamation it shall be a defence [if] -
(a) ... the publication about which the complaint was made was true:
provided that where the defamatory publication contains two or more distinct charges against the plaintiff, a defence under this paragraph shall not fail by reason only that the truth of every charge is not proved, if the part of the publication which has not been proved to be true does not materially injure the plaintiff’s reputation having regard to the truth of the remaining charges;
(b) ... the publication of which complaint was made was a fair comment on some matter of public interest:
provided that where the defamatory publication consists partly of allegations of fact and partly of expression of opinion, a defence of fair comment shall not fail by reason only that the truth of every allegation of fact is not proved if the expression of opinion is a fair comment, having regard to such of the fact alleged or referred to in the defamatory publication for which the action was brought are proved:
provided further that a defence under this paragraph shall not succeed if the plaintiff provides that the publication was not made in good faith within the meaning of subsection (2) of section 21 of this Law;
...”.
In the case of Kimargo Fishfarming Ltd v. Panteli Metaxa (civil appeal no. 16/2008, (2011) 1 C.L.R 218, judgment of 10 February 2011), the Supreme Court upheld the first-instance court’s ruling that a defamatory statement made by the plaintiff about an issue of public interest was covered by the defence of fair comment. When examining whether the lower court’s approach to the defence of fair comment had been justified, the Supreme Court noted that it was difficult to balance the right to freedom of expression and the right to reputation. It concluded that in parallel, however, in a democratic society free dialogue should be encouraged, especially on issues of public interest such as those raised in that case (the environment, and in particular the sea). The Supreme Court found that the appellant company’s contention that the protection of its reputation should have led to the rejection of the defence could not be sustained, as protecting someone’s reputation should not contravene freedom of expression; a sense of proportionality was required.
In the case of Ekdoseis Arktinos v. Dorou Georgiadi (civil appeal no. 118/2008 (2011) 1 C.L.R 407, judgment of 4 March 2011), the Supreme Court reversed the first-instance court’s finding and held that a defamatory statement made by the plaintiffs/appellants about an issue of public interest was covered by the defence of fair comment. In analysing whether the defence of fair comment was applicable, the Supreme Court noted that “the right to a fair comment is one of the basic rights of oral and written free speech and is of vital importance for safeguarding the right upon which our personal freedom is based”.
In the case of Makarios Droushiotis v. Nikola Papadopoulou (civil appeal no. 54/2008, (2012) 1 C.L.R 102, judgment of 30 January 2012), the Supreme Court reversed the first-instance court’s finding and held that a defamatory statement made by the defendant/appellant in relation to an issue of public interest was covered by the defence of fair comment. The Supreme Court noted, inter alia, that even if not all facts were proven, this did not mean that the appellant’s/defendant’s expression of opinion had not constituted a fair comment based on the facts that had been proven. The Supreme Court concluded that the comments in question had constituted an honest and fair expression of opinion on a matter of public interest (the conduct of public figures). The defendant/appellant, as a journalist, had been under a duty to publish, as it had been a matter of public interest on which the public had to be informed.
In the case of Theofanis Karavias v. Stavros Stavrou (civil appeal no. 343/2008, (2012) 1 C.L.R 469, judgment of 20 March 2012), the Supreme Court upheld the judgment of the first-instance court, which had ruled that a defamatory statement made by the plaintiff about an issue of public interest had been covered by the defence of fair comment. The Supreme Court concluded that in order for the court to balance the interests of the two parties, it was of vital importance not to discourage the public from expressing its opinion on matters of public interest for fear of penal or other sanctions. It found that the defendant/respondent in the case had expressed his comments in good faith.