The applicant complained under Article 10 of the Convention that he had been found guilty of the disciplinary offence of undermining the dignity of the office of a judge.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Łaziska.
The applicant was granted leave to present his own case in the proceedings before the Court (Rule 36 § 2 in fine of the Rules of Court). The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska, and subsequently by Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant was appointed to the office of judge at the Wodzisław Śląski District Court on 16 December 2003.
At the beginning of 2009 he applied for the post of a judge at the Gliwice Regional Court. On 9 February 2009 the President of the Gliwice Regional Court instructed Judge S.F.-P. of that court to act as a judge inspector (sędzia wizytator) and to prepare a report on the applicant in order that his application could be presented to the general assembly of judges of the Gliwice Regional Court. The judge inspector inspected the files of some cases decided by the applicant and consulted his superiors.
The judge inspector submitted her assessment report on the applicant to the President of the Regional Court on 20 March 2009. She considered it necessary to include in the conclusions of her report comments that had been made by the hierarchical superiors of the applicant (the President of the Wodzisław Śląski District Court and the head of the relevant division) regarding their professional relations with the applicant, which had not always been smooth; in particular, they had stated that he had failed to comply with their instructions (zarządzenia). In the judge inspector’s view, the reservations of the applicant’s superiors had nothing to do with any personal bias, but stemmed from the applicant’s failure to comply with their instructions.
In order to verify the superiors’ comments, the judge inspector consulted the applicant’s personal file held by the District Court. She found that it had been necessary to issue instructions to the applicant in writing in order to make him follow them.
The judge inspector’s overall assessment of the applicant’s work was good. However, she stated that it was premature at that stage to approve his candidature for the office of judge of the Gliwice Regional Court. The applicant needed to improve the efficiency of the proceedings that he conducted, the stability of his decisions and his productivity in order to match that of the other judges in his division.
On 23 March 2009 the applicant received a copy of the report. A meeting of the general assembly of the judges of the Gliwice Regional Court was scheduled for 27 March 2009.
On 25 March 2009 the board of the Regional Court (kolegium) gave a negative assessment of the applicant’s candidature (five votes against, with two abstentions).
On 26 March 2009 the applicant submitted to the President of the Gliwice Regional Court his written comments on the assessment report. It included the following statements: “[T]he assessment of my work was undertaken only superficially, in many cases unfairly and, unfortunately, also tendentiously” (“... Ocena mojej pracy została dokonana jedynie pobieżnie, w wielu wypadkach nierzetelnie i, niestety, również tendencyjnie”); “[T]o allege that I was insubordinate is not serious, and the origin of these allegations is solely personal, despite what is being claimed by the inspector. Specifically, [the allegations] relate to events that occurred in 2003 and 2004, when I was assigned duties in the enforcement section, probably without a prior decision [to that effect having been taken] by the board. The scale of negligence that I encountered there was such that it should be assessed from the angle of disciplinary or even criminal responsibility.” (“[S]tawianie mi zarzutu niesubordynacji jest niepoważne, a jego źródła, wbrew temu co twierdzi opiniująca, mają charakter wyłącznie osobisty. Konkretnie zaś datują się na rok 2003 i 2004, kiedy przydzielono mi, prawdopodobnie bez uprzedniej decyzji kolegium, obowiązki w sekcji wykonawczej. Skala zaniedbań, z jaką się tam spotkałem, kwalifikowała je do rozpoznania nie tylko pod kątem odpowiedzialności dyscyplinarnej, ale wręcz karnej”). The applicant also commented on specific cases mentioned in the assessment report.
Having regard to the applicant’s written comments, the board of the Regional Court met again on 27 March 2009. The members of the board took note of the applicant’s comments and heard the views of the judge inspector. In the second vote, the applicant received six votes against his candidature, with one abstention.
On 27 March 2009 a meeting of the general assembly of the judges of the Gliwice Regional Court’s jurisdiction was held. According to the Government, the chairman of the meeting read out the comments submitted by the applicant. The applicant maintained his observations regarding the assessment report. In response to a question from a judge as to what extraneous factors had influenced the assessment report, the applicant replied that he did not know exactly, but thought that those factors could have been the interpersonal relations at the Wodzisław Śląski District Court. Another judge pointed out the fact that the applicant’s allegations against his fellow judges, including his superiors, had not been substantiated. In response, the applicant stated that he took full responsibility for his words. The general assembly then voted; six votes were cast for the applicant and eighty-six votes against, with nine abstentions.
On 8 April 2009 the judge inspector replied in writing to the applicant’s comments on the assessment report. She considered his comments to be inappropriate. The applicant submitted that the judge inspector’s reply had not been communicated to him and that he had learned about it only in the course of the disciplinary proceedings.
On 25 May 2009 the Minister of Justice positively assessed the applicant’s candidature and forwarded that assessment to the National Council of the Judiciary (“the NCJ” – Krajowa Rada Sądownictwa).
On 22 June 2009 the NCJ decided not to forward the applicant’s candidature for the office of regional court judge to the President of the Republic.
On 13 August 2009 the applicant lodged an appeal against that decision with the Supreme Court. He submitted that the NCJ had not properly assessed his candidature. In that respect he stated:
“That was so despite the fact that [the applicant] made a number of critical remarks about the assessment report prepared by the judge inspector, which served as a basis for the decisions of the board and the meeting of the general assembly [of the Regional Court]. Even though the assessment report included a lot of false data, [the report] was not verified and the NCJ, as can be seen from the [wording of the] reasoning, did not consider this issue [that is to say the lack of any verification of false data in the assessment report].”
On 6 November 2009 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
On 11 June 2010 the disciplinary officer (Rzecznik Dyscyplinarny) of the Gliwice Regional Court, on an application from the President of that court, instituted disciplinary proceedings against the applicant. The applicant was charged on three counts of the disciplinary offence of undermining the dignity of the office of judge (uchybienie godności urzędu sędziego) under section 107(1) of the Law on the Organisation of the Common Courts (Prawo o ustroju sądów powszechnych – “the 2001 Law”).
Firstly, the disciplinary officer alleged that in his written comments the applicant had implied that the judge inspector had assessed his work tendentiously. Furthermore, he implied that Judge M.O., the President of the Wodzisław Śląski District Court, and Judge K.G.-G., the head of the relevant division, had informed the judge inspector of alleged instances of the applicant failing to comply with instructions given to him. In addition, the applicant implied that Judges I.H. and E.T. had committed criminal and disciplinary offences by failing to supervise the Wodzisław Śląski District Court’s enforcement section (see section 11 above).
Secondly, the disciplinary officer noted that during the meeting of the general assembly meeting of the judges on 27 March 2009 the applicant had maintained the allegations that he had made in his written comments and that, in addition, he had implied that judge inspector had been motivated by extraneous factors in her assessment of the applicant’s work, which had undermined dignity of the office of judge.
Thirdly, the disciplinary officer alleged that in his appeal of 13 August 2009 against the NCJ’s decision the applicant had implied that the judge inspector had used a lot of false data in her assessment report.
The case against the applicant was examined by the Katowice Court of Appeal, sitting as a disciplinary court (hereinafter “the Court of Appeal”).
The applicant asserted that he had not committed a disciplinary offence. He submitted that the institution of disciplinary proceedings against him had been intended to send a signal that criticism of senior judges would not be tolerated. However, that had violated his freedom of expression. The applicant insisted that in his professional life he had always acted honestly and that because of that he could not remain silent when the assessment of his work had been based on inaccurate data. In her report, the judge inspector had criticised the applicant for his failure to comply with superiors’ instructions but had not given him the opportunity to express his position regarding the remarks made by the President of the District Court and the head of the relevant division, even though the principle of objectivity had required her to do so. The term “tendentious” used in his written comments had indicated a onesided presentation of his alleged failings. The term “false data” used in respect of his appeal against the NCJ’s decision had referred to erroneous conclusions included in the assessment report, which had not taken proper account of the number of cases assigned to the applicant.
On 31 March 2011 the Court of Appeal delivered its judgment. The applicant was found guilty of undermining the dignity of the office of judge on three occasions in that he had lacked objectivity and the required moderation in formulating his views.
The conviction concerned (1) the applicant’s written comments of 26 March 2009 contesting the judge inspector’s assessment report – both with regard to his work and to his cooperation with his superiors; (2) the applicant having maintained his written comments at the meeting of the general assembly of the judges of the Gliwice Regional Court of 27 March 2009 and (3) the applicant’s comments on the assessment of his work made in the judge inspector’s report, as submitted in his appeal to the Supreme Court against the NCJ’s decision. The Court of Appeal imposed on the applicant a warning (kara upomnienia).
The Court of Appeal found that the evidence obtained in the case had confirmed the disciplinary offence of which the applicant had been found guilty. The Court of Appeal did not have the competence to determine the correctness (merytoryczna rzetelność) of the assessment report; accordingly, it dismissed requests lodged by the applicant for evidence to be adduced with a view to challenging the findings presented in the report. It acknowledged that the report contained certain minor inaccuracies, but stated that those did not affect the report’s final conclusion as to unsatisfactory level of efficiency in the conduct of the proceedings. In that respect, the Court of Appeal examined some of the relevant case files. On the basis of the applicant’s personal file and the testimony of Judge M.O. (the President of the District Court at the time in question), the Court of Appeal found that the relationship between the applicant and his superiors had not been easy. The applicant had accepted only written communications in respect of workrelated matters, no matter how routine those matters had been.
With regard to the merits, the Court of Appeal noted, referring to the Supreme Court’s judgment of 23 January 2008 (case no. SNO 89/07), that the dignity of the office of judge manifested itself in the ability of the judge in question to remain faithful to the judicial oath, maintain an unblemished character and avoid anything that could bring disrepute to the office. In setting out limits, which if transgressed would lead to a judge being held liable, the legislature undoubtedly took account of the content of the judicial oath (stipulated in section 66 of the 2001 Law). It follows from the wording of the judicial oath that a judge was required, inter alia, to be guided in his actions by the principles of propriety and honesty.
Referring to Article 2 of the Collection of Principles of Judges’ Professional Ethics, the court observed that highly inappropriate behaviour on the part of a judge towards other judges – including towards a judge inspector preparing an assessment report – could undermine the dignity of the office of a judge because professional ethics required restraint in expressing one’s emotions. It was true that a judge could not be constrained in expressing his view; however, he had to express his view at an appropriate place, in a moderate manner and without excessive expressiveness so as to not expose other persons to tarnishing their esteem and dignity (see the Supreme Court’s judgments of 30 August 2006, no. OSN 36/06 and 7 June 2006, no. SNO 25/06).
With regard to Article 10 of the Convention, the Court of Appeal noted that a judge’s statement violating the reputation or dignity of other judges could be justified only if it pursued a pressing social interest. However, there had been no such interest in the case of the applicant’s comments, which had been made exclusively in pursuit of his own private interests. The Court of Appeal furthermore ruled that the applicant’s comments had constituted value judgments (“superficial”, “unfair”, “tendentious” and “using a lot of false data”) that had not had a sufficient factual basis, as required by the Strasbourg Court’s case-law; consequently they had infringed the personal rights of the judge inspector. It emphasised the fact that every judge – and in particular a judge who applied for appointment to a higher judicial office – should display tact, moderation and objectivity in formulating his remarks regarding the report assessing his work.
The Court of Appeal found that the applicant’s allegation that the assessment of his work had been “tendentious” should be considered as lacking in objectivity and the required moderate tone, since the applicant’s objections had concerned only the handful of cases from his docket that had been assessed by the judge inspector. Such an allegation had infringed the reputation of the judge inspector and amounted to the disciplinary offence of undermining the dignity of the judicial office. The same held true for the allegation that the negative assessment of the applicant’s relationship with his superiors had been motivated by personal interests.
The second of the applicant’s “reprehensible actions” (naganne zachowanie) had consisted of maintaining those allegations during the proceedings before the general assembly of judges.
The third reprehensible action had concerned the phrase “used a lot of false data” included in the wording of his appeal against the NCJ’s decision which the Court of Appeal considered excessive and lacking a factual basis in respect of the term “a lot of false data”.
In each of those three situations the applicant had commented on the content of the judge inspector’s report in a manner unworthy of a judge, because his comments had lacked objectivity and the required moderate tone. The allegations raised by the applicant had to be considered as undermining the dignity of the office of judge, since the applicant, being a judge, was required to respect the authority of the judiciary and generally to exercise his office in a dignified manner; even so, he had failed to exercise appropriate moderation in his comments and had violated the personal rights of others. In the case of judges, the dignity of their office required a reasonable moderation and tact in their professional and nonprofessional relations. The Court of Appeal found that the applicant had violated the required standard of conduct.
The Court of Appeal issued the applicant with a warning (the most lenient penalty provided for by law), which it considered commensurate with the applicant’s disciplinary offence. It had regard to the fact that the degree of harmfulness of his action was not significant. In this respect, it took into consideration the fact that the applicant’s behaviour had been motivated by his ambition to become a regional court judge. On the other hand, the Court of Appeal noted that the applicant had not felt responsible for his inappropriate comments.
The applicant lodged an appeal. He argued, inter alia, that his comments on the assessment report had not amounted to a disciplinary offence because they had had a sufficient factual basis and had been motivated by the public interest.
On 20 July 2011 the Supreme Court, sitting as a disciplinary court (hereinafter “the Supreme Court”) dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
The Supreme Court noted that under section 61 of the 2001 Law a judge should have an unblemished character. A judge should also act in accordance with his judicial oath and avoid anything that could bring disrepute to the dignity of a judge (section 82 of the 2001 Law). The judicial oath had a substantive meaning and should be treated with all solemnity because it constituted the basis of responsibility for actions that were contrary to it.
The concept of “unblemished character” of a judge was not statutorily defined, but it was described in caselaw and in legal writing in terms of intellectual qualities and high moral character. The Supreme Court stated that judicial office was a kind of “noble mission” that imposed particular moral obligations on a judge, both while carrying out his office and in his private life.
One of the basic duties of a judge was the duty to respect the rules of decency (dobre obyczaje) and to uphold the authority of the judiciary, as provided for by Articles 2 and 4 of the Collection of Principles of Judges’ Professional Ethics, respectively. The Supreme Court noted in this regard, referring to its previous caselaw, that a judge who formulated critical remarks addressed to other judges – and in particular, judges more senior to him – should do so in a tactful, moderate and dispassionate manner (judgments of 30 August 2006, no. SNO 36/06, 7 June 2006, no. SNO 25/06, 27 June 2008, no. SNO 52/08 and 25 March 2009, no. SNO 13/09). In that respect, for the purposes of assessing the applicant’s behaviour towards the judge inspector, it was not relevant whether the assessment report had been accurate or not. The relevant issue to consider was whether in commenting on the report the applicant had acted honourably and in a manner respecting the accepted rules and the rights of others. The Supreme Court established that the assessment of the applicant’s behaviour in that regard had to be negative. The words used by the applicant in respect of a more senior judge – in particular the words “unfair”, “tendentious”, “superficial”, and “false” – carried a significant pejorative connotation.
The Supreme Court found that the applicant had abused his right to express his opinions and had violated the standards of judicial decency and had thus undermined the administration of justice. The applicant’s comments had infringed not only the reputation of the judge inspector, but had also undermined her professional standing. The comments – as formulated by the applicant and expressed in public (at the meeting of the general assembly of judges and in an appeal lodged with the Supreme Court against the NCJ’s decision) – could not be left unaddressed by the judges. The Supreme Court noted that the applicant had had the right to comment on the assessment report but had been required to do so in a dispassionate manner that was free from personal comments about the judge inspector. The duty to make comments in a dispassionate manner was also one of the basic obligations of a judge who adjudicated cases, conducted proceedings and delivered judgments.
The Supreme Court found that the applicant’s actions had been harmful to the judiciary and its image and was damaging to relations within the judiciary. The applicant had furthermore breached his judicial oath and the rules of professional ethics, and had thus committed a disciplinary offence under section 107(1) of the 2001 Law. The Supreme Court held that the imposition of a warning constituted adequate punishment in the instant case.
On 17 November 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint. He alleged that section 107(1) of the 2001 Law, in so far as it concerned responsibility for undermining the dignity of a judicial office, was incompatible with Articles 2, 42 § 1, 54 § 1 (freedom of expression) and 178 § 1 of the Constitution.
The applicant argued that he had exercised his freedom of expression in submitting his written comments on the assessment report. His comments had exclusively related to the assessment of his work and had not infringed the rights of the judge inspector. The applicant submitted that for the Supreme Court the protection of the judiciary was more important in cases where a judge had made an erroneous assessment of a candidate for judicial office. He maintained that his comments had been in the public interest and had been motivated by the need to ensure fairness in the promotion procedures within the judiciary. The applicant also relied on the Court’s case-law under Article 10 of the Convention.
Secondly, the applicant submitted that section 107(1) of the 2001 Law was incompatible with Article 42 § 1 of the Constitution (the principle of nullum crimen sine lege). He maintained that section 107(1) did not clearly define the offence of undermining the dignity of a judicial office and, in particular, that the term “dignity of a judicial office” was ambiguous and overly broad.
On 7 March 2013 the Constitutional Court declined to examine the constitutional complaint. With regard to the applicant’s complaint under Article 42 § 1 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court referred to the established view that that it was not possible to create a precise catalogue of disciplinary offences. The disciplinary responsibility concerned actions incompatible with the rules of professional ethics or the dignity of a profession or actions undermining the esteem in which a profession was held. The Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s argument that criminal proceedings were comparable to disciplinary proceedings in respect of the guarantees applicable to them. It furthermore noted that disciplinary responsibility could concern actions which were not subject to criminal responsibility. With regard to the applicant’s complaint under Article 54 § 1 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court found that the applicant had not argued that section 107(1) of the 2001 Law had disproportionately restricted his freedom of expression. In addition, it noted that that complaint had concerned the actual application of the law, which was beyond the Constitutional Court’s jurisdiction.
The applicant lodged an interlocutory appeal. On 6 May 2013 the Constitutional Court dismissed it.
The Law of 27 July 2001 (as amended) on the Organisation of the Common Courts (Ustawa prawo o ustroju sądów powszechnych) (hereinafter “the 2001 Law”) sets out comprehensively all matters related to such matters as the organisation and administration of the courts of general jurisdiction and the status of judges and their self-governing bodies.
Its relevant provisions provide as follows:
Section 66
“Upon appointment, a judge takes an oath before the President of the Republic of Poland, in accordance with the following formula:
‘I swear, as a judge of a common court, to serve faithfully the Republic of Poland, to safeguard the law, to discharge the duties of a judge conscientiously, to administer justice impartially in accordance with the law and my conscience, to keep State and professional secrets, and to act in accordance with the principles of propriety and honesty’; the person taking this oath may finish it by saying the words: ‘So help me God.’”
Section 82
“1.  A judge shall act in compliance with the judicial oath.
A judge should, when on and off duty, guard the authority of the office of judge and avoid everything that could bring discredit to the authority of a judge or weaken confidence in his or her impartiality.”
Section 107 § 1
“1.  A judge shall be liable to disciplinary action for professional misconduct, including obvious and gross violations of the law and undermining the dignity of his office (disciplinary offences).”
Section 109 § 1
“1.  The disciplinary penalties are:
1)  a warning,
2)  a reprimand,
3)  dismissal from the post held,
4)  a transfer to another place of service,
5)  the dismissal of the judge from his office.”
Section 91a § 3 provides that a judge passes to the next basic salary step after five years of service in any given judicial post. Under paragraph 6 of the same section, that period shall be extended by three years in the event that a judge has been subjected to disciplinary penalty in the course of that period.
Section 124 § 1 stipulates that a copy of a final judgment imposing a disciplinary penalty on a judge shall be added to his personal file; section 124 § 2 stipulates that it shall be removed after the lapse of five years from the date on which the judgment in question became final if, in the course of that period, the judge in question was not subject to any further disciplinary action.
The National Council of the Judiciary, in its resolution of 19 February 2003, adopted the Collection of Principles of Judges’ Professional Ethics (Zbiór zasad etyki zawodowej sędziów). The relevant provisions of the Principles state as follows:
“§ 2.  A judge shall be guided by the principles of honesty, dignity, honour, sense of duty and respect for the rules of decency.
...
§ 4.  A judge shall safeguard the authority of his or her office, of the court where he or she is serving, and of the administration of justice and the constitutional role of the judiciary.”
The relevant extracts from the appendix to Recommendation CM/Rec (2010)12 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe to member States on judges: independence, efficiency and responsibilities, adopted on 17 November 2010, provide as follows:
“Selection and career
Decisions concerning the selection and career of judges should be based on objective criteria pre-established by law or by the competent authorities. Such decisions should be based on merit, having regard to the qualifications, skills and capacity required to adjudicate cases by applying the law while respecting human dignity.
...
Assessment
Where judicial authorities establish systems for the assessment of judges, such systems should be based on objective criteria. These should be published by the competent judicial authority. The procedure should enable judges to express their view on their own activities and on the assessment of these activities, as well as to challenge assessments before an independent authority or a court.”
The relevant recommendation of Opinion no. 17 of the Consultative Council of European Judges (CCJE) on the evaluation of judges’ work, the quality of justice and respect for judicial independence, adopted on 24 October 2014, read as follows:
“11. It is essential that there is procedural fairness in all elements of individual evaluations. In particular judges must be able to express their views on the process and the proposed conclusions of an evaluation. They must also be able to challenge assessments, particularly when it affects the judge’s “civil rights” in the sense of Article 6 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ...”