The case concerns allegations of excessive use of force by the police during the dispersal of a public assembly at Bolotnaya Square in Moscow on 6 May 2012, the length of the applicant’s pre-trial detention on charges of mass disorder and violence against the police, and the alleged lack of medical assistance in relation to his hunger strike.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lives in Moscow. He was represented by Mr V. Makarov, a lawyer practising in Moscow. At a later stage he was also represented by Ms K. Moskalenko, a lawyer practising in Strasbourg.
The Government were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The background facts relating to the planning, conduct and dispersal of the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square are set out in more detail in Frumkin v. Russia (no. 74568/12, §§ 7-65, 5 January 2016), and Yaroslav Belousov v. Russia (nos. 2653/13 and 60980/14, §§ 7-33, 4 October 2016).
The applicant is an academic physicist and an active member of the political party RPR-PARNAS. At the time of his arrest he was living at his usual address with his wife and two children. On 6 May 2012 he took part in the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square and, according to him, was assaulted by the police dispersing the protestors. He was arrested at the site of the demonstration and on the same day was convicted of failure to obey a lawful order of the police, an offence under Article 19.3 of the Code of Administrative Offences. He was released the same day. After that day the applicant continued his usual professional and political activities while living with his family at his usual address.
On 18 October 2012 the applicant was detained on suspicion of having participated in mass disorder on 6 May 2012. He was charged under Articles 212 § 2 (participation in mass disorder) and 318 § 1 (violence against a public official) of the Criminal Code. The acts imputed to him included obstructing a police officer while he was arresting the demonstrators by holding his arm and trying to snatch his truncheon, hitting the officer on the hands three times, and grabbing the officer by the uniform and pushing him away.
On 19 October 2012 the Basmannyy District Court ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 18 December 2012, stating as follows:
“The prosecution authorities suspect [the applicant] of having committed criminal offences of medium and high gravity, punishable by imprisonment of over two years ...
In assessing the circumstances under investigation, the nature of the acts imputed [to the applicant] the personality of the accused Krivov, who has previously been charged with administrative offences, the court concludes that there are sufficient grounds to believe that [the applicant], if at liberty, may abscond from the investigation and trial, [or] may act in person or by proxy in order to avoid criminal liability, continue [his] criminal activity, [and] destroy the evidence and otherwise obstruct the investigation, which is at its [initial] phase.
Operational-search activities are now underway, aimed at establishing [the applicant’s] possible connections with others actively participating in the mass disorder which took place at Bolotnaya Square in Moscow and the adjacent area; therefore, if at liberty, [he] may co-ordinate his position with unidentified accomplices.”
On 7 December 2012, following a pre-investigation inquiry, the Investigation Committee decided not to open a criminal investigation into the applicant’s alleged assault during his arrest on 6 May 2012. The decision concerned five complaints by people arrested at Bolotnaya Square, including the applicant. Referring to statements given by the police officers, the Investigation Committee decided that the police had acted lawfully.
On 14 December 2012 the Basmannyy District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 6 March 2013, relying on essentially the same grounds and noting the particular complexity of the investigation. This decision was upheld by the Moscow City Court on 14 January 2013.
On the same date the applicant went on a hunger strike, which lasted for forty-three days. On 15 January 2013 he had a blood test, and from that date onwards he was examined daily by the medical staff of the detention facility. On 25 January 2013 he had a consultation with a psychiatrist. On the same day he ended his hunger strike and accepted medical treatment.
On 28 February 2013 the Basmannyy District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 6 July 2013, essentially on the same grounds as before. This decision was upheld by the Moscow City Court on 3 April 2013.
On 24 May 2013 the applicant’s criminal case file was submitted to the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow, which began the trial in a criminal case against the applicants and seven other individuals.
According to the applicant, during his trial he was twice beaten up by the convoy officers at the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court. The judge disregarded his complaints of ill-treatment.
On 6 June 2013 the trial court extended the pre-trial detention of eleven defendants, including the applicant, until 24 November 2013. It dismissed the applicant’s request for an alternative preventive measure, holding that no other measure could secure the course of justice in the case. This decision was upheld by the Moscow City Court on 2 July 2013.
On 19 September 2013 the applicant began another hunger strike to protest against the appalling conditions of his detention (including those in the court holding cells), the extensions of his pre-trial detention, his prosecution for having taken part in an authorised political rally, and the allegedly unfair manner in which the court was conducting the trial. He was on hunger strike for two month and three days. During this period he was examined daily by the medical staff of the detention facility, who recorded his blood pressure and pulse readings, complaints, the medical advice given to him and the treatment he was receiving. Four blood tests and four urine tests were taken during the hunger strike. On eight occasions during this period the applicant refused in writing to be placed in hospital or to receive intravenous glucose, vitamins and proteins. On 22 November 2013 he ended his hunger strike, gave his consent to be placed in a prison hospital and agreed to resume his food intake under medical supervision.
According to the applicant, during the hearing on 18 November 2013 his counsel called an ambulance for him because he felt unwell, but the judge did not allow the ambulance team to enter the courtroom to examine him.
On 19 November 2013 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court extended the detention of nine defendants, including the applicant, until 24 February 2014. This extension order was upheld by the Moscow City Court on 17 December 2013.
On 21 February 2014 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court found the applicant guilty as charged. He was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment, calculated on the basis of a sentence of three years under Article 212 § 2 of the Criminal Code, to be served partly concurrent with a sentence of two years under Article 318 § 1. The applicant’s pre-trial detention counted towards the prison sentence.
On 20 June 2014 the Moscow City Court upheld the first-instance judgment. It reduced the applicant’s prison sentence to three years and nine months.
On 15 July 2016 the applicant was released after serving his sentence.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law, see Yaroslav Belousov (cited above, §§ 85-87, with further references).