The case originated in an application (no. 7529/10) against the Republic of Moldova and the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Moldovan nationals, Mr Roman Canter and Mr Serghei Magaleas (“the applicants”), on 3 February 2010.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Postică, a lawyer practising in Chișinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Apostol, and the Russian Government were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants complained that they had been denied a fair trial as a result of their conviction by a court which had not qualified as a tribunal within the meaning of Article 6 § 1 of the Contention.
On 13 June 2014 the complaint concerning Article 6 § 1 of the Contention was communicated to the respondent Governments and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Russian Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicants, who were born in 1980 and 1977, respectively, live in Slobozia and Parcani, in the self-proclaimed “Moldovan Republic of Transdniestria” (“MRT”). In view of the fact that, in the applicants’ submission, it was impossible for them to apply to the Court directly, the application was lodged by their mothers.
On 2 March 2005 the applicants were arrested by the “MRT” authorities and placed in detention on remand on suspicion of murder. On 1 June 2009 they were convicted by an “MRT” court and sentenced to terms of fourteen years and a half, and fourteen years’ imprisonment, respectively. On 4 August 2009 the Supreme Court of the “MRT” upheld the above judgment, but reduced the sentence of the first applicant to fourteen years’ imprisonment.
It does not appear from the material in the case file and from the parties’ submissions that the applicants informed the authorities of the Republic of Moldova about the proceedings against them and the conviction and detention in the “MRT”.
In December 2014 the applicants challenged their conviction by way of an extraordinary appeal before the Supreme Court of the Republic of Moldova which, on 14 February 2015, upheld their appeal and quashed the judgments of the “MRT” courts on the ground that they had been issued by unconstitutional tribunals.
The applicants were released from detention on 20 July and 20 August 2015, respectively, for reasons which were not related to the Supreme Court of Moldova’s decision of 14 February 2015.