The case originated in an application (no. 29097/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Yelena Mikhaylovna Nadtoka (“the applicant”), on 16 May 2008.
The applicant was represented by Ms G. Arapova, a lawyer practising in Voronezh. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged that there had been a disproportionate interference with her right to freedom of expression.
On 6 May 2013 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Novocherkassk, the Rostov Region.
The applicant is a journalist who, at the material time, was editorinchief of Chastnaya Lavochka (Частная Лавочка), a local newspaper with a circulation of 2,500 distributed in Novocherkassk (“the newspaper”).
On 29 March 2007 the newspaper published, in its issue no. 12 (434) in the section “Our interviews”, an interview conducted by the applicant with N.K., the leader of a Cossacks’ movement “Vsevelikoye Voysko Donskoye” (“Всевеликое Войско Донское” – “the Great Army of the Don”). The article was headlined “We are not the type of Cossacks who are just all talk and no walk” (“Мы не те казаки, что занимаются базарами”).
The interview contained several passages criticising A.V., the then mayor of Novocherkassk, and his entourage. In particular, it quoted N.K. as stating:
“...
[N.K.]: – ... We will not forgive the moral suffering and material damage that he [A.V.] has inflicted on the Cossacks and on the entire town. A.V.’s entourage, his family members, have misappropriated numerous real-estate properties in Novocherkassk. The rest of what is left is being sold to people from out of town, including to those belonging to ethic groups native to the North Caucasus.
We prepared a number of documents [for submission] to the Prosecutor General’s Office, the Russian President, petitions to mass-media and the Internet [outlets]. Now we have additional information concerning facts of corruption and unlawful actions. On the basis of this information we have prepared the materials and, I think, we will submit them to the Deputy Prosecutor of the Southern Federal Circuit. This petition has been signed by more than 250 persons – all of whom are respected citizens of Novocherkassk.
[The applicant]: – Could you share this information with our newspaper? What kind of information is it?
[N.K.] – Yes. For example, the privatisation of the Consumer Service Centre was carried out with obvious violations [of the law]. Piece by piece the ‘Klyuch’ agency sold the ‘Pobeda’ cinema for offices and shops, even though this cinema had been municipal property that had not been put up for auction. The privatisation of the municipal part of the ‘Yuzhnaya’ hotel was carried out with violations: in our opinion, the auction had been botched on purpose. As a result, the lot was put up for public bidding, which in our town means that no one other than the intended buyer would be able to purchase it. Six hundred square metres of the ‘Yuzhnaya’ hotel were sold at dumping price and then re-sold for almost ten times more than that. The [municipal] budget lost, in the estimation of specialists, about one million U.S. dollars.
There are numerous breaches [of the law] concerning plots of land. The land next to houses nos. 97-101 Baklanovskiy Lane was allocated, without an auction, for the construction of a commercial centre commissioned, through intermediaries, by a highranking representative of the Novocherkassk town administration. The preparation of the land [for construction], the re-run of the utility lines were done at the town’s expense. The misuse of the budget funds is obvious.
Also, two plots of land designated for construction in the town centre (Baklanovskiy and Krivopustenko Lanes) were sold at laughable prices and without any bidding ...
...
[The applicant]: – Is that to say that it is obvious that the budget is suffering as a result of such actions on the part of public officials?
[N.K.] – Absolutely right. There is not enough money in the budget. Where does it go? This has to be examined. We are going to write to the control and audit commissions so they come over and check where our taxes go. ...”
On 3 April 2007 A.V. brought defamation proceedings against the applicant, the newspaper’s editorial board and N.K. He demanded that certain statements contained in the interview of 29 March 2007 (underlined in paragraph 8 above) be recognised as untruthful and tarnishing his honour and reputation, and that each respondent pay him 100,000 Russian roubles (RUB) (approximately 2,880 euros (EUR)) in compensation for nonpecuniary damage. In addition, he demanded that the newspaper publish a retraction of the impugned statements.
On 15 August 2007 the Novocherkassk Town Court (“the Town Court”) granted A.V.’s claims in part. It held, in particular:
“The court undoubtedly agrees with the respondents’ assertions concerning the role of the press in a democratic society, its duty to inform the readers on all matters of public interest, freedom of expression and journalistic freedom.
However, when exercising such freedom the press may not overstep the set boundaries regarding respect for the reputation and rights of others. ...”
The Town Court found that the impugned statement “[w]e will not forgive the moral suffering and material damage that he [A.V.] has inflicted on the Cossacks and on the entire town” amounted to a value judgment and thus was not actionable. It further found that the following statement had not been directly connected to the claimant and refused to grant the claims for its retraction:
“... the privatisation of the Consumer Service Centre was carried out with obvious violations [of the law]. Piece by piece the ‘Klyuch’ agency sold the ‘Pobeda’ cinema for offices and shops even though this cinema had been municipal property that had not been put up for auction. The privatisation of the municipal part of the ‘Yuzhnaya’ hotel was carried out with violations: in our opinion, the auction had been botched on purpose. As a result, the lot was put up for public bidding, which in our town means that no one other than the intended buyer would be able to purchase it.”
The Town Court also found that the statement “[t]he rest of what is left is being sold to people from out of town, including to those belonging to ethic groups native to the North Caucasus” did not tarnish A.V.’s reputation.
However, the Town Court considered that the following statements had tarnished the claimant’s honour and dignity because they had accused him of committing unlawful acts:
[1]  “A.V.’s entourage, his family members, have misappropriated numerous realestate properties in Novocherkassk”; and
[2]  “[t]here are numerous breaches [of the law] concerning plots of land. The land next to houses nos. 97-101 Baklanovskiy Lane was allocated, without an auction, for the construction of a commercial centre commissioned, through intermediaries, by a high-ranking representative of the Novocherkassk town administration. The preparation of the land [for construction], the re-run of the utility lines, were done at the town’s expense. The misuse of the budget funds is obvious. Also, two plots of land designated for construction in the town centre (Baklanovskiy and Krivopustenko Lanes) were sold at laughable prices and without any bidding ...”
The Town Court rejected the respondents’ argument that the two statements had not concerned A.V. personally. As regards the first statement, it observed that “the claimant identifies himself with his family, these people are close to him, and he is insulted by statements about them” and that “an indication that the mayor’s family ‘misappropriated numerous real-estate properties’ has certain connotations and points to an unlawful method of acquiring real-estate property”. As regards the second statement, the Town Court found that allegations of unlawful allocation of plots of land had tarnished A.V.’s honour and reputation because questions of land allocation fell within the competence of mayors. It noted, in particular, the following:
“... The respondents did not furnish the court with evidence confirming the truthfulness of the disseminated information which the court has regarded as tarnishing [the claimant’s honour]. ...
The court cannot agree with the respondents’ argument that they should be relieved of the burden of proof as regards the truthfulness of the disseminated statements and of liability, because in this case that would create an opportunity to disseminate untruthful tarnishing statements, which is not allowed by law. ...
When deciding on the amount of compensation for non-pecuniary damage, the court takes into account ... that the claimant is a renowned person in the town, that the information concerning him is of great interest to a wide range of people, and that any written statements made publicly and aimed at him may have a considerable impact on his reputation. ...”
The Town Court awarded the claimant RUB 5,000 (approximately EUR 144) in respect of non-pecuniary damage, to be paid by the newspaper’s editorial board, and RUB 3,000 (approximately EUR 86) to be paid by the applicant and N.K., respectively.
The applicant appealed against the judgment to the Rostov Regional Court (“the Regional Court”). She submitted that the Town Court had failed to apply the standards regarding freedom of the press developed by the Court, that the impugned article had covered a matter of public interest, namely, corruption in the Novocherkassk town administration, that the newspaper’s editorial board and herself as a journalist had disseminated opinions of a third party, and could not be held liable for doing so. The applicant also requested that the Regional Court include in the case file a letter from the Novocherkassk town prosecutor’s office of 17 October 2007 as evidence to demonstrate that the town administration had breached the law when allocating the plots of land mentioned in the interview (see paragraph 23 below).
On 19 November 2007 the Regional Court upheld the District Court’s judgment in full. It reasoned that the respondents had not furnished evidence to prove the truthfulness of the statements “regarding misappropriation of real property in Novocherkassk and breaches of the rules on selling plots of land that tarnish the claimant’s honour and dignity because they accuse him of having committed unlawful acts.” It further observed that “under the law in force, publication of an interview is not listed as grounds for absolving [members of the press] from liability [for defamation].” The Regional Court’s judgment further read, in so far as relevant:
“... In the present case, what the newspaper published was not a value judgment but untrue facts regarding the claimant that were presented in an insulting manner and tarnished his honour, dignity and business reputation as a public official ...
... The respondents failed to provide evidence of the unlawfulness of the claimant’s actions aimed at embezzlement of State property and misuse of budgetary funds. The appeal panel has dismissed Ms Nadtoka’s application to include the letter from the Novocherkassk town prosecutor’s office of 17 October 2007 in the case file [because] it does not prove the unlawfulness of the claimant’s actions either. ...”
According to the applicant, the newspaper’s editorial board and she herself paid the awards due to A.V. in accordance with the judgment of 15 August 2007 at the same time, in autumn 2009. In the applicant’s submission, a withdrawal order for RUB 7,000 issued by the Novocherkassk bailiffs service confirmed that the payment of the award had been made by the newspaper’s editorial board in accordance with the judgment of 15 August 2007, together with the compensation for nonpecuniary damage awarded to A.V. in two earlier judgments. The applicant herself had paid the award due to A.V. in cash, which was noted in a document issued by the Novocherkassk bailiffs service. The document in question had been lost.
According to the Government, A.V. did not submit a writ of execution issued in respect of the applicant on the basis of the judgment of 15 August 2007 to the bailiffs service for enforcement. On 8 September 2009 a bailiff of the Novocherkassk bailiffs service ordered the withdrawal of RUB 7,000 from the bank account of the newspaper’s editorial board in enforcement of the two judgments in A.V.’s favour delivered by the Town Court on 3 and 23 June 2004, respectively.
The case file before the Court contains a scarcely legible copy of the document of 8 September 2009 issued by the Novocherkassk bailiffs service ordering the withdrawal of RUB 7,000 from the bank account of the newspaper’s editorial board. It is not clear from the document which judgment served as a basis for such withdrawal.
On 4 April 2003 the applicant received a reply to her request for information from the prosecutor’s office of the Rostov Region. The letter contained the following information:
“Your collective petition concerning breaches of the law by the Novocherkassk town administration has been examined by the regional prosecutor’s office. As a result of our inquiry the following has been established:
On 14 December 2001 ... an auction for the privatisation of nonresidential premises in Moskovskaya Street took place; the auction was won by ‘Sfera Plus Ltd’ owned by the wife and a son-in-law of the mayor of Novocherkassk. ...
... the privatisation of the non-residential premises in Aleksandrovskaya Street was also conducted with breaches. The property was purchased by ... the deputy mayor of Novocherkassk. ...
As a result of the inquiry, the prosecutor’s office requested that the mayor of Novocherkassk eliminate the breaches of the federal laws on privatisation. ...
As regards breaches of the law on the use of land committed by the town administration of Novocherkassk, the prosecutor’s office of the Rostov Region has already demanded that the administration of Novocherkassk take measures to eliminate them. ...”
On 3 April 2007 the applicant received a letter from the Novocherkassk town prosecutor’s office, which included the following:
“... In 2006-07 the prosecutor’s office conducted an inquiry into compliance with the legislation on ... the distribution of land for construction purposes, its use and construction work. ...
The inquiry established that ... a number of violations of the relevant legislation by officials of the Novocherkassk town administration had taken place during the sale of the land ..., issuance of construction permits and ... the construction work.
In connection with the above, the prosecutor’s office demanded that the mayor of Novocherkassk eliminate the breaches. However, no measures have been taken by the administration. ...”
On 17 October 2007 the applicant received a letter from the Novocherkassk town prosecutor’s office, which included the following information:
“... in 2006 the prosecutor’s office conducted an inquiry, as a result of which it was established that ... the construction permit [for construction of the commercial centre in Baklanovskiy Lane] had been issued without the required endorsement of the Ministry of Culture of the Rostov Region ... and without an expert environmental assessment ...
...
Therefore the officials of the Novocherkassk town administration... had allowed for a range of unlawful actions that led to the sale of the land in Krivopustenko Lane at an understated price and resulted in arrears in the town’s budget ...”
The relevant domestic law and practice have been summarised in Novaya Gazeta and Milashina v. Russia (no. 45083/06, §§ 35-38, 3 October 2017).