The case originated in an application (no. 51472/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Pavo Smolić (“the applicant”), on 5 July 2012.
The applicant was represented by Ms V. Šnur, a lawyer practising in Vinkovci. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged that the national court had violated his right to a fair hearing.
On 1 April 2015 the above complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1934 and lives in Stari Mikanovci.
The applicant was an employee of the State’s railway company, Hrvatske željeznice. He suffered a work-related accident and became unable to work.
On 26 April 1977 the Osijek County Court (Okružni sud u Osijeku) awarded the applicant a lump sum in compensation and ordered the defendant – Hrvatske željeznice – to pay him monthly payments in respect of the difference between his disability pension and the salary he would have been earning were it not for his inability to work.
On 5 May 1988 the Vukovar Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Vukovaru) increased the above-mentioned monthly payments. At the same time, it established that the applicant’s inability to work was only 50% due to the above-mentioned accident, and 50% due to a pre-existing illness.
On 24 December 1990 the applicant instituted civil proceedings against Hrvatske željeznice, seeking that the above-mentioned monthly payments be increased on the grounds of changed circumstances.
The defendant did not oppose an increase in the monthly payments, but disputed the amount requested.
The Vukovar Municipal Court commissioned a report from an accounting expert, and on 13 February 1991 the expert witness submitted his report.
At a hearing held on 20 February 1991 the expert witness gave oral evidence.
On 24 April 1991 the first-instance court allowed the applicant’s claim in part, but on 16 August 1991 the Vukovar County Court (Županijski sud u Vukovaru) quashed the first-instance judgment in part, because it found that the first-instance court had failed to correctly establish the facts. It remitted the case for fresh consideration and ordered the first-instance court to establish, in terms of a percentage, how much the applicant’s inability to work was due to his pre-existing illness.
In the resumed proceedings, the first-instance court commissioned a report from an accounting expert and ordered the applicant to pay costs in advance in the sum of 696.55 Croatian kunas (HRK).
On 5 June 2003 the expert witness submitted his report and the defendant objected to the expert’s findings.
On 15 October 2003 the expert witness submitted his observations in reply to the defendant’s objection.
At a hearing on 28 November 2003 the court heard oral evidence from the expert witness. He stated that he could not precisely determine individual amounts until the Croatian Pension Fund adjusted the applicant’s pension.
On 22 December 2003, after the Croatian Pension Fund had adjusted the applicant’s pension, the expert witness submitted an additional report.
At a hearing on 23 January 2004 the expert witness again gave oral evidence.
On the same date, on the basis of the expert witness’s report, the first-instance court issued a judgment allowing the applicant’s claim in part.
On 3 May 2005 the Vukovar County Court quashed the judgment of 23 January 2004 for substantial violation of the civil procedure rules and ordered a fresh consideration of the case. It held that the first-instance court had failed to take into account the fact: that the first-instance judgment of 24 April 1991 had become final as regards an amount of 63.80 former Yugoslav dinars (YUD) per month payable for the period from 1 January 1991 onwards; the applicant had turned 60 on 15 August 1994; and he should have lodged an application for his disability pension to be recalculated as an old-age pension.
At a hearing held on 15 September 2005 the first-instance court commissioned a further report from an accounting expert, in accordance with the instruction given by the second-instance court. Specifically, it ordered the expert witness, in calculating the monthly amount, to take into account the amount of 63.80 dinars which had already been awarded, as well as the fact that the defendant was 50% responsible for the damage at issue, and to establish whether the applicant had used his right to have his disability pension recalculated as an old-age pension when he had turned 60.
Meanwhile, the defendant split into four companies, and the firstinstance court ordered the applicant to correct his claim by accurately identifying the defendant.
On 2 November 2007 the first-instance court declared the claim inadmissible, because it held that the applicant had failed to properly correct the claim.
Upon an appeal by the applicant, on 9 September 2008 the Vukovar County Court quashed the first-instance decision, because it held that the applicant had already identified the defendant.
In the resumed proceedings, at a hearing held on 22 December 2008 the first-instance court commissioned a report from an accounting expert in accordance with the second-instance court’s instruction given in its judgment of 3 May 2005, and ordered the applicant to pay the related costs in the amount of HRK 2,578 in advance.
On 15 January 2009 and 3 February 2009 the applicant asked for an exemption from paying the costs of the expert witness, claiming that, given his financial situation, and the fact that his pension was HRK 2,313 per month and his wife was unemployed and without any income, he was unable to pay those costs without putting his own and his wife’s subsistence at risk. He asked for those costs to be covered by the first-instance court’s funds, a possibility provided for by the Civil Procedure Act. He submitted a certificate from the Croatian Pension Fund concerning his pension and certificates demonstrating his and his wife’s income.
At a hearing on 3 February 2009 the applicant reiterated all the arguments and repeated that he had not been able to pay for the costs of the expert report. He asked the court to allow his claim as specified in his submissions of 16 February 2007. Neither party put forward any new evidence. The court set aside its decision of 22 December 2008 regarding a further report from an accounting expert, because the applicant had failed to pay for the costs, and concluded the hearing.
On 16 February 2009, relying on the rules regulating the burden of proof, the first-instance court issued a judgment dismissing the applicant’s claim. It held that, owing to his failure to pay for the costs of the expert report, the court had not been able to establish the exact amount of the monthly payments. In its reasoning, the first-instance court stated that the Vukovar County Court, in its decision of 11 November 2008, had awarded the applicant HRK 20,000 for the violation of his right to a trial within a reasonable time, and that he could have paid for the costs of the expert witness with that money.
The applicant lodged an appeal, claiming that the amount awarded to him for the violation of his right to a trial within a reasonable time had been paid to him on 13 March 2009, namely after the first-instance judgment had already been delivered.
On 4 February 2010 the second-instance court upheld the firstinstance judgment. In addition, it held that the applicant failed to demonstrate when the State had deposited the amount of HRK 20,000 on a bank account of his representative.
The applicant then lodged an appeal on points of law (revizija), which the Supreme Court declared inadmissible on 10 January 2011.
The applicant then lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court, and on 11 July 2012 the Constitutional Court declared it inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Obligations Act (Zakon o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia nos. 29/1978, 39/1985 and 57/1989, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia nos. 53/1991, 73/1991, 111/994, 7/1976, 91/1996, 112/1999 and 88/2001), as in force at the material time, provided:
“...
(2)  If the injured person loses income as a result of a complete or partial inability to work, or his/her needs becoming greater on a permanent basis, or possibilities for his/her further development and progress being ruined or diminished, the person responsible shall pay to the injured person monthly payments as compensation for damage.”
“The court may increase the monthly payments for a future period at the request of the injured party, but it may also reduce or suspend the monthly payments if the circumstances of which the court was aware at the time of delivering the previous judgment have changed significantly.”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991, 91/1992, 112/1999, 81/2001, 117/2003, 88/2005, 84/2008, 96/2008 and 123/2008), as in force at the material time, provided:
“The court shall use its discretion to decide which facts it will find proved, after conscientious and careful assessment of all the [pieces of] evidence presented individually and as a whole, and taking into consideration the results of the entire proceedings.”
“The party who, for reasons of ignorance, fails to avail himself or herself of his or her rights under this Act shall be advised by the court as to which procedural actions he or she may take.”
“(1)  If a submission is incomprehensible or does not contain everything necessary in order that it may be proceeded upon, the court shall instruct the person who submitted it to amend or supplement it, and for this purpose it may invite him or her to come to the court, or return the submission to him or her for amendment.
 ... ”
“(1)  When a party proposes [that something be introduced as] evidence, he or she shall be obliged, by order of the court, to pay, in advance, the amount needed to cover the costs incurred in relation to the introduction of the evidence.
(2)  When both parties propose [that something be introduced as] evidence, or when this is ordered by the court of its own motion, the court shall order that the amount needed to cover the costs be deposited by both parties in equal parts. If the court of its own motion orders hearing evidence, it may order that the amount be deposited by only one of the parties.
(3)  The court shall not obtain the evidence if the amount needed to cover the costs is not deposited within the time-limit fixed by the court. In this case, the court shall, taking account of all the circumstances, use its own discretion to assess the importance of the fact that a party has failed to deposit the amount needed to cover the costs within the specified time-limit.
(4)  If the court hears evidence even though a deposit for [obtaining this evidence] has not been paid, it shall, by a ruling, order the party [in question] to pay a certain sum to the witness or the expert witness within eight days. An appeal against such a ruling does not postpone enforcement.
(5)  As an exception to the provision of subsection 3 above, if the court of its own motion orders the hearing of evidence for the purpose of establishing facts in relation to the application of section 3 subsection 8 above, and the parties fail to deposit the specified amount, the costs of hearing the evidence shall be covered by court funds.”
“(1)  The court may exempt a party who, in terms of his or her financial situation, is unable to pay those costs without harm to his or her subsistence or that of his or her family from paying litigation costs.
(2)  An exemption from paying litigation costs covers an exemption from paying fees and an exemption from paying a deposit for witness expenses, expert witnesses, inquiries and court announcements.
(3)  The court may exempt a party from paying court fees under the conditions prescribed by the Court Fees Act.
(4)  In rendering a decision on exempting [a party] from paying litigation costs, the court shall carefully assess all the circumstances, and especially take into account the value of the subject of the dispute, the number of people the party supports, and the income of the party and the members of his or her family.”
“(1)  The decision on exempting [a party] from paying litigation costs shall be rendered by the first-instance court upon an application by the party.
(2)  Along with the application, the party shall provide a certificate from the competent administrative body confirming his or her financial means.
(3)  The certificate of financial means shall indicate the amount of tax paid by the household and individual members of the household, and other sources of income and the overall material situation of the party to whom the certificate is issued.
(4)  More detailed regulations on the issue of certificates of financial means shall be issued by the authority determined by special regulations.
(5)  If necessary, the court may, of its own motion, obtain the necessary data and information about the financial means of the party requesting an exemption, and may also hear the opposing party on the subject.
... ”
“(1)  Each party is obliged to provide facts and present evidence on which his or her claim is based, or to dispute the statements and evidence of his or her opponent.
...”
“If, on the basis of the evidence put forward (section 8), the court cannot establish a fact with certainty, it shall rule on the existence of the fact by applying the rule of the burden of proof.”
The relevant provisions of the Legal Aid Act (Zakon o besplatnoj pravnoj pomoći, Official Gazette no. 62/2008 and 81/2011), in force between 1 February 2009 and 31 December 2013, provided:
“...
(4)  Granting any form of legal aid shall include exempting [a party] from paying fees and litigation costs.”
“(1)  The procedure for granting legal aid is initiated by lodging an application with the [county State administration office or the Zagreb office].
... ”
“(1)  An application shall be submitted to the office on a prescribed form, accompanied by a written statement by the applicant and members of his [or her] household about the property [which they own], and a written statement by the applicant and his or her family members permitting access to all data relating to [their] property and income.
... ”
“First-instance courts, first-instance administrative bodies, legal entities and legal aid offices are obliged to provide information on the possibilities and conditions relating to the use of legal aid, as well as application forms.”
“This Act shall enter into force on the eighth day after its publication in the Official Gazette, save for sections 15 and 16, which shall enter into force on 1 February 2009 ... ”
The Government referred to case no. Gž-700/98 of 28 April 1999, in which the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) had noted that a party who did not submit with his or her exemption application a certificate of financial means for him or herself and his or her spouse, and did not give a statement for the court record, was not entitled to an exemption from paying court fees.