The case originated in an application (no. 28379/11) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Iraqi national, Mr D.N.M. (“the applicant”), on 6 May 2011. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr K. Hellström, legal adviser at the Swedish Red Cross in Malmö. The Swedish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr A. Rönquist, of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that he would be killed or ill-treated if returned to  due to honour-related issues.
On 29 June 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant, a Kurd and Sunni Muslim, was born in 1988 and is currently in Sweden.
On 16 October 2007 he applied to the Migration Board (Migrationsverket) for asylum. He submitted that he had lived in Kirkuk in the Tameem province in northern . He had been in a relationship with a young Sunni woman for one year. Since the woman’s brothers had not approved of him, they had kept their relationship secret. In June 2007, however, the woman’s brothers had caught them hugging and had attacked the applicant with scissors. During the attack, the woman had fled and he had not seen her since. The woman’s brothers had said that he had offended their honour and that it would only be restored if they killed him. The applicant had been hospitalised for one week and had initially been protected by the police. During that time, the woman’s brothers had burnt down his shop. They had also assaulted his father and had told him that they would cut the applicant to pieces. The applicant’s father had obeyed the brothers and had given them permission to kill the applicant if they found him. The applicant had reported the incident to the police. However, they had told him that they could not help him as it was an honour-related issue. He had then gone into hiding with relatives in another part of Kirkuk and had subsequently left  in September 2007.
On 13 November 2008 the Migration Board rejected the applicant’s request for asylum. It first observed that the general situation in  was not a sufficient ground to grant the applicant’s request. Instead, an individual assessment had to be made. It further found the applicant’s story to be partly contradictory, given that he had stated that the police had been unable to protect him and, at the same time, had stated that the police in fact had protected him during the time he spent in hospital. The Board also found the applicant’s story to be vague, for example concerning the assault on his father. It further held that if the woman’s brothers had wanted to kill the applicant, they could have done so when they attacked him the first time. The Board stressed that the applicant had been able to stay in  between June and September 2007, without anything happening to him. Lastly, it held that the applicant had failed to give an explanation as to why the woman’s brothers had not assaulted her but only the applicant. In sum, the Board did not find it credible that there was a threat from the brothers against the applicant.
The applicant appealed to the  (Migrationsdomstolen) in Malmö where he maintained his story and added that the reason he had not been killed in the attack was that neighbours had intervened. The police protection in the hospital lasted only for a limited time. When it had become clear to the police that the case concerned honour-related issues, they had stated that they did not have the resources to protect him. The reason he had been able to stay in  for several months was that he had been in hiding at his cousin’s home. Through a friend he had learnt that the woman had been killed and that her family had again assaulted his father. Internal relocation was not an alternative, as he did not have any social network outside his home province. Furthermore, the woman’s family could find him in other parts of the country.
The Migration Board contested the applicant’s appeal, considering that he lacked credibility. It acknowledged that, if the  were to find the applicant’s story credible, he could not be expected to benefit from the authorities’ protection. However, in the Board’s view, internal flight alternatives were available to the applicant, such as the central parts of  and the Kurdistan Region in the north.
On 4 September 2009 the  upheld the decision of the Board. First, the Court agreed with the Board’s assessment that the general situation in  was not sufficient to justify granting the applicant’s request. Turning to the individual circumstances of the case, the court considered that the applicant’s story had been consistent and had not departed from what was generally known. The court further held that the applicant had given reasonable explanations for the inconsistencies highlighted in the Migration Board’s decision. Thus, the court held, the applicant had made probable that he had been in a relationship with the woman, that they had been caught hugging, that he had then been attacked with scissors, that his shop had later been burnt down and that his father had been beaten and told that the applicant would be harmed. It did, however, note that the applicant’s statements regarding the death of the woman and the further assault on the father were second-hand information of low evidential value. The court further stressed that two years had passed since the attack on the applicant and held that the interest from the woman’s family had probably diminished. The risk that the applicant would be subjected to revenge upon return to  could, however, not be disregarded. The court further noted that the Migration Board had accepted that the applicant could not count on protection from the authorities. Thus, the applicant had made out that there was an individual threat against him which was local to  and the surrounding area. There was, however, nothing to suggest that the applicant would not be safe in other provinces. The court held that an internal relocation alternative, the Kurdistan Region of Iraq being an example, was reasonable and relevant even if the applicant had no social network there.
On 28 October 2009 the Migration Court of Appeal (Migrations-överdomstolen) refused leave to appeal.
The applicant subsequently claimed that there were impediments to his deportation and requested that his application for a residence permit be examined anew. However, on 18 August 2010, the Migration Board refused to reconsider the case. It appears that the applicant did not appeal against this decision.
The basic provisions applicable in the present case, concerning the right of aliens to enter and to remain in , are laid down in the Aliens Act (Utlänningslagen, 2005:716).
An alien who is considered to be a refugee or otherwise in need of protection is, with certain exceptions, entitled to a residence permit in  (Chapter 5, section 1 of the Act). The term “refugee” refers to an alien who is outside the country of his or her nationality owing to a wellfounded fear of being persecuted on grounds of race, nationality, religious or political beliefs, or on grounds of gender, sexual orientation or other membership of a particular social group and who is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country (Chapter 4, section 1). This applies irrespective of whether the persecution is at the hands of the authorities of the country or if those authorities cannot be expected to offer protection against persecution by private individuals. By “an alien otherwise in need of protection” is meant, inter alia, a person who has left the country of his or her nationality because of a well-founded fear of being sentenced to death or receiving corporal punishment, or of being subjected to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Chapter 4, section 2).
Moreover, if a residence permit cannot be granted on the above grounds, such a permit may be issued to an alien if, after an overall assessment of his or her situation, there are such particularly distressing circumstances (synnerligen ömmande omständigheter) to allow him or her to remain in Sweden (Chapter 5, section 6). Special consideration should be given, inter alia, to the alien’s health status. According to the preparatory works (Government Bill 2004/05:170, pp. 190-191), life-threatening physical or mental illness for which no treatment can be given in the alien’s home country could constitute a reason for the grant of a residence permit.
As regards the enforcement of a deportation or expulsion order, account has to be taken of the risk of capital punishment or torture and other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. According to a special provision on impediments to enforcement, an alien must not be sent to a country where there are reasonable grounds for believing that he or she would be in danger of suffering capital or corporal punishment or of being subjected to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Chapter 12, section 1). In addition, an alien must not, in principle, be sent to a country where he or she risks persecution (Chapter 12, section 2).
Under certain conditions, an alien may be granted a residence permit even if a deportation or expulsion order has gained legal force. This is the case where new circumstances have emerged which indicate that there are reasonable grounds for believing, inter alia, that an enforcement would put the alien in danger of being subjected to capital or corporal punishment, torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or there are medical or other special reasons why the order should not be enforced (Chapter 12, section 18). If a residence permit cannot be granted under this criterion, the Migration Board may instead decide to re-examine the matter. Such a re-examination shall be carried out where it may be assumed, on the basis of new circumstances invoked by the alien, that there are lasting impediments to enforcement of the nature referred to in Chapter 12, sections 1 and 2, and these circumstances could not have been invoked previously or the alien shows that he or she has a valid excuse for not having done so. Should the applicable conditions not have been met, the Migration Board shall decide not to grant a re-examination (Chapter 12, section 19).
Matters concerning the right of aliens to enter and remain in  are dealt with by three instances: the Migration Board, the  and the Migration Court of Appeal.
On 9 March 2011 the Migration Court of Appeal delivered a judgment concerning an alleged risk of honour-related crimes (MIG 2011:6). The applicants, a young couple from the Kurdish parts of , claimed to have had an illicit relationship which had resulted in their being persecuted by the woman’s family. Their applications for asylum had been rejected by the Migration Board and granted on appeal by the . The Migration Court of Appeal granted the Board leave to appeal.
The appellate court upheld the Migration Court’s judgment. It considered that the applicants had made probable that they would be subjected to honour-related violence or other forms of abuse upon return. It further considered that, while there was a possibility to receive protection in the Kurdish region against honour-related crimes, country information revealed that the situation was very fragile, making it impossible to draw any general conclusion as to whether the authorities were able to provide effective protection. For instance, effective protection could be difficult to get if the persons making the threats belonged to a powerful clan with influence at governmental level. Having had regard to the applicants’ personal circumstances, the alleged persecutors’ influence in Iraqi society and the lack of effective protection, the Migration Court of Appeal concluded that the applicants would in all likelihood be unable to receive sufficient protection in the Kurdish region. The court further observed that, according to country information, the only possible protection for men would be temporary detention.
On 31 May 2012 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) issued the latest Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Iraq. In regard to honour violence, it sets out the following (at p. 37):
“So-called “honour crimes” – that is, violence committed by family members to protect the family’s honour – reportedly remain of particular concern. Most frequently, women and girls and, to a lesser extent, men and boys, are killed or subjected to other types of violence such as mutilations, because they are judged to have transgressed cultural, social or religious norms bringing shame to their family. “Honour crimes” are said to occur for a variety of reasons, including adultery, loss of virginity (even by rape), refusal of an arranged marriage, attempt to marry someone against the wishes of the family or making a demand for a divorce. Even the suspicion or rumour that any of these acts have been committed can reportedly result in “honour crimes”. ...
The Iraqi Penal Code contains provisions that allow lenient punishments for “honour killings” on the grounds of provocation or if the accused had “honourable motives”. ... “Honour crimes” are reported to be frequently committed with impunity, given the high level of social acceptance of this type of crime, including among law enforcement officials. “Honour crimes” are reported to be committed in all areas of Iraq, though there is generally more information available in the Kurdistan Region, where the KRG [the Kurdistan Regional Government] has taken steps to combat the practice. Importantly, the KRG has introduced legal amendments to the Iraq Penal Code, effectively treating “honour killings” on the same level as other homicides.”
The UNHCR Guidelines further stated that, for men at risk of “honour crimes”, there are no protection facilities in the Kurdistan Region other than detention or prison (p. 38).
The UK Border Agency Iraq Operational Guidance Note of December 2011 stated the following regarding honour crimes in central and southern  (at paras. 3.9.6 and 3.9.8):
“The Iraqi Penal Code (Law No. 111 of 1969) contains provisions that allow lenient punishments for honour killings ‘on the grounds of provocation or if the accused had honourable motives’. ...
...
The police forces are tribally-based, however when it comes to issues related to honour crimes especially, there are efforts to try and break with how such cases are typically dealt with. On the other hand, there is a lot of tolerance towards the concept of honour and a widespread understanding in society of the male responsibility in preserving a family’s honour.”
As regards honour crimes in the Kurdistan Region, the Border Agency stated (para. 3.9.10):
“The legal position in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq is different to south and central . In 2002, Kurdish Region government passed a law to abolish reduced penalties for the murder of a female family member by a male relative on grounds of family shame and dishonour. This law sets the Kurdish region apart from many other countries in the Middle East and North Africa where penal laws still permit mitigated sentences and exemptions for men who murder in the name of ‘honour’. In the Kurdish region honour killings are now punished as harshly as other murders and are not viewed differently under the law.”
The Border Agency summarised (paras. 3.9.15 and 3.9.16):
“Women fearing ‘honour killing’ or ‘honour crimes’ in either central or southern  or in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq are unlikely to be able to access effective protection. Each case must be considered on its own merits to assess whether internal relocation would be possible for the particular profile of claimant, but in general an internal relocation alternative is unlikely to be available for lone women.
Honour crimes might not always be gender-related and there might be cases where men are as likely as women to be victims for committing certain acts which have brought shame on their family. If in such a case internal relocation is considered unduly harsh then Humanitarian Protection might be appropriate.”
The UK Border Agency Iraq Operational Guidance Note of 12 February 2007 set out the following regarding the tribal structure in :
“ is a largely tribal society with at least three-quarters of the Iraqi people belonging to one of the country’s 150 tribes. Tribes are regional power-holders and therefore if there is a localised tribal dispute the individual should be able to relocate to escape the problem. However UNHCR noted in October 2005 that within the Iraqi context and with the exception of the capital city of , cities are constituted of people belonging to specific tribes and families. Any newcomer, particularly when he/she does not belong to the existing tribes and families, is liable to be subject to discrimination. However tribes do appear to have limited influence in . Though relocation by persons of a certain tribe may cause resentment and discrimination on the part of the receiving tribe, such relocation is not considered unduly harsh.”
The UNHCR Guidelines set out the following regarding sectarian violence in  (at pp. 25-26):
“While open sectarian violence between Arab Sunnis and Arab Shi’ites ended in 2008, armed Sunni groups continue to target Shi’ite civilians with the apparent aim of reigniting sectarian tension. Sectarian-motivated violence includes: mass-casualty attacks targeting Shit’ite civilians and pilgrims; threats against Sunnis in Shi’ite majority areas and Shi’ites in Sunni majority areas; as well as targeted killings of both Sunni and Shi’ite clerics and scholars. Baathist ties and/or purported engagement in terrorism are often equated to sectarianism by the Iraqi Government and the ISF [international security forces]. Many individuals accused of Ba’athist ties and/or terrorism and thus perceived to be engaged in sectarianism are of Sunni background.
...
During the period of heightened sectarian violence in 2006 and 2007, the social and demographic make-up of many areas were altered as Sunni and Shi’ite armed groups sought to seize control and to cleanse “mixed” areas of the rival sect. This occurred principally in Baghdad, Iraq’s most diverse city, but also in the mixed towns and villages surrounding it. During that period, many members of both sects were internally displaced or fled abroad. To date, most of Baghdad’s formerly mixed neighbourhoods remain largely homogenized, preventing many from returning to their former areas of residence. In only a few neighbourhoods of  do members of both sects live side by side. Most returnees have returned to areas under the control of their own community. The recent political crisis, combined with a series of attacks by Sunni armed groups targeting Shi’ite neighbourhoods and pilgrims, has deepened sectarian tensions. Anecdotal evidence from UNHCR protection monitoring activities suggests that some Sunnis are leaving mixed and predominantly Shi’ite neighbourhoods in  fearing retaliation. While previously many Iraqi Sunnis fled to Syria and Jordan to escape sectarian violence, reportedly most now seek to relocate within Iraq given tightended visa requirements in these countries and the ongoing violence in .
Both Sunnis and Shi’ites living in or returning to areas in which they would constitute a minority may be exposed to targeted violence on account of their religious identity. Both Shi’ites in Sunni-dominated neighbourhoods and Sunnis in Shi’ite-dominated neighbourhoods have reportedly been subjected to threatening letters demanding that they vacate their homes. In cases where individuals do not comply, there are reports of violence or harassment, including killings.”
In a recent country guidance determination, HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC), of 13 November 2012, the UK Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) stated the following (at para. 297):
“... We observe that although the May 2012 UNHCR Guidelines emphasise the harm caused by the ethno-sectarian conflict between different communities, especially that between Sunni and Shi’a, they do not state there is a need for international refugee protection purely because a person is a Sunni or Shi’a and we do not consider that the evidence shows that there is a real risk of Article 15(c) [of the Refugee Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC] harm arising solely because a person is a Sunni or Shi’a civilian. And even where concern is expressed about both Sunnis and Shi’as living in or returning to areas in which they would constitute a minority, the substance of what UNHCR is saying is not that Sunni Arabs living in majority Shi’a areas and Shi’a Arabs living in majority Sunni Arab areas “will” be at Article 15(c) risk but simply that “they may be exposed to targeted violence on account of their religious identity”. In our judgement the other evidence relating to Sunnis and Shi’as reveals a similar picture. However, whilst for the above reasons we find the evidence as a whole insufficient to establish Sunni or Shi’a identity as in itself an “enhanced risk category” under Article 15(c), we do accept that depending on the individual circumstances, and in particular on their facing return to an area where their Sunni or Shi’a brethren are in a minority, a person may be able to establish a real risk of Article 15(c). (They may, of course, also be able to establish a real risk of persecution under the Refugee Convention or of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR).”
In HM and others, the UK Upper Tribunal described the situation of Kurds in  (at para. 300):
“There is nothing in the 2012 UNHCR Guidelines to suggest that Kurds per se are an enhanced risk category. Some support is given to the notion of Kurds as an enhanced risk category by [the expert witness] Dr George who in his written report referred to Kurds in central Iraq “remain[ing] at risk”... and by [the expert witness] Dr Fatah who in his report refers to Kurds in Baghdad being “more vulnerable”... but in neither instance did the experts seek to say that the number of attacks on Kurds were at significant levels. According to Dr Fatah, the number of Kurds in Baghdad is around 100,000-150,000, far fewer than previously.”
As to the availability of internal flight or relocation alternatives (IFA/IRA) in the Kurdistan region, the 2012 UNHCR Guidelines gave the following account (at pp. 49 and 51):
“A person from central or southern  may be out of reach of his/her persecutors if relocated to the Kurdistan Region as the state protection of the Kurdish authorities may be triggered. This may occur only if the person is both admitted to the Kurdistan Region and allowed to legally remain there and if the Kurdish authorities are able and willing to provide protection in the individual case. Generally, the Kurdish authorities will be able and willing to provide protection; however, certain persons, particularly those who fear harm as a result of traditional practices and religious norms of a persecutory nature – such as women and children with specific profiles and LGBTI individuals – may still be reached by their persecutors if relocated within . Further, large segments of society and conservative elements in the KRG public administration endorse such norms, which would militate against the availability of an IFA/IRA for some cases in the Kurdistan Region.
...
Persons fleeing persecution at the hands of non-state actors (e.g. family/tribe in the case of fear from “honour killing” or blood feud) may still be within reach of their persecutors.”
As regards possible internal flight alternatives in southern and central  the report stated, inter alia, the following (at pp. 53 and 55):
“As indicated in these Guidelines, persecution primarily emanates from a range of non-state actors. Armed groups reportedly have operatives in many parts of the country and, as a result, a viable IFA/IRA will likely not exist for individuals at risk of being targeted by such groups in southern and central Iraq. As reported throughout these Guidelines, armed groups are present in many parts of the country and have demonstrated mobility in accessing areas where they do not have strongholds. The mobility and reach of armed groups should not be underestimated in determining the relevance of an IFA/IRA. Persons seeking to relocate to other areas in central and southern Iraq may be at risk of facing renewed violence given the high levels of violence prevailing in many areas. UNHCR protection monitoring shows that lack of physical safety remains a concern for both IDPs [internally displaced persons] and returnees, particularly in the central governorates. Reports have been received of returnees being targeted because they do not belong to the majority sect in their area of return. In some cases, these attacks have been fatal. The presence of IDPs can at times result in tensions with host communities that consider them a destabilizing factor.
Generally, protection by national authorities will not be available given that the national authorities have as yet limited capacity to enforce law and order. Members of the ISF and the judiciary are themselves a major target of attacks and are reportedly prone to corruption and infiltration.
...
For categories of individuals who fear harm as a result of traditional practices and religious norms of a persecutory nature – such as women and children with specific profiles, victims of trafficking, and LGBTI individuals – and for whom internal relocation to another part of central and southern Iraq may be relevant, the endorsement of such norms by large segments of society and powerful conservative elements in the Iraqi public administration as well as the continued presence of armed groups with extremist or highly conservative leanings militate against the availability of an IFA/IRA in southern and central Iraq.
...
Common ethnic or religious backgrounds and existing tribal and family ties in the area of relocation are crucial when assessing the availability of an IFA/IRA, as these generally ensure a certain level of community protection and access to services. ... Further, an IFA/IRA to an area with a predominantly different ethnic or religious demography may also not be possible due to latent or overt tensions between groups. This can be particularly the case for Sunnis in predominantly Shi’ite areas, and vice versa, especially if the demographic make-up of the areas has changed as a result of previous sectarian violence.”
The UNHCR summarised the situation in the southern and central parts of  thus (at p. 56):
“Reports of insecurity, problematic living conditions and lack of documentation in southern and central  militate against the availability of an IFA/IRA. Further, relocation to an area with a predominantly different ethnic or religious demographic is not reasonable due to latent or overt tensions between ethnic or religious groups. This can be particularly the case when considering relocation of Sunnis to predominantly Shi’ite areas or vice versa.”
In a country guidance judgment of 7 May 2008, SI (expert evidence – Kurd – SM confirmed) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00094, the UK Asylum and Immigration Tribunal concluded, inter alia, the following in regard to internal relocation within Iraq (at para. 62):
“[W]e are prepared to accept that Kurds face difficulties pretty well everywhere in central and southern Iraq. However, although there have been examples of Kurdish communities per se facing targeted attacks, the evidence does not demonstrate that that is generally the case. On the whole a Kurd who can relocate safely within central and southern Iraq to an area where there is a significant Kurdish community can find protection there and will be able to avoid unduly harsh living conditions. What, however, of Kurds who for one reason or another are not able to relocate safely to such areas? Here, we are prepared to accept that the evidence indicates a slightly different position. As compared to a Kurd able to relocate safely to an area where there is a significant Kurdish community, a Kurd only able to relocate safely to an area where he (or she) would have to live separately from a Kurdish community would face added difficulties, by virtue of being regarded with suspicion as a stranger who stands out in ethnic, tribal and cultural and sometimes religious terms. However, we do not consider that the evidence demonstrates that for Kurds in either category these difficulties are such as to mean that merely by virtue of being Kurdish a person faces either a real risk of serious harm or that those conditions for them would be unreasonable or unduly harsh.”