The case originated in an application (no. 38194/97) against Greece lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Greek national, Mr Charilaos Karakasis (“the applicant”), on 19 June 1997.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr K. Mavroidis, a lawyer practising in Athens. The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Apessos, Assistant Legal Adviser (paredros) at the State Legal Council (Nomiko Simvulio tu Kratus), Delegate of the Agent and Mrs V. Pelekou, Legal Assistant (dikastikos andiprosopos) at the State Legal Council.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not been heard in connection with his entitlement to compensation for his detention on remand and that the relevant decision did not contain reasons.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court.
By a decision of 30 November 1999, the Chamber declared the application partly admissible, deciding to examine the Government’s argument that the applicant had not exhausted domestic remedies together with the merits.
The applicant filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). The Government invited the Court to reject the application on the ground that it had not been submitted within the six-month time-limit of Article 35 § 1 of the Convention.
On 25 October 1990 and 9 November 1990 criminal complaints were lodged against the applicant for instigation to fraud and for issuing checks for the payment of which there were no adequate funds. The prosecutor instituted criminal proceedings against him.
In 1994 the investigating judge ordered the applicant’s provisional detention (warrant No. 22/94). However, the applicant evaded arrest.
On 5 August 1994 the indictments chamber of the first instance criminal court (simvulio plimmeliodikon) of Athens decided to commit the applicant for trial to the three-member Court of Appeal (trimeles efetio) of Athens, sitting as a first instance court, on the above charges. The chamber confirmed the investigating judge’s warrant concerning the applicant’s detention.
On 2 February 1995 the indictments chamber decided to commit the applicant for trial on a number of supplementary charges.
The applicant was arrested on 2 September 1995. Until 30 October 1995 the applicant was deemed to be serving a sentence that had been imposed on him for unrelated offences in 1989. As a result, the applicant’s detention on remand on the fraud and other charges mentioned above officially started on 30 October 1995.
On 17 July 1996 the applicant applied for his provisional release. On 22 August 1996 the indictments chamber of the Court of Appeal of Athens rejected his application.
On 2 September 1996 the applicant appeared, together with MB, JK and DK, before the three-member Court of Appeal of Athens. He was represented by counsel who also acted for MB and JK. The trial lasted until 3 September 1996 when the court heard the final submissions of the parties on the question of guilt of the applicant and his co-defendants. Then the court withdrew for deliberations in the course of which it decided to acquit the applicant and convict MB and JK.
The relevant decision was pronounced and then the court heard submissions on the sentences to be imposed on MB and JK. Counsel who represented the applicant as well as MB and JK was heard in this connection. The court withdrew for deliberations in the course of which it decided on the penalties to be imposed. It also decided that “the applicant should not be compensated for the time he spent in detention on remand”. The relevant decision was pronounced on the same day, i.e. on 3 September 1996.
However, its text was finalised (katharographi) on 9 December 1996. The applicant was informed of this development later on and obtained a certified copy on 28 July 1997.
The Code of Criminal Procedure provides as follows:
Article 533 § 2
Article 535 § 1
Article 536 §§ 1 and 2
“Upon an application submitted orally by the person who has been acquitted, the court which heard the case shall decide on the State's obligation to pay compensation in a separate decision issued at the same time as the verdict. However, the court may also issue such a decision proprio motu ...
Article 537 §§ 1 and 2
“The person who has suffered prejudice may request compensation at a later stage before the same court. 
In these circumstances, the application must be submitted to the public prosecutor of this court strictly within forty-eight hours from the pronouncement of the judgment in open court.”
Article 539 § 1 
Article 540 § 1