The applicant complained under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention that the domestic proceedings concerning his administrative arrest had been unfair.
The applicant was born in 1987 and lives in Munster, Germany. He was represented by Mr A. Gasimli, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr. Ç. Əsgərov.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 29 April 2011 the applicant was arrested for insulting police officers who had informed him that the house where he was living with his family had been built unlawfully without a permit. He was taken to the police station, where a report was drawn up indicating that he had committed the administrative offence of minor hooliganism under Article 296 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”). He refused to submit a written explanation and sign the report.
On the same date the applicant was brought before the Sumgayit City Court, which found him guilty and sentenced him to seven days’ administrative detention. The court’s judgment referred only to the testimony of two police officers, who stated that they had discovered an unlawfully constructed house while patrolling the area. They had approached the house to make enquiries with the owner. At that point the applicant had come out of the house and started yelling and insulting them. As their efforts to calm him down had been unsuccessful, they had taken him to the police station. The applicant told the court that he had not insulted anyone or caused a public disturbance. He therefore had not committed the offence in question and was not guilty.
According to the applicant, he refused State-funded legal assistance at the hearing and insisted on choosing his own lawyer, but the judge disregarded his request. By the time his own lawyer arrived, the hearing had already been concluded with the participation of the State-funded lawyer. According to the Government, the applicant expressed his wish to be represented by a lawyer of his own choosing but failed to give a specific name. The first-instance court therefore appointed a State-funded lawyer as his counsel and continued the hearing.
On 3 May 2011 the applicant, who by this time was represented by a lawyer of his own choosing, lodged an appeal with the Sumgayit Court of Appeal, arguing that he had not committed any act which could be classified as an offence under the CAO and that his conviction had not been based on sufficient evidence. He further argued that the real reason for his arrest had been to supress the political activities which he and his father, who headed the local branch of the Musavat opposition party, had been carrying out. The applicant requested that his parents be called as defence witnesses and that the police officers who had testified against him in court be reheard, as his lawyer had not had an opportunity to question them. The applicant also argued that he had been deprived of access to his own lawyer because the first-instance court had not waited for the latter to arrive and had concluded the hearing with the participation of the previously appointed State-funded lawyer.
On 4 May 2011 the Sumgayit Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the first-instance court. It appears from the transcript of the hearing that the appellate court heard the police officers, who repeated the testimony they had given during the hearing before the first-instance court. The appellate court also heard the applicant’s mother, who testified that on 29 April 2011 she had answered the door to some police officers who had asked her whether her husband was at home. When she had said no, they had asked for her son, who at that point had also come to the door. The police officers had talked to her son, who had not been insulting anyone. A few minutes later they had all left together. Ten minutes later she had called her husband and informed him that their son had been taken away by the police.
Without giving reasoning in that regard, the appellate court dismissed the testimony of the applicant and his mother as not corresponding to the facts of the case and based its judgment on that of the police officers. Referring to Article 376.2 of the CAO, it also found that since the applicant had refused State-funded legal assistance and failed to name his own lawyer, the first-instance court had acted in accordance with the law by overriding his wishes and continuing the hearing with the participation of the Statefunded lawyer.
The relevant provisions of the CAO are described in detail in the Court’s judgment in Gafgaz Mammadov v. Azerbaijan (no. 60259/11, §§ 3238, 15 October 2015).