The case originated in an application (no. 43503/08) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Aleksandar Asenov Sabev (“the applicant”), on 3 September 2008.
The applicant was represented by Ms G.P. Petkova, a lawyer practising in Sofia. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms A. Panova, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his right to a tribunal guaranteed by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention had been violated on account of the fact that the courts which had examined his appeal against his dismissal had not had been sufficiently competent to hear and determine the case before them, which, in his view, had prevented them from assessing all the decisive issues for the outcome of the case.
On 4 January 2017 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Sofia.
At the material time the applicant was an army officer holding the rank of major who had been working for the Military Intelligence Service for several years.
On 27 May 2005 the applicant’s security clearance to access classified information at the national level was withdrawn, of which fact he was duly notified. The order merely mentioned the legal provision on which the measure had been based, that is, section 59 (1) (2) of the Law on the protection of classified information.
On the same date the applicant lodged an administrative appeal against that decision with the State Commission on Information Security (“the State Commission”), asserting that he had not infringed the aforementioned legal provision.
By letter of 22 July 2005 the State Commission informed the applicant that his appeal had been examined and dismissed on 15 July 2005. The letter gave no details concerning the Commission’s deliberations or its reasoning.
On 8 August 2005 the applicant was relieved of his duties in the Military Intelligence Service, and on 30 September 2005 he was transferred to the Intelligence Unit at the Army Headquarters.
By letter of 29 August 2006 the State Commission informed the Head of the Intelligence Unit at the Army Headquarters that on 22 August 2006 it had cancelled the applicant’s clearance to access classified information from NATO, and that he also no longer had clearance to access classified information at the national level. It stated that the applicant’s transfer to the Intelligence Unit had consequently been contrary to section 59 (6) of the Law on the protection of classified information. The letter gave no details concerning the State Commission’s deliberations or its reasoning.
On 30 August 2006 the applicant took cognisance of that letter.
On 11 September 2006 the Head of the Intelligence Unit contacted the Commission on the Status of Officers in the Army Headquarters, which met that same day and found that the applicant failed to satisfy the legal conditions for his post on account of the cancellation of the two aforementioned security clearances to access classified information. It proposed terminating his employment contract after the expiry of six months’ notice.
On 12 September 2006 the applicant took cognisance of that letter.
Between September and December 2006 the applicant applied to several State bodies in an attempt to discover the precise reason for the cancellation of his clearances. The State Commission replied that it could not supply that information and that it would not reconsider its decision. The Defence Minister informed him that his complaint was ill-founded, and the National Assembly told him that the issue lay outside its jurisdiction.
By order of 23 March 2007 the Defence Minister terminated the applicant’s contract for failure to satisfy the legal conditions for his post. The applicant was given notice of that decision on 12 April 2007.
On 23 April 2007 the applicant appealed against the order for his dismissal before the Supreme Administrative Court (“CAS”), complaining of the lack of reasoning of the order, as well as several procedural errors. He complained, in particular, that the order had failed to mention any fact justifying his dismissal.
By judgment of 19 November 2007 a three-judge trial bench of the CAS dismissed the applicant’s appeal. That judgment stated that the impugned order had been sufficiently reasoned, in particular in relation to the other documents in the file; it had been established that the applicant’s clearances to access classified information had been withdrawn, as confirmed by the State Commission; pursuant to the legislative provisions in force, no reasons had to be given for the withdrawal of such clearance, and the relevant order was not subject to judicial review; the withdrawal of the clearances meant that the applicant could no longer hold a post entailing access to classified information for three years; in ordering his dismissal, the Defence Minister had been bound by the facts found by the State Commission. Moreover, the CAS trial bench found no evidence of any procedural error.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with a five-judge bench of the CAS. He repeated his plea that his dismissal had been unlawful and unreasoned. He alleged that he had not committed any offence and had never been informed of the precise reason for the withdrawal of his clearances to access classified information. He invited the CAS to order the military authorities to supply him with the documents that had been used in evidence in the procedure for the withdrawal of the clearances in question.
By judgment of 6 March 2008 a five-judge bench of the CAS upheld the lower court’s decision. The CAS bench held, in particular, that the applicant’s dismissal had been justified by the State Commission’s withdrawal of the applicant’s clearances. It pointed out that the withdrawal itself did not have to be reasoned and was not subject to judicial review. It considered that that the Defence Minister therefore had been required to comply with the decision of the specialist administrative authorities and to order tale applicant’s dismissal, which he had done. It added that the applicant had taken cognisance of the circumstances justifying his dismissal on 30 August 2006, when he had been informed of the State Commission’s decision to withdraw his security clearances to access classified information.
The Law on the protection of classified information governs the protection and storage of an access to classified information. The State Commission is the authority responsible for applying that Law. The Commission is made up of five members elected for a five-year term by the Council of Ministers, as proposed by the Prime Minister.
Access is only possible to classified information if the person concerned has been given security clearance (sections 36 and 38 of the Law).
Pursuant to section 59 (1) (2) of the Law, clearance to access classified information must be withdrawn if the person concerned has infringed the Law or any instruments enacted for its application, to the actual or potential detriment of the interests of the State and the authorities having access to the classified information. Pursuant to section 59 (3), no reasons must be given for decisions to withdraw security clearance. Persons from whom clearance has been withdrawn are debarred from holding a post enabling them to access classified information for three years following the withdrawal (section 59 (6)).
Clearance withdrawal may be contested before the State Commission (section 62 of the Law). Under section 68 of the Law as worded prior to 2016, the Commission’s decision was final.
On 13 September 2016 section 68 of the Law was amended. It now allows the persons concerned to contest the State Commission’s decision before the CAS.
Pursuant to section 128b (1) (1) of the 1995 Law on defence and the armed forces, which has now been revoked, the Defence Minister could dismiss a regular member of the armed forces if he or she failed to satisfy the conditions for the post in question. Dismissal orders issued by the Minister could be contested before the CAS (section 132 of the same Law).
Under Regulation 199 (1) (2) of the Regulations on regular service in the armed forces as in force at the material time, a serviceman failed to satisfy the conditions for his post if he lacked access to classified information.