The case originated in an application (no. 59214/11) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Ms Borbála Kiss (“the applicant”), on 20 September 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr L. Baltay, a lawyer practising in Gyál. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Acting Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had been subjected to an inhuman and degrading police measure, which had not been adequately investigated.
On 23 November 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in Tiszalúc.
On 4 September 2010 a family feast took place at a private house in Tiszalúc. It involved the applicant – who is of Roma origin – and another fifty people. After a first visit at 8.30 p.m. without any incident, at about 9.30 p.m. several police officers returned to the house, demanding that the music be turned down. Those present complied. Subsequently, a heated argument started between a Mr H. and a police officer. The applicant intervened, a tumultuous scene developed, and the officer called the applicant names. The officer, threatening her with arrest, grabbed her arm and pepper-sprayed her eyes. The Government submitted that this had been necessitated by the applicant’s resistance. The applicant fell over, and then six or seven male officers dragged her on the ground to, and banged her against, the police car. While being dragged, her breasts became exposed, since her pullover was torn. She suffered bruises on her neck and her eyes were burning badly. Eventually, however, the officers refrained from arresting her.
The applicant then went to consult her general practitioner. The latter did not issue a medical certificate, but arranged for the applicant to be transferred to the , where she was diagnosed with an eye injury which would heal in less than eight days.
On 6 September 2010 the applicant and others involved in the incident filed a criminal report against unknown police officers with the Szerencs Police Department. On 27 September 2010 the Miskolc Investigation Office discontinued the investigation, finding that the applicant and the others had been feasting loudly and had countered the police intervention in an aggressive manner and that the police measures had been proportionate.
On 15 November 2010 the applicant filed an individual criminal report against unknown police officers. On 14 January 2011 Public Prosecutor Dr F. of the Investigation Office discontinued the investigation, observing that the force applied by the police had not been excessive.
On the applicant’s complaint, on 28 January 2011 the Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén County Public Prosecutor’s Office reopened the investigation. It pointed out that further witness testimonies were necessary to clarify the circumstances and the proportionality of the police intervention. Subsequently additional evidence was obtained; in particular, a video recording of the testimonies given by the applicant and the others present was admitted to the file.
In the resumed proceedings, on 23 February 2011 Dr F. again discontinued the case, coming in essence to the same conclusion as before. The applicant and the others present at the party were not heard in these, the preceding or the ensuing proceedings; neither were the suspected police officers interrogated or confronted with them. It appears that the decision was based on the minutes of the testimonies, which had been given by some witnesses in the criminal proceedings conducted against the applicant and her associates (see paragraphs 13 to 16 below), and which had not concerned the proportionality of the use of force by the police.
On 16 March 2011 the ’s Office dismissed the applicant’s complaint for want of evidence, pointing out that there had been no impartial witness to the incident.
Simultaneously, criminal proceedings were conducted against the applicant and other participants in the feast on charges of obstructing justice. The bill of indictment bore the signature of Dr F.
The Government submitted that, in these proceedings before the Miskolc District Court, the circumstances of the case were being thoroughly examined, several witnesses were heard, and the applicant had the opportunity to state in person – and by being confronted with the impugned police officers – her position and observations, including her objections to the investigation and the prosecution proceedings.
On 8 March 2012 the applicant was found guilty as charged and sentenced to one year’s suspended imprisonment. Her appeal is pending.
The applicant maintained that her first-instance trial was unfair and defence evidence was not given due weight. During the taking of evidence, out of the ten or so police officers who had been present at the incident, only two identified the applicant at all, and even they could not specify the role she had allegedly played in the events. The evidence against her was limited to the consideration that since she had gone to see a doctor, she (and others who had done so) must have been involved in the case. Statements of several police officers included the assertion that those who had been sprayed had obviously obstructed the police action, otherwise they would not have been sprayed. On the other hand, the applicant’s own testimony was confirmed by several witnesses; and there were two different versions of the facts, both confirmed by the same number of witnesses. The applicant asserted that, nevertheless, the statement of the police officers had carried more weight in the District Court’s eyes than that of the applicant’s family members.
Act no. XIX of 1998 on the Code of Criminal Procedure provides:
Chapter IX
Title III – Conduct of the investigation
Discontinuation of the investigation
“Section 190 (1) The public prosecutor shall, by decision, discontinue the investigation:
a) if the action does not constitute a criminal offence,
b) if, on the basis of the results of the investigation, the commission of a criminal offence cannot be established and no result can be expected from the continuation of the procedure,
c) if the criminal offence was committed not by the suspect, or on the basis of the results of the investigation it cannot be established whether or not the criminal offence was committed by the suspect,
d) if a ground excluding punishability occurs, unless it appears necessary to order involuntary treatment in a mental institution,
e) due to the death of the suspect, lapse of time or pardon,
f) due to other statutory grounds eliminating punishability,
g) if there has been no private motion, request or complaint, and none can be submitted subsequently,
h) if the action has already been adjudicated by a final decision, including the case regulated in section 6 of the Criminal Code,
i) if the identity of the perpetrator could not be established in the investigations,
j) [the prosecutor shall discontinue the investigation and issue a reprimand] if the action committed by the suspect no longer poses a threat – or poses such an insignificant level of threat – to society that even the imposition of the most lenient punishment allowed under the law or the application of any other measure is unnecessary.”
“Section 191 (1) Unless an exception is made in this Act, discontinuation of the investigation shall not prevent the subsequent resumption of the proceedings in the same case.
(2) Resumption of the proceedings shall be ordered by the public prosecutor or, if the investigation was terminated by a public prosecutor, by a senior prosecutor. If the suspect was reprimanded (section 71 of the Criminal Code), the public prosecutor or the senior prosecutor, respectively, shall quash the decision discontinuing the investigation. Against the decision ordering resumption of the investigation, no objection shall lie.
(3) If no objection was filed against the discontinuation of the investigation or the senior prosecutor did not order the resumption of the investigation, subsequently only a court can order the resumption of the investigation against a person in respect of whom the investigation had previously been discontinued.
(4) If the court rejected the motion for the resumption of the investigation, a repeated motion for resumption on the same ground shall not be allowed.”
“Section 207 (1) Prior to the preferment of the bill of indictment, the responsibilities of the court shall be performed at first instance by the judge designated by the president of the county court (‘investigating judge’).
(2) The investigating judge shall...
c) decide on the resumption of an investigation after its discontinuation (section 191(3)).”
Title IV – Remedy during the investigation
“Section 195 (6) A motion for review may be filed with the public prosecutor’s office against [certain] decisions ..., and against a decision rejecting a complaint against a prosecutorial decision ... within eight days of delivery. The prosecutor’s office shall forward the motion for review and the case file to the court [i.e. the investigating judge] within three days.”
“Section 198 (1) If the criminal report was filed by the aggrieved party, he may submit a complaint against the rejection of the report within eight days of its delivery in order to have the investigation ordered.
(2) If the prosecutor terminated the investigation, the aggrieved party may file a complaint with a view to the continuation of the procedure within eight days of the delivery of the decision on discontinuation.”
“Section 199 (1) On the basis of the complaint, the prosecutor or the senior prosecutor may:
a) quash the decision rejecting the report or terminating the investigation, and deliver a decision on ordering or continuing the investigation or on pressing charges;
b) reject the complaint if he finds it unfounded.
(2) After the rejection of his complaint, the aggrieved party may act as a supplementary private prosecutor if:
a) the report was rejected under section 174(1) a) or c), or
b) the investigation was terminated under section 190(1) a) to d) or f).”