The case concerns alleged discrimination in the baccalaureate (schoolleaving) qualification of pupils belonging to national minorities studying at school in their native tongue. The applicants, who are ethnic Hungarians, complained under Article 1 of Protocol No. 12 to the Convention that they had had to sit two additional exams (oral and written in their mother tongue) during the same, rather short, period set for the final exams throughout the country. Moreover, the exams they had had to sit in Romanian language and literature had been very difficult for them. For this reason, ethnic Hungarian pupils had less time than Romanian pupils to prepare for their exams or to simply rest between them, and less chance of success in the baccalaureate.
The applicants’ names, years of birth and place of residence are listed in Appendix I below. They were represented by Mr D.A. Karsai, a lawyer practising in Budapest.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms O.F. Ezer, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants live in an area inhabited primarily by ethnic Hungarians. They attended school in Romania and were taught in Hungarian, their mother tongue, and because of this, had to take two additional exams in the baccalaureate, to assess their proficiency in their mother tongue (see paragraph 12 below). They all failed their baccalaureate because they did not obtain the required grades to pass the exams in Romanian language and literature (Ms Ádám, Mr Petres, Mr Bakos, Mr Forika and Mr Maxem) or Hungarian language and literature (Mr Ambrus). They all retook the exams but failed to obtain the required grades (see Appendix I below). Some of the applicants contested the marks (Mr Bakos, Mr Ambrus, Mr Forika and Mr Maxem), but after reassessment, their grades were still not sufficient to pass the exams. They all obtained the required grades in the other exams in the baccalaureate.
Under the applicable rules, in order to pass the baccalaureate, candidates must obtain a minimum of 5.00 in each exam and the overall grade must be a minimum of 6.00 (see paragraph 12 below). The maximum grade is 10.
The Ministry of Education sets the timetable for the baccalaureate at the beginning of each school year (see paragraph 12 and Appendix II below). The written exams are organised over consecutive days: Romanian language (written), mother tongue (written) and the first exam in a curriculum subject. Pupils sitting the additional exams in their mother tongue have three consecutive days of written examination, whereas pupils not sitting them have a day of rest in between (see Appendix III below).
According to data provided by the Government, in the period 2013 to 2018 the success rate in the final exams was 58.1 to 73.9% for all pupils and 58.4 to 70% for pupils taught in Hungarian. During the same period, the success rate in the Romanian language and literature exams was 17 to 18% lower for Hungarian language students than for their Romanian peers.
The National Education Act (hereinafter “the NEA”), published in the Official Bulletin on 10 January 2011 and entered into force thirty days after publication, provides that the State “grants equal rights of access to all levels and forms of preuniversity and higher education, as well as lifelong learning, for all nationals of Romania, without any form of discrimination” (Article 2 § 8).
The NEA also provides as a defining principle “the recognition and the guarantee of rights of persons belonging to national minorities, the right to preserve, develop and express ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identity”, as well as the principle of “ensuring equal opportunities” (Article 3).
The following provisions regulate the right to education in minority languages:
Article 45
“(1)  Persons belonging to national minorities shall have the right to be taught in their mother tongue, at all levels and in all forms of [primary and secondary] education, in accordance with the law.
(2)  Any Romanian national and any national of a European Union State or Switzerland may register and be taught in all forms of education in the Romanian language, a minority language or a foreign language, irrespective of their mother tongue or of the language they were taught in previously.”
Article 46
“(1)  In [primary and secondary] education, where teaching is done in a minority language, all subjects shall be studied in that language, with the exception of the subject of Romanian language and literature.
(2)  The subject of Romanian language and literature shall be taught, throughout [primary and secondary] education, in accordance with the school curriculum and from textbooks specifically designed for the relevant national minority.
(3)  By way of exception, in schools where teaching is done in a minority language, the subject of Romanian language and literature may be taught from textbooks used in schools where teaching is done in the Romanian language, at the request of parents, the organisation representing the national minority elected into Parliament or, if the respective national minority is not represented in Parliament, at the request of the parliamentary group representing national minorities.
(4)  Exams in the subject of Romanian language and literature shall be based on a special school curriculum.
(5)  In [primary and secondary education], evaluation assessments and exams for pupils enrolled in schools where teaching is done in a minority language shall be based on the requirements of the national curriculum.
...
(12)  In [primary and secondary] education, pupils may sit the entrance and final exams in the language in which they were taught the relevant subjects, in accordance with the law.”
The content and organisation of the baccalaureate are regulated as follows:
Article 77
“(1)  Secondary school graduates shall receive a diploma and record of [their] grades, as part of their educational portfolio, attesting to the fact that [they] finished their secondary school studies and may ... take the baccalaureate exam.
(2)  Pupils who passed their [final school year] shall sit the national baccalaureate exam.
(3)  Secondary school graduates who sit and pass the national baccalaureate exam shall receive a baccalaureate diploma, which gives them access to university education, in accordance with the law.
(4)  The national baccalaureate exam consists of the following exams:
- Exam A: an assessment of oral communication skills in the Romanian language;
- Exam B: an assessment of oral communication skills in the mother tongue, for pupils whose high school education was in a minority language;
- Exam C: an assessment of oral communication skills in two foreign languages studied at high school ...;
- Exam D: a digital [computer] skills assessment ...;
- Exam E: a written assessment of competences obtained throughout high school, as follows:
(a)  a written exam in Romanian language and literature – a standard exam for pupils in all branches, profiles and specialisations;
(b)  a written exam in the [maternal] language and literature – a standard exam for pupils in all branches, profiles and specialisations whose high school education was in a minority language;
(c)   written exams in two subjects ...
(5)  The content of the exam curriculum is set by the Ministry of Education ... and publicly announced to pupils at the beginning of the first year of secondary school, in accordance with the law. The timetable, methodology and organisation of the baccalaureate exam are set by the Ministry of Education ... and are publicly announced for each year group at the beginning of the last year of secondary school.
...”
Article 78
“1.  [Secondary] school graduates shall be considered to have passed the national baccalaureate exam if all the following conditions are met:
(a)  [they] sat exams A, B, C and D provided for by Article 77 § 4;
(b)  [they] sat written exams E provided for by Article 77 § 4 and obtained at least grade 5 in each;
(c)  [they] obtained at least 6 as the average grade, calculated to two decimal points, in exams E.
School graduates who pass the baccalaureate exam shall receive a baccalaureate diploma.
School graduates who pass exams A, B, C and D provided for by Article 77 § 4 shall receive certificates attesting to their level of language and digital skills respectively. These certificates are issued irrespective of whether they have passed exams E provided for by Article 77 § 4.
If a pupil does not pass the national baccalaureate exam, the grades obtained in assessments A, B, C and D ... and the results obtained in written exams E, if grade 5 or higher, shall be recognised in the next [exam] session, upon request.
Two national baccalaureate exam sessions shall be organised per school year.
...
Pupils may sit the baccalaureate exam twice free of charge. Any subsequent resits shall be subject to the payment of a fee set by the Ministry of Education ...
Assessments A, B, C and D provided for by Article 77 § 4 shall ... take place in each school during the school year, in the second semester...
Written exams E in the national baccalaureate exam, provided for by Article 77 § 4, shall take place at the end of the school year, in the presence of a committee set up by the school inspectorate.”
Discrimination is prohibited by Article 16 of the Constitution, and is defined in Article 2 § 1 of the Anti-discrimination Ordinance (Government Ordinance no. 137/2000 on preventing and punishing all forms of discrimination). In addition, Article 11 of the Ordinance provides as follows:
“(1)  Under the ordinance herein, denying a person or group of persons access to the State-owned or private education system of any kind, degree or level, on account of their belonging to a race, nationality, ethnic group, religion, social category or disadvantaged group, on account of their beliefs, age, gender or sexual orientation, shall constitute a contravention.
(2)  The provisions of the paragraph above shall apply at all stages and levels of education, including admission or enrolment in education institutions and the assessment and examination of students’ knowledge.
(3)  Under the ordinance herein, requiring a declaration to prove that a person or group belongs to an ethnic group as a condition of access to education in their mother tongue shall constitute a contravention. The exception to this rule is the situation where candidates apply in the secondary and higher education system for places allocated specifically for a certain minority, in which case they shall prove that they belong to this minority by means of a document issued by a legally established organisation [representing] the relevant minority.
(4)  The provisions of paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) shall not be interpreted as a restriction of the right of an education institution to refuse the application of a person whose knowledge and/or prior results do not meet the required admission standards of that institution, as long as the refusal is not determined by [his or her] belonging to a race, nationality, ethnic group, religion, social category or disadvantaged group, on account of his or her beliefs, age, gender or sexual orientation.
...
(6)  Under the ordinance herein, any restrictions based on belonging to a race, nationality, ethnic group, religion, social category or disadvantaged group in the establishment and accreditation of education institutions set up in accordance with the legal framework in force shall constitute a contravention.”
On 3 July 2008 the Constitutional Court adopted four decisions (nos. 818, 819, 820, and 821) declaring Articles 1, 2 and 27 § 1 of the Antidiscrimination Ordinance unconstitutional in so far as they could be interpreted as granting the domestic courts the power to repeal laws which they found to be discriminatory. The decisions were adopted following an examination of constitutional complaints lodged by the Ministry of Justice in four sets of proceedings in which the domestic courts had declared various legal provisions concerning salary adjustments discriminatory. The decisions were published in the Official Gazette on 16 July 2008. In all four decisions, the Constitutional Court held:
“Interpreting the provisions of the [Anti-discrimination Ordinance] so as to allow the courts to have power to repeal legal provisions and replace them with new provisions or existing provisions from other laws is clearly unconstitutional, as it breaches the principle of the separation of powers enshrined in Article 1 § 4 of the Constitution, as well as Article 61 § 1, which states that Parliament is the only legislative body in the country.
...
Accordingly, the Constitutional Court ... rules that the provisions of Articles 1, 2 § 3, and 27 § 1 of Government Ordinance no. 137/2000 on preventing and punishing all forms of discrimination are unconstitutional, in so far as they can be interpreted as allowing the courts to revoke or refuse to apply [laws] on the grounds that they are discriminatory and replace them with provisions created on the basis of case-law or provisions of other laws not considered by the legislature when adopting the provisions [considered discriminatory].”
The relevant parts of the Administrative Proceedings Act read as follows:
Article 1: Who can apply to court
“(1)  Anyone who considers that their rights or legitimate interests were breached by a public authority by an administrative act or failure to respond to a request within the statutory time-limit, may apply to court for annulment of that act, acknowledgement of the right or legitimate interest at stake and compensation for the damage sustained. The legitimate interest may be either private or public.”
Article 2: Meaning of terms
“1.  In accordance with the present law, the following words and phrases have the meaning set out below: ...
(c)  administrative act: unilateral act, either individual or normative, issued by a public authority, in the exercise of its public power, with a view to organising the application of a law or concrete application of a law, and which gives rise to, modifies or extinguishes legal relations;
...”
Article 8: Subject of the legal action
“1.  Anyone who considers that their rights or legitimate interests were breached by a unilateral administrative act, and who is unsatisfied with the response received to their preliminary request [plângere prealabilă] or who has received no response within the time-limit specified in Article 2 § 1 (h), may lodge an action with the court, seeking partial or total annulment of that act, compensation for the damage sustained, and, if applicable, non-pecuniary damages ...”
Ministerial Order no. 4799 regulates the baccalaureate exam procedure. The relevant provisions read as follows:
Article 43
“1.  Subjects for the written exams shall be set by the National Assessment and Examination Centre in accordance with the following criteria:
(a)  [they] shall comply with the school curricula and the baccalaureate programme approved and published by the [Ministry of Education] ...”
Article 47
“3.  The National Assessment and Examination Centre shall ensure translation of the subjects into the languages of national minorities.”
In decision no. 2/2011, issued on 23 February 2011, the Constitutional Court examined a challenge to the constitutionality of the NEA made by a group of parliamentarians. Several provisions were called into question, including Article 46 § 2 providing for the right to education of national minorities (see paragraph 11 above). The Constitutional Court dismissed all objections.
The relevant parts of the Constitutional Court’s decision read as follows:
“... the Court observes that Article 6 of the Constitution guarantees the right to identity of people belonging to national minorities; the constitutional provision expressly provides that ‘the State recognises and guarantees the right of persons belonging to national minorities to preserve, develop, and express their ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identity’. The method of implementation of this right is specified in paragraph 2 of the same constitutional provision, which requires that adequate measures be taken to this end. The State’s positive obligation is inferred from the phrase: ‘protection measures taken by the State’ which must respect ‘the principles of equality and non-discrimination in relation to other Romanian nationals’.
...
Numerous international instruments provide for the right to education ... of persons belonging to national minorities ...
Consequently, positive measures may be necessary to protect the identity of a minority and the rights of members of that group to enjoy and develop their own culture and language, and practice their religion ...
These international instruments refer to the specific situation of persons belonging to national minorities, which requires the State to treat them differently ...
The [NEA] has implemented and developed these obligations so as to allow and guarantee the continuous development of the cultural identity of persons belonging to national minorities ...
The legislature has chosen to make specific provisions concerning [primary and secondary] education for persons belonging to national minorities.
...
The fact that the law provides for a special school curriculum for learning the Romanian language designed for members of a national minority signifies that the specific situation of these persons has been taken into account, notably the fact that they have a different mother tongue than Romanian. In other words, the different situation in which members of a national minority find themselves evidently calls for different treatment by law, in order to ensure effective equality and access to quality education for all. Consequently, the legislature must take this fact into account and adapt the requirements to learn Romanian language and literature to the specific situation of persons belonging to national minorities. Last but not least, the authorities have an obligation to ensure that a sufficient number of hours are provided for the proper study of Romanian language and literature.”
Z.I.A., the father of an ethnic Hungarian student, complained that Ministerial Order no. 5610/2012 setting the timetable for the baccalaureate exams discriminated against pupils belonging to a national minority who had to sit two additional exams in the same time period as their Romanian peers.
In decision no. 148/2014, issued on 5 March 2014, the National Council for Combatting Discrimination (“the NCCD”) found that that situation did not constitute discrimination. It accepted that pupils taught in their mother tongue and not Romanian had to make additional efforts during their final exams. It considered, however, that these efforts were rewarded by the fact that they obtained a certificate of language proficiency which was not awarded to Romanian pupils. Moreover, it reiterated that being taught in a language other than Romanian was a choice and not a right for students. This choice involved additional efforts on the part of the State and the students themselves, and both parties had to accept this choice.
In the operative part of its decision, the NCCD recommended that the authorities:
“... set a timetable [for the baccalaureate] taking into account the days necessary for rest, set a timetable allowing an equal amount of days between the [exams] in the baccalaureate, for instance by scheduling the [exams] in the mother tongue – oral and written – at the end of the baccalaureate exam period, in so far as possible.”
Z.I.A. lodged an action with the Bucharest County Court complaining of discrimination against ethnic Hungarian pupils and seeking annulment of the decision issued by the NCCD on 5 March 2014. In his action, he requested that the matter of discrimination be referred to the Constitutional Court.
Following a referral by the Bucharest Court of Appeal, the Constitutional Court examined the compatibility with the nondiscrimination clause of the NEA. In his complaint, Z.I.A. argued that during the same period of time allocated to all students for the final exams, ethnic Hungarians had to sit more exams than their Romanian peers. This, in his view, created a difference in treatment amounting to discrimination. He also suggested that the solution for eliminating discrimination would be to have pupils sit exams in only one of the two languages, namely their mother tongue.
In decision no. 670/2015, issued on 20 October 2015, the Constitutional Court dismissed the complaint. It reiterated that the Constitution guaranteed the right of the persons belonging to a national minority to preserve their collective identity through the use of their mother tongue. This right however, was related to the obligation to integrate into society in general, by learning the official language. Consequently, the Constitutional Court dismissed the argument that there was no objective and reasonable justification for requiring students belonging to ethnic minorities to sit the Romanian language exams.
The Constitutional Court further held that the fact that students belonging to ethnic minorities had to sit more exams in the same time period was not a question of constitutionality. It reiterated that it was for the legislature to set the timetable for the final exams.
Consequently, Z.I.A.’s initial action was dismissed by the Bucharest Court of Appeal on 24 November 2014. In a final decision of 7 March 2017 the High Court of Cassation and Justice declared his appeal on points of law null and void, on the grounds that he had failed to state the reasons for his appeal.
The Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, adopted by the Council of Europe in 1995, entered into force in respect of the respondent State on 1 February 1998. The relevant parts read as follows:
“The member States of the Council of Europe and the other States, signatories to the present framework Convention,
...
Considering that a pluralist and genuinely democratic society should not only respect the ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identity of each person belonging to a national minority, but also create appropriate conditions enabling them to express, preserve and develop this identity;
...”
Article 5
“1.  The Parties undertake to promote the conditions necessary for persons belonging to national minorities to maintain and develop their culture, and to preserve the essential elements of their identity, namely their religion, language, traditions and cultural heritage.
Without prejudice to measures taken in pursuance of their general integration policy, the Parties shall refrain from policies or practices aimed at assimilation of persons belonging to national minorities against their will and shall protect these persons from any action aimed at such assimilation.
...”
Article 10
“1.  The Parties undertake to recognise that every person belonging to a national minority has the right to use freely and without interference his or her minority language, in private and in public, orally and in writing.
...”
Article 12
“1.  The Parties shall, where appropriate, take measures in the fields of education and research to foster knowledge of the culture, history, language and religion of their national minorities and of the majority.
In this context the Parties shall inter alia provide adequate opportunities for teacher training and access to textbooks, and facilitate contacts among students and teachers of different communities.
The Parties undertake to promote equal opportunities for access to education at all levels for persons belonging to national minorities.
...”
Article 14
“1.  The Parties undertake to recognise that every person belonging to a national minority has the right to learn his or her minority language.
In areas inhabited by persons belonging to national minorities traditionally or in substantial numbers, if there is sufficient demand, the Parties shall endeavour to ensure, as far as possible and within the framework of their education systems, that persons belonging to those minorities have adequate opportunities for being taught the minority language or for receiving instruction in this language.
Paragraph 2 of this article shall be implemented without prejudice to the learning of the official language or the teaching in this language.”
The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, adopted by the Council of Europe in 1992, entered into force in respect of the respondent State on 1 May 2008. The relevant provisions read as follows:
“Preamble
The member States of the Council of Europe signatory hereto,
...
Considering that the right to use a regional or minority language in private and public life is an inalienable right conforming to the principles embodied in the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and according to the spirit of the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
...
Stressing the value of interculturalism and multilingualism and considering that the protection and encouragement of regional or minority languages should not be to the detriment of the official languages and the need to learn them;
Realising that the protection and promotion of regional or minority languages in the different countries and regions of Europe represent an important contribution to the building of a Europe based on the principles of democracy and cultural diversity within the framework of national sovereignty and territorial integrity;
Taking into consideration the specific conditions and historical traditions in the different regions of the European States,
...”
Article 1 – Definitions
“For the purposes of this Charter:
a  ’regional or minority languages’ means languages that are:
i  traditionally used within a given territory of a State by nationals of that State who form a group numerically smaller than the rest of the State’s population; and
ii  different from the official language(s) of that State;
it does not include either dialects of the official language(s) of the State or the languages of migrants;”