The case originated in an application (no. 1871/08) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Genadi Jeladze (“the applicant”), on 7 December 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr Dimitri Khachidze, a lawyer practising in . The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Levan Meskhoradze of the Ministry of Justice.
On 20 May 2009 the Court decided to communicate the complaint under Article 3 of the Convention concerning lack of adequate medical care in prison to the Government (Rule 54 § 2 (b) of the Rules of Court). It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The Government and the applicant each submitted, on 14 September and 17 November 2009 respectively, observations on the admissibility and merits of the communicated complaint (Rule 54 (a) of the Rules of Court). The Government submitted additional comments on the applicant’s submissions on 13 January 2010.
The applicant was born in 1978 and is currently serving a prison sentence in Rustavi no. 6 Prison.
On 21 July 2004 the applicant was detained on suspicion of aggravated murder and causing actual bodily harm, offences under Articles 109 and 120 of the Criminal Code of Georgia respectively.
On 24 July 2004 the Oni District Court, acting at the prosecutor’s request, remanded the applicant in custody for three months. His pretrial detention was subsequently extended several times.
On 30 June 2006 the applicant was convicted as charged and sentenced to eighteen years’ imprisonment. His conviction was based on several witness statements, forensic reports, and certain other pieces of evidence. The applicant appealed against his conviction, claiming that the first-instance court had erred in the application of domestic law and the assessment of the facts. He complained, in particular, that the Oni District Court had failed to take the statements of the defence witnesses into account.
On 15 November 2006 the Kutaisi Court of Appeal, after re-hearing the applicant, the victim and the key witnesses and reviewing the other evidence, upheld the applicant’s conviction in full.
The applicant’s appeal on points of law of 12 December 2006, in which he reiterated the arguments he had made before the first two instances, was rejected by the Supreme Court of Georgia on 7 June 2007.
In view of the deterioration of the applicant’s state of health, on 4 June 2007, the applicant’s advocate requested the Ministry of Justice, the authority in charge of the prison system at the material time, to conduct a comprehensive examination of his client’s medical condition. His request was, however, refused. Between 8 June and 18 July 2007 experts from the National Forensic Bureau (“the NFB”), an agency of the Ministry of Justice, conducted the medical examination at the applicant’s own expense (“the medical report of 18 July 2007”). The conclusions of that examination showed that the applicant was suffering from a chronic form of viral Hepatitis C (“HCV”) with moderate pathological activity; the experts classified the applicant’s condition as “not serious” and recommended that he receive antiviral treatment on an out-patient basis.
On 1 August 2007 the applicant’s lawyer requested the Prison Department of the Ministry of Justice (“the Prison Department”) to transfer his client from Rustavi no. 6 Prison, where he was detained at the time, to the Prison Department’s medical establishment (“the prison hospital”) for the purposes of antiviral treatment. In support of the above request, the applicant’s lawyer submitted the medical report of 18 July 2007.
On 6 August 2007 the Governor of Rustavi no. 6 Prison replied that the applicant was receiving hepatoprotective drugs in prison, and that his state of health was stable.
In the meantime, the applicant was transferred, for unknown reasons, from Rustavi no. 6 to Rustavi no. 2 Prison, which fact his lawyer complained of to the Prison Department on 29 August 2007. He also reiterated his request for the applicant’s transfer to the prison hospital.
In letters of 12 and 20 September 2007, the Governor of Rustavi no. 2 Prison and a representative of the Prison Department respectively, citing the medical report of 18 July 2007, stated that “in view of the applicant’s current state of health, his transfer to [the prison hospital] for medical assessment and treatment [was] unnecessary”. They noted that the applicant was receiving symptomatic treatment on an out-patient basis.
On 24 June 2008 the applicant’s lawyer requested the Prison Department to specify what treatment was being provided for his client in prison. A copy of the applicant’s medical file was also requested.
In a reply of 14 July 2008, the Prison Department stated that the applicant had not been treated with antiviral medication; spasmolytic and hepatoprotective drugs had been provided instead. Blood and liver tests performed on the applicant had disclosed that his state of health remained satisfactory. The reply further noted that the applicant was under the supervision of the medical personnel of Rustavi no. 2 Prison. The lawyer’s request for a copy of the applicant’s medical file was left unanswered.
On 21 July 2008 the applicant’s lawyer requested the NFB to conduct another comprehensive medical examination of his client in order to establish how his HCV condition had evolved since July 2007. For that purpose, on 18 July 2008 the lawyer had presented a service agreement to the NFB according to which the applicant was to cover the costs of the examination. However, after a preliminary estimate disclosed that those costs would amount to some 1,000 Georgian laris (GEL) (approximately 450 euros), on 30 September 2008 the lawyer, referring to the difficult financial situation of the applicant’s family, requested that the examination be conducted at the Prison Department’s expense. In this connection, it was brought to the Department’s attention that the applicant had been infected with HCV in prison.
The request of 21 July 2008 was dismissed by the Prison Department on 8 October 2008.
On 20 October 2008 the applicant’s lawyer requested the Court, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, to indicate to the Government an interim measure ensuring that the applicant was provided with a comprehensive medical examination and an appropriate treatment plan. On 22 October 2008 the Government were requested, under Rule 54 § 2 (a) of the Rules of Court, to provide the Court with up-to-date information on the applicant’s state of health and his current medical treatment.
On 13 November 2008 the Government submitted to the Court a copy of the applicant’s medical file, according to which it appeared that the applicant had been transferred to the prison hospital on 30 October 2008. Comparing the results of the various medical tests which the applicant had undergone upon his transfer to the prison hospital with the conclusions of the medical report of 18 July 2007, the Government stated that the applicant’s HCV had not progressed and that his general condition had remained stable. They contended that, in view of the fact that the applicant’s HCV was in a latent form, antiviral medication was not necessary. Instead, Ringer Lactate and glucose transfusions containing vitamins C, B1 and B6 were to be given to him. Riboxin, a medication having positive metabolic effects, was also prescribed.
By a letter of 20 January 2009 the Government submitted the results of the applicant’s additional medical examination, conducted at a civil laboratory centre on 8 December 2008. The results of the laboratory tests showed that the applicant was infected with HCV, Genotype 3a, with a viral load of 316130 UL/ml, and he required antiviral medication. Consequently, the Government, in consultation with qualified medical experts, proposed a treatment plan according to which the antiviral agents Intron A and Ribovirin were to be administered to the applicant for twenty-four weeks. The medical information further disclosed that the applicant’s state of health was stable; no jaundice of the skin or sclera was noticeable; the amount of bilirubin was within the norms; the liver bore no signs of serious internal injury but its lower border was palpable 2 cm below the costal margin.
The medical file shows that the applicant initially accepted the proposed treatment plan. However, according to four handwritten notes dated 26 and 29 December 2008 and 9 January and 18 May 2009, he opted for postponing the treatment until he had undergone another forensic examination. The note of 18 May 2009 does not bear the applicant’s signature.
In the meantime, the applicant was additionally diagnosed with a personality disorder and was transferred to the prison hospital, where he was seen by various specialists, including a psychiatrist, and prescribed the relevant drug-based treatment.
According to the applicant’s medical file, on 4 June 2009 he consented in writing to receiving antiviral treatment, however, only on condition that he was transferred either to Ksani no. 7 or Rustavi no. 2 Prison.
On 29 June 2009 he was again offered antiviral treatment on an out-patient basis on the premises of Rustavi no. 6 Prison. A handwritten note according to which the applicant again refused the proposed treatment plan was signed by the head doctor of Rustavi no. 6 Prison, another doctor from the prison hospital, and one of the prison officers. The handwritten note contained at the end a comment by the applicant stating that he had never refused the proposed antiviral treatment and that no preconditions for the treatment had been set by him. The applicant maintained that the conditions in Rustavi no. 6 Prison were inadequate for the treatment. He also stated that on several occasions handwritten notes concerning his refusal to start the treatment had been drawn up in his absence.
As disclosed by the case file, on 16 December 2009 the applicant finally agreed to the proposed anti-viral treatment plan.
The relevant legal provisions concerning the protection of prisoners’ rights, as well as excerpts from the Public Defender’s report for the second half of 2007 bearing on medical problems in prison, including those created by HCV, are cited in the case of Poghosyan v. Georgia (no. 9870/07, §§ 2022, 24 February 2009).
The relevant excerpts from the above-mentioned report read:
“Viral Hepatitis
The problem of viral hepatitis remains one of the most acute issues within the establishments of the Georgian prison system. About 40% of the inmates who died in 2009 were suffering from viral hepatitis. 15% of the deceased had cirrhosis of the liver and related complications such as bleeding from the upper part of the gastrointestinal tract, which in several instances was the direct cause of the inmates’ death. As regards the statistical data for 2010, 47.4% of the prisoners who died in the first half of 2010 were diagnosed as suffering from viral hepatitis; some of them had developed life-threatening complications. The monitoring carried out by the National Preventive Mechanism revealed that the chief doctors of the prison establishments recognised viral hepatitis as one of the most widespread diseases. However, no accurate record is maintained concerning instances of viral hepatitis infection; nor is any other type of statistical data gathered in the prisons of . The [prison] doctors have information only concerning cases where the hepatitis diagnosis has been confirmed by lab results. The monitoring revealed that a lot of prisoners who had clinically apparent signs of liver damage had not been examined for the presence of viral hepatitis at all.”
The European Prison Rules lay down the following guidelines as concerns healthcare services in prisons:
“Admission
1 At admission the following details shall be recorded immediately concerning each prisoner: ...
subject to the requirements of medical confidentiality, any information about the prisoner’s health that is relevant to the physical and mental well-being of the prisoner or others. ...
As soon as possible after admission:
information about the health of the prisoner on admission shall be supplemented by a medical examination in accordance with Rule 42; ...
Duties of the medical practitioner
1 The medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall see every prisoner as soon as possible after admission, and shall examine them unless this is obviously unnecessary. ...
3 When examining a prisoner the medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall pay particular attention to: ...
isolating prisoners suspected of infectious or contagious conditions for the period of infection and providing them with proper treatment;
The following are the relevant extracts concerning health care services in prisons:
When entering prison, all prisoners should without delay be seen by a member of the establishment’s health care service. In its reports to date the CPT has recommended that every newly arrived prisoner be properly interviewed and, if necessary, physically examined by a medical doctor as soon as possible after his admission. It should be added that in some countries, medical screening on arrival is carried out by a fully qualified nurse, who reports to a doctor. This latter approach could be considered as a more efficient use of available resources.
It is also desirable that a leaflet or booklet be handed to prisoners on their arrival, informing them of the existence and operation of the health care service and reminding them of basic measures of hygiene.
While in custody, prisoners should be able to have access to a doctor at any time, irrespective of their detention ... The health care service should be so organised as to enable requests to consult a doctor to be met without undue delay ...
A medical file should be compiled for each patient, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the patient’s evolution and of any special examinations he has undergone. In the event of a transfer, the file should be forwarded to the doctors in the receiving establishment. ...
A prison health care service should ensure that information about transmittable diseases (in particular hepatitis, AIDS, tuberculosis, dermatological infections) is regularly circulated, both to prisoners and to prison staff. Where appropriate, medical control of those with whom a particular prisoner has regular contact (fellow prisoners, prison staff, frequent visitors) should be carried out.
The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
“76. Despite the goodwill and commitment of health-care staff at the penitentiary establishments visited, the provision of health care to prisoners remained problematic, due to the shortage of staff, facilities and resources. The delegation heard a number of complaints from prisoners at all the establishments visited concerning delays in access to a doctor, the inadequate quality of care (in particular, dental and psychiatric care) and difficulties with access to outside specialists and hospital facilities. ...
Prisoners in need of hospitalisation were transferred to the , upon recommendation by the prison doctor. Some complaints were heard at the establishments visited of long delays in securing such transfers, due to a limited capacity. Inmates who could not be admitted to the  depended financially on their families (including, apparently, to cover the cost of escort to the hospital). The CPT recommends that measures be taken to ensure that prisoners in need of hospital treatment are promptly transferred to appropriate medical facilities.
As a result of the insufficient number of doctors and nurses, the medical examination upon admission was superficial, if it took place at all. The only establishment at which prisoners were systematically screened upon arrival was Prison No. 5 in , where new arrivals were undressed and screened for injuries by a doctor or a nurse, and all cases of injuries and complaints of ill-treatment were immediately reported to the Prosecutor’s Office. However, in other aspects the initial medical examination was cursory and did not identify detained persons’ healthcare needs. At the rest of the establishments visited, there was no routine medical examination on arrival. A prisoner could be seen by a doctor if he/she had a particular health complaint and specifically requested an examination. ...
No progress had been made since the previous visit in respect of medical documentation. Only a small number of prisoners (i.e. those who had a particular medical problem) had a medical file worthy of the name. In line with its previous recommendations, the CPT recommends that the Georgian authorities take steps to open a personal and confidential medical file for each prisoner, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the prisoner’s state of health and of his treatment, including any special examinations he has undergone. ...
... [R]ecommendations
- the Georgian authorities to take steps to ensure that all newly arrived prisoners are seen by a health-care staff member within 24 hours of their arrival. The medical examination on admission should be comprehensive, including appropriate screening for transmissible diseases (paragraph 79); ...
- the Georgian authorities to take steps to open a personal and confidential medical file for each prisoner, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the prisoner’s state of health and of his treatment, including any special examinations he has undergone (paragraph 80).”