The present case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission"). The case originated in an application (no. 8966/80) against the  lodged with the Commission on 1 May 1980 under Article 25 (art. 25) of the Convention by an Italian citizen, Mr. Francesco Goddi.
The Commission’s request was lodged with the registry of the Court on 6 January 1983, within the period of three months laid down by Articles 32 para. 1 and 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47). The request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby the  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The purpose of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether or not the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 para. 3 (c) (art. 6-3-c).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of the Rules of Court, the applicant expressed the wish to take part in the proceedings pending before the Court and appointed a lawyer for this purpose (Rule 30).
The Chamber of seven judges to be constituted included, as ex officio members, Mr. C. Russo, the elected judge of Italian nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr. G. Wiarda, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b) of the Rules of Court). On 28 January 1983, the President drew by lot, in the presence of the Registrar, the names of the five other members, namely Mr. M. Zekia, Mr. G. Lagergren, Mr. F. Gölcüklü, Mr. B. Walsh and Mr. J. Gersing (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43). Subsequently, Mr. L. Liesch, a substitute judge, replaced Mr. Zekia, who was prevented from taking part in the consideration of the case (Rules 22 para. 1 and 24 para. 1).
On 1 March 1983, Mr. Wiarda - who had assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5) - decided, after consulting, through the Registrar, the Agent of the Italian Government, ("the Government"), the Commission’s Delegate and the applicant’s lawyer on the necessity for a written procedure, that there was no call for memorials to be filed (Rule 37 para. 1).
On the same date and on 12 April, the Registrar, acting on the President’s instructions, requested the Commission to produce the observations, information and documents which it had received from the Government and the applicant, this material was supplied on 7 March and 22 April.
After consulting, through the Registrar, the Agent of the Government, the Commission’s Delegate and the applicant’s lawyer, the President directed on 26 May that the oral proceedings should open on 20 June 1983 (Rule 38).
On 16 June, the President granted the Agent of the Government and the applicant’s lawyer leave to use the Italian language (Rule 27 paras. 2 and 3).
By a "memorial by way of unsolicited intervention", received at the registry on 17 June, the Council of the Rome Bar Association (Consiglio dell’ordine degli avvocati e procuratori di Roma) sought leave to take part in the proceedings. This request was refused by the President on the same day since it had been made at too late a stage (Rule 37 para. 2).
The hearings were held in public at the , , on the appointed day. Immediately before they opened, the Court had held a preparatory meeting.
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
- for the applicant
The Court heard addresses by Mr. Trechsel for the Commission, Mr. Sangermano for the applicant and Mr. Squillante for the Government, as well as their replies to its questions.
On 19 and 21 July, Mr. Goddi’s lawyer transmitted to the Court his client’s claims under Article 50 (art. 50) of the Convention.
In accordance with the President’s directions, the registry received, on 17 and 26 August 1983 respectively, the observations of the Government and of the Commission’s Delegate on this issue.
Mr. Francesco Goddi, an Italian citizen born in 1951, is a shepherd. He resides at San Venanzo ().
On 6 June 1975, the applicant was tried, together with a certain Mr. F., by the  in connection with various offences. As regards some of the charges (threatening use of arms, unauthorised possession and carrying of arms and ammunition), he was sentenced to eighteen months’ imprisonment (reclusione) and a serious-offence fine (multa) of 300,000 Lire; on the other charges (unauthorised possession and carrying of military weapons, causing damage to property, causing a dangerous explosion in an inhabited area), he was acquitted for want of sufficient evidence.
The offenders, the public prosecutor (procuratore della Repubblica) and the senior public prosecutor (procuratore generale) attached to the Bologna Court of Appeal all appealed. Mr. Goddi’s grounds of appeal were drafted by one of the two lawyers who had defended him at first instance, namely Mr. Monteleone.
The Bologna Court of Appeal set the hearing down for 30 November 1976, but Mr. Monteleone did not appear, although he had been notified of the date. The Court of Appeal assigned an officially-appointed lawyer, a Mr. Maio, to act for the applicant and then adjourned the proceedings indefinitely for other procedural reasons. The President subsequently decided that the hearing should be held on 9 July 1977. On that day, the Court of Appeal once more ordered an adjournment, since Mr. F. had not been notified of the date. The record of the sitting discloses that Mr. Goddi appeared before the Court assisted by a new lawyer of his own choosing, Mr. Bezicheri, but not whether the latter was the only lawyer representing the applicant at that time.
On 20 September 1977, the President of the Court of Appeal set the adjourned hearing down for 3 December. Three days later, the  senior public prosecutor asked the Orvieto public prosecutor, in whose district the applicant was resident, to notify the latter accordingly and to make the necessary arrangements for transporting him to  should he be under arrest.
The bailiff was unable to serve the summons either on Mr. Goddi himself or on a person duly authorised by law to accept it and therefore lodged it at the town hall; the bailiff informed the applicant both by notice left at his home and by registered letter with acknowledgment of receipt. The letter, which had been posted on 5 October 1977, was collected by the applicant in person on 7 October.
On 29 October, pursuant to a warrant issued by the Forlì public prosecutor, Mr. Goddi was arrested and placed in custody in Orvieto in order to serve a sentence of six months’ imprisonment imposed on him by the  on 3 May 1976.
The hearing of 3 December 1977 was held in the absence not only of the applicant and his lawyer but also of the party seeking damages, the co-accused and his lawyer, and the three witnesses who had been summoned. The Court of Appeal was, in fact, unaware of Mr. Goddi’s recent arrest and declared him to be unlawfully absent (contumace).
The latter asserts, without adducing any proof that he had told the authorities of the criminal proceedings pending against him and of the date of the hearing - which assertion the authorities deny - but that they made no arrangements to enable him to attend.
Bezicheri failed to appear, since he had not received the notification: it had been sent to Mr. Monteleone and probably also to Mr. Ronconi, the other lawyer who had defended the applicant at first instance. According to his own evidence, Mr. Bezicheri learnt of the hearing only on 5 December, two days after the event, when relatives of his client sought information from him as to the progress of the proceedings.
At the hearing on 3 December, the Court of Appeal assigned another lawyer, Mr. Straziani, to act for Mr. Goddi. The public prosecutor’s office sought an adjournment so that the witnesses who should have been present on that day (see paragraph 14 above) could attend. After deliberating in private, the Court of Appeal refused this request and resumed the proceedings.
As regards Mr. Goddi, the public prosecutor’s office submitted that he should be convicted on the charges which the  had dismissed for want of sufficient evidence and that the remainder of the first-instance judgment should be confirmed. Mr. Straziani did no more than refer back to the grounds of appeal, which had been drafted by Mr. Monteleone.
The hearing was concluded on the same day. The Court of Appeal accepted the senior public prosecutor’s submissions and imposed on the applicant heavier sentences, namely four years’ imprisonment and a serious-offence fine of 500,000 Lire, together with three months’ "detention" (arresto) and a minor-offence fine (ammenda) of 30,000 Lire.
The applicant appealed on points of law; two of his grounds of appeal related to his own and his lawyer’s absence at the hearing on 3 December 1977.
The Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal on 8 November 1979. It held that the notification sent to Mr. Monteleone satisfied the requirements of Article 410 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 19 below). As to the finding that Mr. Goddi had been unlawfully absent, the Court of Cassation noted that the appeal court had been unaware of the impediment on which he relied.
Article 427 of the Code of Criminal Procedure reads as follows:
"An accused who is under arrest shall attend the hearing free from physical restraint, unless precautions are necessary to obviate the risk of escape or violence.
If at any time the accused refuses to attend and none of the circumstances contemplated in Article 497 obtains, the court shall direct that the proceedings are to continue as though he were present; in that event, he shall for all purposes be represented by the defence counsel.
 ..."
Under Article 22 of the regulations on the application of the same Code, it is for the public prosecutor’s office to request that an accused who is in custody be escorted to the hearing.
The accused may, by written declaration, decline to appear. If he does not decline, the rules concerning his participation and his assistance or representation by a defence counsel must always be complied with, failing which the proceedings will be null and void (Article 185). However, the Court of Cassation has held that this ground of nullity does not apply if the court was unaware that the person concerned was in custody (2nd Chamber, 30 October 1972, no. 1267, 1974 Reports, p. 2403).
Under Article 497 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, where an accused, even if he is in custody, cannot attend the hearing on account of a legitimate impediment, the court has to adjourn the proceedings unless he agrees to their continuing without him. However, according to Article 498, if the impediment is not a legitimate one and if the notifications have been duly effected, the court has to order that judgment shall be rendered in absentia.
The Code of Criminal Procedure lays down that both the accused and his defence counsel shall be informed on the date of the hearing.
As regards notification to the lawyer, Article 410 provides:
"In cases before a regional court, an assize court, a court of appeal or an appel court of assize, the registrar shall ensure that the date fixed for the oral proceedings is notified in writing to the defence counsel at least eight days in advance ..."
The summons to appear is null and void if this Article has not been complied with (Article 412).
On the other hand, the Court of Cassation, taking its decision in plenary session, held on 7 February 1981 that where an accused is represented by several lawyers it suffices to address the notice to appear to one of them only (Murdocca and Others judgment).
Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides, inter alia, that the proceedings shall be null and void if the accused did not have the assistance of defence counsel; there is an exception in the case of an offence punishable by a minor-offence fine not exceeding 3,000 Lire or "detention" for not more than one month, even if these penalties are imposed together. During the trial, the accused cannot have more than two defence counsel.
Under Article 133, third paragraph, of the same Code, if the accused has changed the defence counsel of his choice or simply withdrawn his instructions, the change or withdrawal is of no effect if the judge or the public prosecutor’s office investigating the case is not informed thereof; during the oral proceedings, such a change or withdrawal is effected by means of a declaration recorded in the minutes.
If the accused has not appointed a defence counsel or if the appointed counsel fails to fulfil his obligations, a lawyer will be officially assigned by the court (Article 128, first and last paragraphs, of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
The Court of Cassation, for its part, has held that a lawyer loses his status of defence counsel if he does not take part in the oral proceedings and does not arrange to be replaced (5th Criminal Chamber, 26 March 1975, Canistracci). The Court of Cassation stated:
"In that event, the accused will be defended by a lawyer officially assigned to him, unless he renews his instructions to his previous counsel: failing such renewal, (the latter) cannot lodge an appeal, this rights being reserved to the defence counsel who assisted or represented the accused during the proceedings. Accordingly, notice of a further hearing must be served on the officially-assigned defence counsel ..."
In his application of 1 May 1980 to the Commission (no. 8966/80), Mr. Goddi alleged that he had not received a fair hearing because he had not had legal assistance of his own choosing and because the Bologna Court of Appeal had, wrongly in his view, declared him to be unlawfully absent. He relied on Article 6 paras. 1 and 3 (c) (art. 6-1, art. 6-3-c) of the Convention.
On 5 March 1982, the Commission declared the application admissible, after examining it solely under paragraph 3 (c) (art. 6-3-c).
In its report of 14 July 1982 (Article 31 of the Convention) (art. 31), the Commission expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been a violation. The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to the present judgment.
At the hearings of 20 June 1983, the Court was requested by the Government to hold that there had been no breach of Article 6 para. 3 (c) (art. 6-3-c) in the present case; by the applicant to find that there had been an "infringement of the rights of the defence and, hence, of human rights"; and by the Commission to confirm its opinion.