The case originated in an application (no. 53197/13) against the Republic of Finland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Finnish national, Mr Rabbe Roley Ragnar Österlund (“the applicant”), on 23 July 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr Mikko Siika-Aho, a lawyer practising in Helsinki. The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Arto Kosonen of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the ne bis in idem principle had been violated in his case.
On 3 December 2013 the complaint concerning the ne bis in idem principle was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Karjaa.
.  In 2004 and 2005 the applicant’s two companies were subject to a tax inspection. The tax inspection was concluded with a final report on 20 December 2005.
.  On 25 August and 12 September 2006 the tax authorities imposed on the applicant additional taxes as well as tax surcharges (veronkorotus, skatteförhöjning) for the tax years 2000 to 2003 as he had, inter alia, received disguised dividends from the companies. The amount of tax surcharges varied between 240 and 5,000 euros (EUR).
.  By letter dated 16 September 2008 the applicant sought rectification from the local Tax Rectification Committee (verotuksen oikaisulautakunta, prövningsnämnden i beskattningsärenden), requesting it to quash the decisions of 25 August and 12 September 2006 concerning the tax years 2002 to 2003.
.  By letter dated 16 September 2008 the applicant lodged a material appeal (perustevalitus, grundbesvär) with the Helsinki Administrative Court (hallinto-oikeus, förvaltningsdomstolen) in respect of the tax years 2000 and 2001.
.  On 24 February 2010 the Tax Rectification Committee rejected the applicant’s applications for rectification concerning the tax years 2002 and 2003.
.  By letter dated 12 April 2010 the applicant appealed against the rectification decisions of 24 February 2010 to the Helsinki Administrative Court, requesting that the taxation decisions concerning the tax years 2002 and 2003 be quashed and the tax surcharges be withdrawn. He referred to the ne bis in idem principle and claimed that the taxation decisions violated that principle.
.  On 5 April 2011 the Helsinki Administrative Court cancelled some of the tax surcharges in respect of tax years 2001 to 2003 and quashed the relevant tax decisions. For the rest, it rejected the applicant’s appeals. The court found that there was no impediment to imposing taxes on disguised dividends even if there was already a final criminal judgment in this respect, because imposing taxes on disguised dividends was not considered criminal. There could thus be no question of double jeopardy in this respect. The taxation decisions for the tax years 2002 and 2003 were thus upheld. As far as the tax surcharges and the right to impose additional taxes were concerned, the court found that the tax surcharges and the charges on tax fraud concerned the same matter. The tax surcharges thus related to acts in respect of which the applicant had already been convicted or acquitted. As both matters were pending simultaneously and not consecutively, there was no impediment to continuing the taxation proceedings. Even if the criminal proceedings became final while the taxation proceedings were still pending, this did not prevent the continuation of the taxation proceedings. There was thus no reason to change the tax surcharges as far as the corresponding criminal charges had been dismissed, namely, in respect of the disguised dividends received during the tax years 2002 and 2003. As far as the proceedings led to both criminal conviction and imposition of tax surcharges, the situation was contrary to Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention and the tax surcharges were therefore cancelled in respect of tax years 2001 to 2003. The decision was not unanimous.
.  By letter dated 13 June 2011, the applicant appealed against the Administrative Court decision to the Supreme Administrative Court (korkein hallinto-oikeus, högsta förvaltningsdomstolen), reiterating the grounds of appeal already presented before the Administrative Court. He argued that his acquittal prevented the further examination of the same matter in taxation proceedings.
.  On 23 January 2013 the Supreme Administrative Court refused the applicant leave to appeal but granted the Tax Ombudsman (veroasiamies, skatteombudet) leave to appeal. It quashed the Administrative Court’s decision regarding cancellation of the tax surcharges and upheld the lower court’s decisions. The court found that it had, in its decision of 20 April 2011, examined the scope of the ne bis in idem principle and the Court’s case-law in this respect. In the present case the charges and the tax surcharges concerned essentially the same matter. However, the ne bis in idem principle was applicable only when the first set of proceedings had become final before the second set of proceedings started. In the present case the proceedings had been simultaneous. Tax surcharges could thus be imposed on the applicant even if the criminal proceedings against him had already become final. The Administrative Court’s decision thus needed to be quashed.
.  On 25 April 2007 the public prosecutor brought charges against the applicant, inter alia, for aggravated tax fraud (törkeä veropetos, grovt skattebedrägeri) concerning the tax years 2001 to 2003. According to the charges, the applicant was accused of aggravated tax fraud as he had avoided taxes. The tax authorities joined the charges and presented a compensation claim totalling EUR 150,508.52 plus interest, which was the amount of avoided taxes.
.  On 20 March 2008 the Raasepori District Court (käräjäoikeus, tingsrätten) convicted the applicant of aggravated tax fraud, and sentenced him to a suspended prison sentence of 7 months. He was ordered to pay the tax authorities EUR 89,113.80 plus interest in compensation for the avoided taxes. The court found that the applicant had avoided taxes during the tax years 2001 to 2003 but dismissed the charges as far as they concerned the disguised dividends, for lack of proof.
.  By letter dated 14 August 2009 the applicant appealed to the Turku Appeal Court (hovioikeus, hovrätten), requesting that the charges of aggravated tax fraud be dismissed as tax surcharges had already been imposed in the matter.
On 15 April 2009 the Turku Appeal Court upheld the District Court judgment. It found that possible tax surcharges imposed on the applicant did not prevent him from being convicted of tax fraud and sentenced.
.  On an unspecified date the applicant appealed to the Supreme Court (korkein oikeus, högsta domstolen), reiterating the grounds of appeal already presented before the Appeal Court.
.  On an unspecified date, the Supreme Court granted the applicant leave to appeal.
.  On 19 November 2010 the Supreme Court upheld the Appeal Court judgment. It found that the charges of aggravated tax fraud undisputedly concerned the same failure to declare income for which tax surcharges had been imposed for the tax years 2001 to 2003. The court found that the fact that taxation proceedings became final while criminal proceedings were still pending did not prevent the examination of the charges being continued. In the present case, the charges had been brought before the time-limit for lodging an application for rectification had run out. The tax surcharges in respect of the tax years 2001 to 2003 were thus all still pending before the Administrative Court. As the charges had been brought while the taxation proceedings had not yet become final, there was no impediment to examining the charges of aggravated tax fraud. This judgment was published (KKO 2010:82).
.  Section 57, subsection 1, of the Tax Assessment Procedure Act (laki verotusmenettelystä, lagen om beskattningsförfarande, Act no. 1558/1995, as amended by Act no. 1079/2005) provides that if a person has failed to make the required tax returns or has given incomplete, misleading or false information to the tax authorities and tax has therefore been incompletely or partially levied, the taxpayer shall be ordered to pay unpaid taxes together with additional tax and a tax surcharge.
.  According to Chapter 29, sections 1 and 2, of the Penal Code (rikoslaki, strafflagen, as amended by Acts no. 1228/1997 and no. 769/1990), a person who (1) gives a tax authority false information on a fact that influences the assessment of tax, (2) files a tax return concealing a fact that influences the assessment of tax, (3) for the purpose of avoiding tax, fails to observe a duty pertaining to taxation, influencing the assessment of tax, or (4) acts otherwise fraudulently and thereby causes or attempts to cause a tax not to be assessed, or too low a tax to be assessed or a tax to be unduly refunded, shall be sentenced for tax fraud to a fine or to imprisonment for a period of up to two years. If by the tax fraud (1) considerable financial benefit is sought or (2) the offence is committed in a particularly methodical manner and the tax fraud is aggravated when assessed as a whole, the offender shall be sentenced for aggravated tax fraud to imprisonment for a period between four months and four years.
.  The Supreme Court has taken a stand on the ne bis in idem principle in its precedent case KKO 2010:46 which concerned tax surcharges and aggravated tax fraud. In that case it found, inter alia, that even though a final judgment in a taxation case, in which tax surcharges had been imposed, prevented criminal charges being brought about the same matter, such preventive effect could not be applied to pending cases (lis pendens) crossing from administrative proceedings to criminal proceedings or vice versa. However, in July 2013 the Supreme Court reversed its line of interpretation, finding that charges for tax fraud could no longer be brought if there was already a decision to order or not to order tax surcharges in the same matter (KKO 2013:59).
.  The Act on Tax Surcharges and Customs Duty Surcharges Imposed by a Separate Decision (laki erillisellä päätöksellä määrättävästä veron- tai tullinkorotuksesta, lagen om skatteförhöjning och tullhöjning som påförs genom ett särskilt beslut, Act no. 781/2013) entered into force on 1 December 2013. According to the Act, the tax authorities can, when making a tax decision, assess whether to impose a tax surcharge or to report the matter to the police. The tax authorities can decide not to impose a tax surcharge. If they have not reported the matter to the police, a tax surcharge can be imposed by a separate decision by the end of the calendar year following the actual tax decision. If the tax authorities have imposed tax surcharges, they can no longer report the same matter to the police unless, after imposing the tax surcharges, they have received evidence of new or recently revealed facts. If the tax authorities have reported the matter to the police, tax surcharges can, as a rule, no longer be imposed. The purpose of the Act is thus to ensure that a tax or a customs duty matter is processed and possibly punished in only one set of proceedings. The Act does not, however, contain any transitional provisions extending its scope retroactively.