The case originated in an application (no. 28932/14) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a national of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, Mr Šemso Hodžić (“the applicant”), on 8 April 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Ademović, a lawyer practising in Sarajevo. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged a lack of fairness in the procedure and decisions for his internment in a psychiatric hospital. He relied on Article 5 §§ 1 (e) and 4 and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 30 June 2014 the application was communicated to the Government. The President of the Section to which the case was allocated decided, under Rule 54 § 2 (c) of the Rules of Court, to invite the parties to submit further observations in respect of the issues raised under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina did not make use of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicant was born in 1952.
On 30 May 2012 the applicant was arrested and detained in connection with a suspicion of making two threats by telephone against certain M.S. and Š.O.
In the course of the investigation, the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office (Općinsko državni odvjetništvo u Zagrebu) commissioned a psychiatric expert report on the applicant’s mental health at the time of the offence, including, if appropriate, the existence of a need for his psychiatric internment.
On 28 June 2012 the psychiatric expert, E.S., submitted her report, which stated that the applicant suffered from paranoid schizophrenia. She found that he was incapable of understanding and controlling his actions and that he posed a danger to others, which warranted his psychiatric internment. The expert noted that she had not inspected any medical documents concerning the applicant’s previous psychiatric treatment, but she had interviewed him, examined the criminal case file and a medical report from the prison administration.
On 10 July 2012 the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office indicted the applicant in the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court (Općinski kazneni sud u Zagrebu) on charges of making serious threats. It asked that the measure of involuntary psychiatric internment be ordered in respect of the applicant, as provided under the Protection of Individuals with Mental Disorders Act.
On 27 July 2012 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court found that the indictment was flawed as it had been based on an incomplete expert report, which had not taken into account all the medical documentation concerning the applicant’s previous psychiatric treatment. The indictment was thus returned to the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office with an instruction to commission an additional expert report.
On 24 August 2012 E.S. produced a supplement to her report, which she prepared with a psychologist. She explained that she had obtained the applicant’s medical record from his general practitioner, V.P., but had not obtained anything from his psychiatrist, V.G. (a university professor), who had in the meantime retired and could not be reached. The expert also stated that, in her view, the applicant’s diagnosis had already been clear after the first examination and that she did not need further documents to provide a diagnosis. She thus reiterated her previous opinion on the basis of the new records she had obtained.
On 28 August 2012 the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office submitted a new indictment against the applicant in the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court. This indictment was confirmed and accepted on 3 October 2012 and the case was sent to trial.
Meanwhile, on 30 August 2012, the applicant was released from pretrial detention because the maximum period had expired (see paragraph 31 below).
At a hearing before the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court on 4 December 2012, the applicant asked that his psychiatrist V.G., his general practitioner V.P. and several other witnesses, including his neighbours, be heard. He said they could all give evidence as to his mental state. He also argued that he had had previous conflicts with the victims and asked that the police be requested to submit relevant information about those incidents.
At the same hearing, several prosecution witnesses and the expert witness E.S. were questioned. E.S. reiterated the findings and opinion she had previously given. She also argued that the evidence concerning the applicant’s mental state at the moment of the commission of the offence could not be given by his general practitioner or his psychiatrist.
In the meantime, on 11 September and 13 December 2012 the applicant submitted medical reports by his psychiatrist V.G. according to which he suffered from chronic stress and maladaptation to the environment. This was a behavioural disorder which needed further psychological treatment. V.G. also stressed that the applicant’s psychiatric internment could create adverse effects for his treatment. He pointed out that the applicant participated in an outpatient psychiatric treatment for years and that there were positive developments in his behaviour, in particular related to the abstinence from alcohol.
At a hearing on 18 December 2012, the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court heard further witnesses for the prosecution. It dismissed all the applicant’s requests for the taking of evidence on the grounds that they were irrelevant. In particular, the trial court held that the general practitioner V.P. did not have sufficient expertise to give evidence on the applicant’s mental capacity and that her documents had been taken into account by E.S. The trial court considered that the same arguments applied to V.G.
At a hearing on 23 January 2013 the parties gave their closing arguments. The applicant argued that E.S.’s expert opinion was flawed and incomplete as it had not taken into account the existing medical documentation related to his treatment but only the medical record held by his general practitioner. At the same time, her opinion was contrary to the findings of his psychiatrist V.G.
On the same day the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court found that the applicant had committed the offence of making serious threats while lacking mental capacity. Relying on E.S.’s report, it decided that he should be placed in a psychiatric hospital for a period of six months. The Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court found the medical reports produced by V.G. (see paragraph 17 above) unreliable on the grounds that they contradicted the findings of the expert witness E.S. and that they had been produced by a doctor whom the applicant had paid privately.
The applicant appealed against the judgment to Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu), alleging numerous substantive and procedural flaws. He pointed out that his psychiatrist V.G., who had treated him for six years, had not been consulted in the course of the proceedings. He also referred to a report by V.G., which found that there were no grounds for his being placed in a psychiatric institution and that any such decision could have severe consequences for his health.
On 9 July 2013 the Zagreb County Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on the grounds that all the relevant facts had been correctly established. It stressed that the expert witness E.S. had taken into account the applicant’s medical record held by his general practitioner V.P., which also included the findings of his psychiatrist V.G. The Zagreb County Court therefore considered that it had not been necessary to question V.P. and V.G., particularly since they were not certified court experts as was the case with E.S. The Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court judgment thereby became final.
On 23 October 2013 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), complaining that the proceedings had been unfair.
On 27 November 2013 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded. It considered that the applicant was simply repeating his arguments from the proceedings before the lower courts challenging their decisions although those decisions did not disclose any arbitrariness or unfairness.
After the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court’s judgment became final (see paragraph 22 above) it was sent for implementation to a single judge of the Zagreb County Court, as provided for under the Protection of Individuals with Mental Disorders Act (see paragraph 32 below).
In the meantime, the applicant went to Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, where he was examined by two experts in forensic psychiatry, A.K. and A.B.M., and a psychologist, S.P. In a report of 10 August 2013 the experts stated that the applicant had various mental disorders of a histrionic type, but did not have paranoid schizophrenia. They also stated that he was fully conscious of his acts and could adopt a critical attitude towards his own conduct.
On 21 October 2013 a judge of the Zagreb County Court ordered that the applicant be sent to the psychiatric hospital.
The applicant appealed against that decision to a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court, referring, inter alia, to the expert report drafted on 10 August 2013 (see paragraph 26 above).
On 7 November 2013 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on the grounds that there had been nothing in his arguments to raise any doubts about the necessity for his committal to the hospital as established by the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court.
According to the available information, the applicant is still at large as he could not be located by the relevant authorities in order to execute the psychiatric internment order.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette no. 152/2008, with further amendments) read:
“(1)  Until the adoption of a first-instance judgment, pre-trial detention may last for a maximum of:
...
three months for offences carrying a sentence of up to three years’ imprisonment;
...”
“(1)  Persons for whom it is probable that they could give information on the criminal offence, perpetrator or other important circumstances are heard as witnesses.”
“(1)  The following persons enjoy testimonial privilege:
...
5)  ... doctors, ... psychologists, ... with regard to the information they had learned from the defendant in the performance of their duties ...”
“Expert report shall be commissioned when, in order to determine or assess the relevant facts, it is necessary to obtain findings and the opinion of a person who has the necessary expert knowledge.”
“(2)  If a specialised institution exists for a certain type of expertise, or the expert evidence may be given from a state authority, such expert report, particularly a complex one, shall as a rule be assigned to such an institution or such an authority. The institution or the authority shall appoint one or more experts who shall produce the expert report.
...
(4)  If for certain expert report, permanent expert witnesses are appointed, other expert witnesses may be appointed only when there is a danger of delay, or when permanent expert witnesses are not available or if other circumstances so require.”
“(1)  Any person who ... enjoys the testimonial privilege ... may not be appointed as an expert witness, and if such a person was appointed, his or her findings and opinion may not be used as evidence in the proceedings.”
“If the findings of the expert witness are unclear, incomplete or contradictory in themselves or contrary to other examined circumstances, and these omissions cannot be removed by a re-examination of the expert witness, the same or other expert witness shall provide new expert report.”
“If the opinion of the expert witness contains contradictions or other omissions, or if grounds for suspicion arise that the opinion is inaccurate, and these omissions or suspicion cannot be removed by a re-examination of the expert witness, the opinion of another expert witness shall be requested.”
“...
(3)  If an expert report has been commissioned in order to establish the mental capacity of the accused [at the moment of the commission of the offence], the expert shall establish whether at the moment of the commission of the offence the accused suffered from a mental illness, temporary mental disturbance, insufficient mental development or some other mental derangement and shall determine the nature, type and degree of any such mental derangement and shall give his or her opinion on the effects of that condition on the accused’s capacity to understand the meaning of his or her actions and to control his or her will.
(4)  If the expert finds that at the moment of the commission of the offence the accused was unable to understand the meaning of his or her actions and to control his or her will, [the expert] shall give his or her opinion on the degree of possibility that [the accused], due to the mental derangement in question, could commit a serious offence ...”
“(1)  The provisions of this Code ... shall also apply in proceedings against persons lacking mental capacity at the time of the commission of the unlawful act, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter.”
“(1)  If a defendant lacked mental capacity when committing the unlawful act, the State Attorney shall request in the indictment that the court establish that the defendant has committed an unlawful act while lacking mental capacity and that he or she be interned [in a psychiatric hospital] under the Protection of Individuals with Mental Disorders Act.”
“(1)  Save for the grounds on which the pre-trial detention may be ordered against an accused, such detention shall be ordered in respect of the accused against whom the indictment under Article 550 § 1 has been lodged if there is a possibility that due to the serious mental derangement that person might commit a serious offence. Before ordering the per-trial detention, an expert opinion on the existence of the danger referred to shall be obtained. If the pre-trial detention has been ordered [under this provision] the prison administration shall be informed in order to transfer that person to [an adequate institution].
(2)  The pre-trial detention under paragraph 1 of this Article can last as long as there is need for it but not longer than provided under Article 133 of this Code.”
“(1)  If the State Attorney has made a request in accordance with Article 550 paragraph 1 of this Code, and the court, upon completion of the trial, establishes that the defendant has committed the unlawful act while lacking mental capacity and that the conditions exist for ordering his or her internment in a psychiatric hospital in accordance with the Protection of Individuals with Mental Disorders Act, it shall adopt a judgment determining that the defendant has committed the unlawful act while lacking mental capacity and shall order [his or her] involuntary internment in a psychiatric hospital for a period of six months.
(2)  The court shall, when adopting the judgment under paragraph1 of this Article, order or extend the pre-trial detention under Article 551 § 1 of this Code.
...”
“(5)  The president of the [trial] panel shall, immediately upon the decision ordering internment [in the psychiatric hospital] becoming enforceable, forward all the necessary documents to the relevant court for the procedure under the Protection of Individuals with Mental Disorders Act.”
The relevant provisions of the Protection of Individuals with Mental Disorders Act (Zakon o zaštiti osoba s duševnim smetnjama, Official Gazette no. 11/1997, with further amendments) provide:
“This Act regulates the basic principles, organisation and enforcement of the protection of individuals with mental disorders, as well as the conditions for the application of measures and treatment.”
“(1)  The proceedings for the involuntary admission of a mentally ill person to a psychiatric institution shall be in the competence of a single judge of the [relevant] County Court.
(2)  The proceedings for the involuntary placement in a psychiatric institution are non-contentious [civil] proceedings.
...”
“(1)  The court shall order involuntary psychiatric internment of a mentally ill offender if, on the basis of an expert report, it finds that the person in question has serious mental disorder and that he or she is dangerous for his or her environment.
(2)  A mentally ill offender shall be considered dangerous for his or her environment if there is a high probability that due to his or her mental disorder leading to his lack of mental capacity [at the moment of the commission of the offence] could again commit a criminal offence punishable by at least three years’ imprisonment.”
“(1)  The procedure for internment [in a psychiatric hospital] in accordance with sections 44-50.a of this Act shall be conducted in respect of persons whose internment has been ordered by a court in criminal proceedings.
(2)  In the proceedings for involuntary psychiatric internment of mentally ill offenders sections 44-50a of this Act shall apply and, if something is not provided in those provisions, other provisions of this Act shall apply.
(3)  The involuntary psychiatric internment starts by the finality of the decision on psychiatric internment adopted in the criminal proceedings ...
(4)  After the expiry of the period for the maximum possible sentence for the offence for which the mentally ill offender was found to be responsible, his or her release from the hospital shall be governed by the provisions of this Act [applicable to mentally ill non-offenders].”
“(1)  The first-instance court which conducted the criminal proceedings where internment was ordered for a person lacking mental capacity shall forward copies of the [relevant documents] to the court competent for the procedure of internment (hereinafter: the court).
...
(3)  The court shall without delay forward to the Ministry of Health a copy of the [criminal court’s] judgment, including the report of the expert witness, and other information necessary for the selection of the institution where the individual is to be interned. Within three days of receipt of the [criminal court’s judgment], the Ministry of Health shall designate the psychiatric hospital ...
(4)  After the receipt of the decision of the Ministry of Health referred to in paragraph 3 of this section, the court shall, within three days, order the committal of the person to the psychiatric hospital for the enforcement of the decision on his or her internment.
...
(7)  Appeal against the decision on the committal of the person to the hospital does not have suspensive effect.”
In the context of the proceedings concerning mentally ill offenders, after the first part of the proceedings has been concluded before the criminal court, the Protection of Individuals with Mental Disorders Act envisages that the single judge of the County Court assumes further responsibility to ensure that the mentally ill offender is kept in the psychiatric hospital only if, and as long as, he or she is dangerous within the meaning of section 44 of that Act, but no longer than the maximum penalty for the relevant offence as provided under section 44a of that Act. Further relevant provisions of the Protection of Individuals with Mental Disorders Act related to the involuntary admission and involuntary retention in a psychiatric institution of persons with a mental illness are set out in the case of M.S. v. Croatia (no. 2), (no. 75450/12, § 36, 19 February 2015).