The case originated in an application (no. 11589/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Oleg Yuryevich Tetsen (“the applicant”), on 15 March 2004.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mrs V. Milinchuk, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained about non-enforcement of the judgment in his favour.
On 21 June 2007 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Vizinga in the .
From 14 June 2001 to 31 July 2003 the applicant was employed in the military commander’s office in the . On the commander’s orders, he took part in counter-terrorist operations. For his participation he was paid an additional compensation of 55,807.70 Russian roubles (RUB) for a period of eighty-five days.
The applicant applied to a court, claiming that the additional compensation should be paid for the entire duration of his employment in the military commander’s office. He submitted original employment contracts and orders signed by the military commander.
The military commander’s office did not send a representative to take part in the proceedings and asked the court to hear the case in his absence.
On 25 August 2003 the Military Court of the Rostov-on-Don Garrison accepted the applicant’s claim and awarded him RUB 444,965.37 against the military commander of the .
No appeal having been lodged against the judgment, it became enforceable ten days later.
On 6 September 2003 the applicant obtained a writ of execution and submitted it to the Ministry of Finance.
On 23 August 2005 a representative of the military commander’s office asked the Military Court of the Rostov-on-Don Garrison to quash the judgment of 25 August 2003 on account of newly discovered circumstances. He claimed that it had been founded on “unreliable evidence” (недостоверные доказательства).
By decision of 20 October 2005, a judge of the Military Court of the Rostov-on-Don Garrison set aside the judgment of 25 August 2003 on account of newly discovered circumstances. The parties did not make available a copy of that decision to the Court. According to the applicant, it did not specify why the evidence in the original judgment was considered “unreliable”. The Government indicated that it was unreliable because “the applicant’s calculations of the indebtedness [had] had no legal effect”.
In the re-opened proceedings the applicant’s claims were rejected in full. Copies of these judgments were not made available to the Court.